A/63/PV.73

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

73

rd plenary meeting
Monday, 22 December 2008, 3 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

The meeting was called to order at 3.30 p.m.
Agenda item 104 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(a) Election of twenty members of the Committee
for Programme and Coordination
Note by the Secretary-General (A/63/312)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Pursuant to
General Assembly decision 42/450 of 17 December
1987 and upon the nomination by the Economic and
Social Council, the Assembly elects the members of
the Committee for Programme and Coordination.
The document before the Assembly contains the
nominations by the Economic and Social Council to fill
the vacancies in the Committee that will occur as a
result of the expiration, on 31 December 2008, of the
terms of office of Argentina, Armenia, Belarus, Benin,
Brazil, Bulgaria, the Central African Republic, Cuba,
India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel,
Italy, Pakistan, Portugal, Senegal, South Africa,
Switzerland and Uruguay. Members will recall that
there still remains one vacant seat from among the
Western European and other States whose mandate will
expire on 31 December 2008.
These States are eligible for immediate
re-election. I have also been informed by the President
of the Economic and Social Council, in a letter dated
19 December 2008, that the Council has nominated
South Africa to fill the vacancy arising from
Swaziland’s withdrawal.

I should like to remind members that, after
1 January 2009, the following States will remain
members of the Committee: Bangladesh, China, the
Comoros, France, Haiti, Jamaica, Kenya, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, the Niger, the Republic of Korea, the
Russian Federation, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and Zimbabwe. Therefore, those 13 States
are not eligible to run in this election.
I should now like to inform members that the
following States have been nominated by the Economic
and Social Council. The four African States for four
vacancies are: the Central African Republic, Guinea,
Nigeria and South Africa. The four Asian States for
four vacancies are: India, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Kazakhstan and Pakistan. The three Eastern European
States for three vacancies are: Armenia, Belarus and
Ukraine. The four Latin American and Caribbean
States for four vacancies are: Argentina, Brazil, Cuba
and Uruguay. The two Western European and other
States for two of five vacancies are: Italy and Spain.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of
procedure, all elections should be held by secret ballot
and there shall be no nominations. However, I should
like to recall paragraph 16 of General Assembly
decision 34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing
with the secret ballot for elections to subsidiary organs,
when the number of candidates corresponds to the
number of seats to be filled, should become standard,
unless a delegation specifically requests a vote on a
given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on the
basis of dispensing with the secret ballot?

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-66454 (E)

*0866454*

A/63/PV.73

It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The number of
States nominated from among the African States, the
Asian States, the Eastern European States, the Latin
American and Caribbean States and the Western
European and other States is equal to or less than the
number of seats to be filled in each of those groups.
May I therefore take it that the Assembly wishes
to declare those States nominated by the Economic and
Social Council, namely, Argentina, Armenia, Belarus,
Brazil, the Central African Republic, Cuba, Guinea,
India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Kazakhstan,
Nigeria, Pakistan, South Africa, Spain, Ukraine and
Uruguay, elected members of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination for a three-year term of
office beginning on 1 January 2009?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I congratulate
the States that have just been elected members of the
Committee for Programme and Coordination.
Members will recall that from previous sessions,
and as indicated in A/63/312, there remain two
vacancies in the Group of Western European and other
States for members whose term of office would begin
on the date of election. One term will expire on
31 December 2008 and the other on 31 December 2009.
Members are also reminded that the Economic
and Social Council postponed the nomination of three
members from the Western European and other States
for a three-year term beginning on 1 January 2009. The
General Assembly will be in a position to act on these
vacancies upon the nomination by the Economic and
Social Council of Member States from that region.
We have thus concluded this stage of our
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 104.
(b) Election of seven members of the
Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission
The President (spoke in Spanish): Members will
recall that, in accordance with paragraphs 4 (a) to (e)
of General Assembly resolution 60/180 of
20 December 2005, the Organizational Committee
shall comprise the following: seven members of the
Security Council, including five permanent members;
seven members of the Economic and Social Council,

2

elected from regional groups; five top providers of
assessed contributions to United Nations budgets and
of voluntary contributions to United Nations funds,
programmes and agencies, including a standing
peacebuilding fund; five top providers of military
personnel and civilian police to United Nations
missions; and seven additional members elected by the
General Assembly, giving due consideration to
representation from all regional groups in the overall
composition of the Committee.
Members will also recall that, at its 111th plenary
meeting of the sixty-second session, on 11 July 2008,
the General Assembly extended to 31 December 2008,
the terms of office of the current members of the
Assembly on the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission, namely Burundi, Chile,
Egypt, El Salvador and Fiji.
By resolution 63/145 of 18 December 2008, the
General Assembly decided that, beginning with the
election to be held during the sixty-third session, the
term of office for the members of the General
Assembly on the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission shall begin from 1 January
instead of from 23 June.
The Assembly also decided that the term of office
of the two members of the General Assembly on the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission due to expire on 22 June 2009, namely
Georgia and Jamaica, shall be extended to
31 December 2009.
Also, by a letter dated 19 December 2008
addressed to the President of the General Assembly,
contained in document A/63/631, the facilitator of the
troop-contributing countries informed me of their
decision that the terms of office of Bangladesh, India,
Nepal, Nigeria and Pakistan from the troopcontributing countries category of membership will be
from 1 January 2009 until 31 December 2010.
Also, by a letter dated 18 December 2008
addressed to the Secretary-General, contained in
document A/63/632, the facilitator of the group of the
leading financial contributors informed the SecretaryGeneral that the financial contributors have decided to
extend the terms of office of their five members,
namely Canada, Germany, Japan, the Netherlands and
Sweden, to 31 December 2010.

08-66454

A/63/PV.73

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to take note of documents A/63/631 and
A/63/632?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): It is also my
understanding that on 19 December 2008, the
Economic and Social Council decided that, starting in
2009, the two-year term of members of the Council
elected to the Organizational Committee will begin on
1 January instead of 23 June.
The General Assembly will now proceed to the
election of five members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission. By
resolution 60/261, the Assembly decided that the
members of the Organizational Committee shall serve
for renewable terms of two years, as applicable.
Accordingly, Burundi, Chile, Egypt, El Salvador and
Fiji are eligible for immediate re-election.
Regarding candidatures for the five seats, I
should like to inform members that: for the African
States, the group has endorsed Benin and South Africa;
for the Asian States, the group has endorsed Thailand;
for the Latin American and Caribbean States, the group
has endorsed Chile and Uruguay.
Members will recall that, in resolution 60/261,
the General Assembly decided that the rules of
procedure and established practice of the Assembly for
the election of members of its subsidiary bodies shall
apply to its election of members of the Committee. For
this election, rules 92 and 94 shall be applicable.
Accordingly, the election shall be held by secret ballot
and there shall be no nominations.
However, I should like to recall paragraph 16 of
General Assembly decision 34/401, whereby the
practice of dispensing with the secret ballot for
elections to subsidiary organs when the number of
candidates corresponds to the number of seats to be
filled should become standard, unless a delegation
specifically requests a vote on a given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on that
basis?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Since the
number of candidates endorsed by the Group of
African States, the Group of Asian States and the

08-66454

Group of Latin American and Caribbean States
corresponds to the number of seats to be filled, may I
take it that the General Assembly decides to elect
Benin, Chile, South Africa, Thailand and Uruguay as
members of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission for a two-year term of
office beginning on 1 January 2009?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I congratulate
Benin, Chile, South Africa, Thailand and Uruguay on
their election as members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission.
As of now, therefore, the members of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission from 1 January 2009 are as follows:
Bangladesh, Benin, Chile, China, El Salvador, France,
Georgia, Germany, Guinea-Bissau, India, Jamaica,
Japan, Luxembourg, Morocco, the Netherlands, Nepal,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Poland, the Republic of
Korea, the Russian Federation, South Africa, Sweden,
Thailand, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America and
Uruguay.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I would like
to take this opportunity to thank His Excellency
Mr. Yukio Takasu, Permanent Representative of Japan,
for undertaking the task of coordinating consultations
and negotiations on this very important issue.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 104?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 43 (continued)
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa
Draft resolution (A/63/L.62)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Members will
recall that the General Assembly held the debate on
agenda item 43 jointly with agenda item 57 and its
sub-items (a) and (b) at the 26th, 27th and 29th plenary
meetings, on 15 and 20 October 2008.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Morocco, who will introduce draft resolution
A/63/L.62.

3

A/63/PV.73

Mr. Loulichki (Morocco): On behalf of the
African Group and all sponsors, I have the honour to
introduce draft resolution A/63/L.62, entitled “20012010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in Developing
Countries, Particularly in Africa”.
The African Group wishes to thank, particularly,
the United Republic of Tanzania for diligently
facilitating the negotiations. The delegation of
Tanzania performed excellent work in highlighting the
most relevant measures to roll back malaria in malariaendemic countries. The African Group wishes also to
thank all Member States that enriched the deliberations
during the negotiations.
Malaria accounts for more than a million deaths
each year, of which 80 per cent occur on our continent,
Africa, where malaria is the leading cause of mortality
in children under five years of age. Ninety per cent of
the most severely affected African countries are more
exposed to malaria, and HIV prevalence is more than
10 per cent in those countries.
It is because Africa bears an overwhelming
proportion of the malaria scourge that we, as Member
States, have the duty to unite our efforts, through
malaria control strategies, to ensure the achievement of
the 2010-2015 targets, in accordance with the
recommendations contained in the global strategy of
the World Health Organization (WHO).
While malaria is a disease that affects mostly
developing countries, the disease knows no national
boundaries. Concerted efforts on the part of all
Member States, the relevant international organizations
and the private sector are thus needed if we are to
succeed in combating the disease.
Implementation of the Roll Back Malaria Global
Strategic Plan and the Global Malaria Action Plan
developed by the Roll Back Malaria Partnership, as
well as other WHO recommendations, are thus critical
to meeting the international targets on malaria. We are
very confident that development agendas will help
strengthen health systems and increase access to highquality malaria prevention and treatment services in
malaria-endemic countries.
The African Group is presenting this annual draft
resolution as part of our effort to respond to the
specific needs of Africa, as well as to achieve
Millennium Development Goal 6. The struggle against
malaria is another example attesting to the urgency of

4

providing universal access to malaria-control
interventions to at-risk young children and pregnant
women, whose fates must never be forgotten.
We all know that political commitment, adequate
resources and research into advanced sciences and
technology on malaria prevention and treatment could
drastically reduce malaria deaths by 2010, because
malaria is preventable, treatable and curable. We are
counting on sustained and continued bilateral and
multilateral support in order to combat the disease.
The draft resolution before members, entitled
“2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa”, is an
update of previous resolutions. This update takes into
account recent developments and scientific measures to
combat malaria. Further, the draft welcomes the theme
of “Malaria — a disease without borders”, which was
chosen for the first World Malaria Day, and the
sustained increase in funding for malaria interventions,
as well as the predictability of that funding. The draft
resolution also welcomes the designation by the
Secretary-General of a Special Envoy for Malaria, who
will cooperate with other stakeholders to work with
national and global leaders to help secure political will,
partnerships and funds for malaria.
The African Group calls upon the international
community to work in a spirit of cooperation towards
sustained support for the Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria, the Roll Back Malaria
Partnership secretariat and other partners and to
support coordinated efforts to strengthen health
systems and scale up interventions so as to reduce the
burden of malaria.
In introducing the draft resolution under
consideration and as in previous sessions of the
General Assembly, the African Group seeks the
adoption of this draft resolution by the General
Assembly without a vote, thus signalling the strong
political commitment of Member States to roll back
malaria by 2010 and to work together towards its full
eradication.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We shall now
proceed to consider draft resolution A/63/L.62.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/63/L.62. Before we take action on the
draft resolution, I should like to inform the Assembly
that the following countries have become sponsors:

08-66454

A/63/PV.73

Algeria, Australia, Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Fiji,
Finland, Germany, Guyana, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Nicaragua, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and TimorLeste.
May I take it that the General Assembly decides
to adopt draft resolution A/63/L.62?
Draft resolution A/63/L.62 was adopted (resolution
A/63/234).
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of agenda item 43?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 107 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/63/L.64)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Members will
recall that the General Assembly held the debate on
agenda item 107 jointly with agenda items 44 and 112
at the 51st plenary meeting, on 17 November 2008.
Members will also recall that the Assembly took action
on draft resolutions A/63/L.27 and A/63/L.25/Rev.1
under this agenda item at the 51st and 68th plenary
meetings.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Indonesia, who will introduce draft resolution
A/63/L.64.
Mrs. Asmady (Indonesia): I have the honour, on
behalf of the sponsors, to submit for the General
Assembly’s consideration and adoption a draft
resolution entitled “Agriculture development and food
security” and contained in document A/63/L.64.
The draft resolution is a culmination of this
year’s efforts by Chile, Egypt and Indonesia to advance
the issue of agriculture development and food security
in the General Assembly. Back in June, these three
countries humbly suggested to the President of the
General Assembly that the issue of food security and
agriculture development be taken up as a theme for the
sixty-third session of the General Assembly. We
believe the President’s positive response and the
subsequent dialogue and action will contribute to
global efforts being made to address this issue.

08-66454

The
resolution
establishes
“Agriculture
development and food security” as an item on the
agenda of the General Assembly. It is our view that this
will encourage the advancement of discussions which
in turn could build global consensus on addressing
questions of agriculture development and food security.
Our aim, however, must not be merely to stimulate an
in-depth worldwide debate on the absolute need for
food security; it must be much more. Our aim must be
to establish food security as a permanent and
prominent item on the global development agenda.
We look forward to the Secretary-General’s
report on “Agriculture development and food security”,
which will include national, regional and international
efforts on the issue, as requested in the draft resolution.
As the Secretary-General has indicated, tackling this
issue will require international leadership and
coordination at the highest level. That is the basis for
the draft resolution we are presenting today.
In closing, on behalf of Chile, Egypt, Indonesia
and all the other sponsors of this resolution, we would
like to express our highest appreciation for the support,
constructive debate and flexibility shown by all
delegations during the informal consultations. With
these introductory remarks, I now propose draft
resolution A/63/L.64 for the General Assembly’s
consideration and adoption by consensus.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We shall now
proceed to consider draft resolution A/63/L.64. I
should like to inform the Assembly that the following
countries have become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Angola, Australia, Canada, China and the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/63/L.64?
Draft resolution A/62/L.64 was adopted (resolution
63/235).
The President (spoke in Spanish): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 107.

5

A/63/PV.73

Agenda item 114 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(k) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Organization of
la Francophonie
Draft resolution (A/63/L.59)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Members will
recall that the Assembly held its debate on agenda item
114 and its sub-items (a) to (u) at its 36th and 37th
plenary meetings, on 3 November 2008.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/63/L.59. I have been informed that the
following delegations have become sponsors of the
draft resolution: Albania, Angola, Austria, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Djibouti,
Dominica, the Dominican Republic, Egypt, Finland,
Georgia, Ghana, Haiti, Honduras, Ireland, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Madagascar, Mauritius,
Morocco, Mozambique, Paraguay, the Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Moldova, Serbia,
Thailand, Ukraine and Viet Nam.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/63/L.59?
Draft resolution A/63/L.59 was adopted (resolution
63/236).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Saint Arnaud (Canada) (spoke in French):
The Canadian delegation welcomes the adoption of this
resolution and thanks Member States for their support.
We would also like to thank the very many sponsors of
this text, which marks an important stage in relations
between the United Nations and the International
Organization of la Francophonie (IOF). We thank
delegations of member States and observers of the IOF
for their cooperation. We also thank the States that are
not members or observers of the IOF who have been
good enough to co-sponsor this text. Their support is
entirely in keeping with the importance that the IOF
attaches to multilingualism and cultural diversity. It is
also good support for cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in general, which
constitutes an indispensable tool in attaining the goals
of the United Nations.

6

The year 2008 will have been an important year
for the IOF in Canada with the holding of the Quebec
summit in October. We are happy to see the results of
collaboration between the United Nations and the IOF,
which over the next few months, will pave the way for
preparations for the forthcoming IOF summit, to be
held in 2010 in Madagascar.
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of sub-item (k) of agenda item 114?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 155
Recognition of sickle-cell anaemia as a public
health priority
Draft resolution (A/63/L.63)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of the Congo, who will
introduce draft resolution A/63/L.63.
Mr. Balé (Congo) (spoke in French): It is my
honour to introduce draft resolution A/63/L.63, entitled
“Recognition of sickle-cell anaemia as a public health
problem”.
It is true that the genetic blood disease known as
sickle-cell anaemia, although it is present on all
continents, generally speaking does not cause much
reaction; hence the lack of interest it gives rise to.
Unless one is affected oneself or if one’s loved one is
affected, or unless one is working in the field of
medicine, this hereditary disease is little known to the
public at large. However, according to estimates from
the World Health Organization (WHO), it affects
almost 100 million people worldwide, including all
forms of the disease. Unless handled robustly in its
early stages, it can cause the death of more than 50 per
cent of people affected in its severest form, referred to
in medical jargon as homozygocity or the SS disease.
Moreover, the prevalence of malaria and the risk of
acquiring HIV/AIDS following a blood transfusion
constitute factors for increased mortality rates among
carriers of this disease. To that situation are added the
obscurantist beliefs to be found in many regions that
are highly infected, all of which fosters ignorance of
the disease and increases these grim statistics.
It is a disquieting picture, but it has not been
enough to remove sickle-cell anaemia from its orphan

08-66454

A/63/PV.73

medical ghetto: unlike AIDS or malaria, it has to date
not really drawn the attention of decision makers.

countries have become sponsors: Cuba, Egypt and
Slovenia.

Today, with the adoption of the draft resolution
entitled “Recognition of sickle-cell anaemia as a public
health problem”, we shall mark the beginning of an
important stage in ending the long isolation of this
disease. But we shall be doing more than that: it is now
the hope of more than 100 million carriers of the
disease that bolder action in the future will help
resolutely and effectively to tackle this disease in order
to alleviate their suffering and increase their life
expectancy. That is why we welcome the fact that, on
19 June every year, activities to raise public awareness
about sickle-cell anaemia will be made possible at the
national and international levels.

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/63/L.63?

We have no doubt that the adoption of this draft
resolution will ensure support from both Member
States and partners and thus will reflect their
commitment to assisting efforts to combat sickle-cell
anaemia, including in the context of strengthening
public
health
through
various
development
programmes.
Obviously, all relevant current and future
activities are aimed at eliminating this disease as a
public health problem. Therefore, basic and applied
research into this disease should be a natural
compliment to this awareness-raising campaign and
our struggle.
I am confident that the General Assembly will
send a message of hope to the hundreds of millions of
people suffering from sickle-cell anaemia throughout
the world by adopting this draft resolution by
consensus.
Finally, I should like to sincerely thank all
delegations that have taken an active part in the
consultations leading to the adoption of this text. I am
also grateful to the sponsor countries.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/63/L.63,
entitled “Recognition of sickle-cell anaemia as a public
health problem”. I should like to announce that, since
the introduction of the draft resolution, the following

Draft resolution A/63/L.63 was adopted (resolution
63/237).
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of agenda item 155?
It was so decided.
Programme of work
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would now
like to draw the attention of members to the date of
recess of the present session. Members will recall that,
at its 69th plenary meeting, on 15 December 2008, the
General Assembly decided that the sixty-third session
would recess on Monday, 22 December 2008.
However, in view of the work that remains to be done
for this part of the session, I would like to propose to
the Assembly that it postpone the date of recess of the
current session until Tuesday, 23 December 2008.
If there is no objection, may I take it that the
Assembly agrees to that proposal?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would also
like to consult members regarding an extension for the
work of the Fifth Committee. Members will recall that,
at its 69th plenary meeting, on 15 December 2008, the
General Assembly agreed to extend the work of the
Fifth Committee to Monday, 22 December 2008.
However, I have been informed by the Chairperson of
the Fifth Committee that the Committee will not be
able to finish its work today, Monday, 22 December,
and will need additional meetings until Tuesday,
23 December 2008.
May I therefore take it that the General Assembly
agrees to extend the work of the Fifth Committee until
Tuesday, 23 December 2008?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

08-66454

7
