s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
S/26437
14 September 1993
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

After consultations among members of the Security council, the President of
the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the Council, at its
3276th meeting, on 14 September 1993, in connection with the Council's
consideration of the item entitled "The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina":
The Security Council expresses its profound concern over recent reports
that Bosnian Croats have been holding Bosnian Muslims in detention camps under
deplorable conditions. The Council recalls the international revulsion and
condemnation that accompanied revelations last year of the conditions under
which Bosnian Muslims and Bosnian Croats were being held in Bosnian Serb
detention camps.
The Council reiterates the principle that the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) must be given access to all detainees in Bosnia wherever
they may be held.
It notes that the ICRC has recently been given access to some
detainees, but recalls with condemnation the obstacles which the Bosnian Croats
have previously placed in the way of the ICRC's attempts to gain access to the
camps in order to ascertain the conditions of the detained.
It also notes the
recent appeal addressed by the President of Croatia to the Bosnian Croats
(S/26419).
The Council emphasizes the fact that inhumane treatment and abuses in
detention centres violates international humanitarian law. Moreover, as the
Council has previously recalled, persons who commit or order the commission of
grave breaches of the Geneva conventions are individually responsible in respect
of such breaches.
The Council calls upon the Bosnian Croats to supply immediately to the ICRC
complete information on all camps where Bosnian Muslim and other prisoners are
being held, and to assure the ICRC and all other legitimately concerned
international bodies free and unhindered access to the detained, wherever they
may be held.
The Council believes that the Government of Croatia has a responsibility to
use its influence with the Bosnian Croats to secure compliance with this
statement and calls on the Government of Croatia to take immediate steps to that
end.

93-49989 (E)

140993

140993

I • ••

S/26437
English
Page 2

The Council further reaffirms that all parties to the conflict are bound to
comply with their obligations under international humanitarian law and in
particular the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and reminds them of its
willingness to consider appropriate actions if any of them should fail to abide
scrupulously by their obligations.
The Council decides to remain seized of the matter.
