200

production of and trafficking in drugs. in consultation with
and incorporating the experience of the Fund:
6. Invites intcmational financing institutions to consider giving financia! support to activitics in producing
countrics with a view to stopping the cultivation and production of illicit drugs, and calls upon Member Statcs to
encourage regional financing institutions to support such
projects;
7. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations and programmcs of the United Nations system to
identify special drug control activities in their respective
fields and to accord higher priority to drug control activities in their programme budgets;
8. Requcsts the Secrctary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fortieth session. through the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the Economic and Social
Council, on the drug control activities carried out by the
specialized agencies and other organizations and programmes concerned. pursuant to the present resolution;
9. A/so requcsts the Secretary-General to take the necessary steps to improve the co-ordination of drug control
activities within the United Nations system and among
Member States, the specialized agencies and programmes
and other international and regional organs and organizations involved in drug control activities, with due consideration for the respective jurisdietions of those hodics, so
as to avoid duplication of efforts in this field;
10. Furthcr rcquests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session on measures to
improve co-operation and co-ordination of drug control
activities within the United Nations system. in the light of
the intergovernmental review of drug control to be undertaken by the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its twenty-fifth session.
/00/h plcnary meeting
16 Decemhcr I 983

38/94.

Question of enforced or involuntary disappearances

The General Assemhly.
Recalling its resolution 33/ l 73 of 20 December 1978.
entitled "Disappeared persons". and its resolution 37/180
of 17 December 1982 on the question of enforced or involuntary disappearances,
Bcaring in mind Commission on Human Rights resolution 1983/20 of 22 February 1983, 9 ' in which the Commission decided to extend for one year the term of the
mandate of the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, and Economic and Social Council
decision 1983/141 of 27 May 1983, in which thc Council
approved the Commission's decision.
Convinced that the action taken, in consultation with thc
Governments concerned, to promote the implementation
of the provisions of General Assembly resolution 33/ 173
and other United Nations resolutions concerning the
plight of missing or disappeared persons should be continued,
Expressing its cmotion at the anguish and sorrow of thc
families concerned, who should know the fate of thcir relatives,
l. Welcomes the decision of the Commission on
Human Rights to extend for one year the tcrm ofthe mandate of the Working Group on Enforced or lnvoluntary
9S See Officia! RC/'ord, orthc l,cono1111c ami Soual C·011w1/. /V83. Su¡,¡,/,·
111c11t No

3 (F/1983113 and Corr.lL chap. XXVII. ,ect A

Disappcaranccs. a\ laid down in Commission resolution
llJX3120:

.'. /;'xprc.1scs 1t1 ll/J[)recial!on to the Working Group for
thc work it has done and to those Governments that havc
co-operated with I t:
,. Ca/Is upon the Commission on Human Rights to
continue to studv this qucstion as a matter of priority and
to takc any step it may deem necessary to the pursuit of
thc task of thc Working Group when it considers thc
report to be subm 1tted by the Group at its fortieth session;
4. .-lpprnls to ali Ciovernmcnts to provide thc Working
Group and the Commission on Human Rights with the
full co-operation warranted by their strictly humanitarian
objectivcs and thcir working methods based on discretion;
S. Rcnnl's its rcqucsl to the Secretary-General to cont111ue to providc thc Working Group with ali neccssarv
assistancc.
/OOth plcnar,· meeting
/6 Decemhcr 1983

38/95.

Assistance to student refugees in southern
Africa

/'he General .1.1 ,cmf,/L
Rccalling its rcsolution 371177 of 17 December 1982, in
which it, intcr afia. rcquested the Sccretary-Gcneral, in cooperation with thc United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. to rnntinue to organize and implcment an
eflecti ve programme of cducational and other appropriate
assistance for student refugces from Namibia and South
Africa who had taken asylum in Botswana, Lesotho, Swa11land and Zambia.
flaring considcrcd thc report of thc Secretary-General %
rnntaining the rcview by the High Commissioner ofassistance programmes for student refugees from South Africa
and Namibia,
llíoting with apprcclatwn that sorne of the projects recommended in the rcport on assistance to student refugees
in southern Afnca have been successfully completed,
Not/1/g with conccrn the continued influx into Botswana.
Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia of student refugces from
South Africa, as well as from Namibia.
Conrinccd that the discriminatory policics and repress,vc measurcs being applied in South Africa and Namibia
will lead to a furthcr cxodus of student refugces from those
countries,
Conscious of thc burden placed on the limited ti.nancial,
material and administrative resources ofthe host countrics
bv thc incrcasing num bcr of student refugees,
.tppreciat111g thc efforts ofthe host countries to deal with
their student rcfugce populations. with thc assistance of
thc international rnmmunity.
L /,'ndorscs the assessments and recommcndations
contained in the rcport of the Secretary-General and commcnds him and the lJnited Nations High Commissioncr
for Refugecs for their efforts to mobilize resourccs and
organize the programme of assistance for student rcfugecs
in thc host countries of southern Africa:
"l
Hxpresscs 1/s apprcciation to the Governments of
Botswana, Lesotho. Swaziland and Zambia for granting
asylum and making educational and other facilities available to the student refugees. in spitc of thc pressure which
thc continuing in flux of those rcfugces cxerts on facilities
111 thcir countric,
