S/PV.9353

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9353rd meeting

Tuesday, 20 June 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Alhefeiti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. Moretti
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. Olmedo
Mrs. Onanga
Mr. Korbieh
Mrs. Shino
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Afonso
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan (S/2023/433)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-17774 (E)
*2317774*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9353

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in South Sudan (S/2023/433)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for South Sudan and Head of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan; Mr. Charles Tai Gituai, interim
Chairperson of the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission; and Mr. Marco Impagliazzo,
President of the Community of Sant’Egidio.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/433, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Haysom.
Mr. Haysom: I thank you, Madam, for the
opportunity to address the Security Council today on
the situation in South Sudan.
I acknowledge the presence of the interim
Chairperson of the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission, Mr. Charles Gituai, and the
President of the Community of Sant’Egidio, Mr. Marco
Impagliazzo, who will respectively brief in detail on
the status of the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan and engagements with the
non-signatory parties.
For my part, I would like to begin by noting
that the crisis in the Sudan has implications for the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement in South
Sudan. The impacts of that conflict are unfurling along
multiple fronts. Since mid-April, over 117,000 women,
2/18

20/06/2023

men and children have crossed over into South Sudan
from the Sudan along the border areas, 93 per cent of
whom are South Sudanese returnees. I want to commend
the Government of South Sudan for its open border
policy to all those who are fleeing the conflict, with
or without travel documents. The absorption capacity
of the Government and humanitarians in South Sudan,
however, is under strain, with limited local resources
and bottlenecks of arrivals in South Sudan’s border
towns, notably in Renk.
The economic impacts of the conflict cast a shadow
on an already fragile country context. The sudden
interruption of imports from the Sudan has resulted in
essential commodities being out of reach for ordinary
people in South Sudan. Crude oil exports from South
Sudan through Port Sudan are an economic lifeline that,
if interrupted — as recently threatened — could have
devastating effects on the South Sudanese economy.
On the political side, the conflict in the Sudan
reduces the much-needed bandwidth, both domestic and
international, to focus attention on South Sudan during
this critical phase of its transition. While the efforts
of President Kiir Mayardit and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) to end the conflict
in the Sudan remain commendable, the timeline of the
peace process in South Sudan should not be allowed to
become the opportunity cost of those efforts.
In South Sudan, those factors are exacerbating the
existing triggers and drivers of conflict, complicating
an already tenuous security situation across the country.
For example, reports of northern migratory cattle
herders refusing to return to the Sudan are concerning.
The absence of local agreements governing the
movement of cattle outside the drive season heightens
the risk of clashes between northern pastoralists and
South Sudanese agrarian communities.
Furthermore, there is increased competition over
scarce resources in areas of new displacements, resulting
in an escalation of tensions among communities, often
with a tribal overtone in an environment marked by
prevailing economic hardship, pre-existing communal
tensions and the presence of firearms. Recently, the
developments in Upper Nile state underscored just
how combustible those factors can become in a short
period of time, with a simple trigger rapidly igniting
underlying drivers in a deadly sequence of events,
as has happened in Renk and Malakal over access to
water points.
23-17774

20/06/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Concerningly, among those events, one of our
United Nations police officers was held against his will
by 30 internally displaced persons (IDPs) for several
hours. Moreover, on 7 June, a 14-year-old Shilluk
resident of the protection of civilian sites was stabbed
to death, and a Nuer man was subsequently beaten to
death, sparking deadly clashes between armed youth
militias. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) has verified that at least 14 IDPs were
killed and 28 injured, including one woman. At the
request of the State authorities, humanitarian partners
have temporarily suspended the movement to Malakal
of new arrivals from the Sudan currently in Renk but
continue to facilitate the voluntary movement of people
to their chosen destination or other destinations across
South Sudan.
In the aftermath of that latest event, I visited Malakal
to observe the dynamics on the ground myself. We are
reviewing our integrated response with both uniformed
and civilian responses, as well as the effectiveness of
our coordination with South Sudan’s security services.
As matters stand, approximately 6,000 to 7,000 Nuer
have now left the protection-of-civilians site, with
only the Shilluk community remaining at what is now
a mono-ethnic site. Humanitarians are adapting their
response plans to support both communities, inside and
outside the camp. And far from receding, the threats
to the site have only increased. UNMISS’s prevention
plan includes the deployment of intensified patrols and
more than 600 peacekeepers on the ground. We will
be reinvigorating cordon-and-search operations to find
and remove firearms from the camp, which has been
designated a weapon-free zone. We are supporting
community leaders in fulfilling their responsibility to
de-escalate and take ownership of conflict-resolution
efforts. That is backed by engagements with national
and local political leaders, who set the overall tone for
intercommunal tolerance and peaceful disarmament.
We also appreciate the support that has been extended
by the Governor of Upper Nile, the South Sudan
People’s Defence Forces, the South Sudan National
Police Service and the National Security Service in
restoring relative calm and preventing reinforcements
in the form of armed youths from Malakal town.
The flare-up of tensions in Malakal only adds
to the much wider patchwork of intercommunal and
subnational conflicts that the Mission is grappling
with. With the recent publication of the quarterly
UNMISS briefing on violence affecting civilians, we

S/PV.9353

expressed our alarm at the reappearance of extrajudicial
killings in Warrap and Lakes states and engaged the
Government in addressing those serious violations of
human rights. We further urged the Government to
publicly release the findings of the ad hoc investigation
committees established by the President. Meanwhile,
the renewed UNMISS mandate requires us to
undertake additional protection-of-civilians tasks,
which must be commensurate with our capabilities and
resources in a context where our protection mandate
is operationalized based on a Mission-wide, crosscutting responsibility using the full range of tools at our
disposal. In that regard, our intention is to extend the
force’s footprint across the country, while still retaining
reserves for addressing intercommunal, subnational
and pre-electoral contingencies. I note that we await the
outcomes of the ongoing military and police capability
study, which will respond to our question of whether we
are fit for purpose. Despite our geographic constraints,
I note that a recent independent perception survey
shows that the South Sudanese still support and trust in
the stabilizing presence offered by UNMISS.
After four years of incessant rainfall, some parts
of South Sudan are now bracing for a drought. The
prolonged dry season and late rains will impact crops,
fuelling further insecurity and vulnerability. Criminal
activity targeting food items is on the rise. In one
incident in Bor alone, seven metric tons of food were
stolen. In Jonglei, the World Food Programme (WFP)
has had to pause the prepositioning of food for the third
time this year. Attacks on humanitarian personnel and
assets are unacceptable. Humanitarians must be able
to safely deliver life-saving supplies to those in need.
UNMISS continues to provide WFP convoys with
force protection, and we are collaborating on further
enhancing our coordination and operations. With needs
increasing and resources dwindling, humanitarian
partners have made the difficult decision to divert
resources from ongoing responses to address emerging
critical needs, including those of the newly arrived
vulnerable returnees and refugees from the Sudan.
I commend the Emergency Relief Coordinator for
allocating $8 million from emergency funds, and I am
asking donors and the broader international community
to provide their support. The 2023 humanitarian
response plan for reaching an estimated 6.8 million
vulnerable people with urgent vital support is less
than 30 per cent funded. On a more positive note, I am
pleased to be able to inform the Council about progress
on the Nile River corridor initiative. Our engagement

23-177743/18

S/PV.9353

20/06/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

with the Government has resulted in an agreement to
reduce the number of checkpoints from more than 30 to
six. UNMISS will continue to support the Government
to ensure that.

In conclusion, the challenges are many, but I
am hopeful that with cooperation, partnership and
sustained leadership, a positive change in the lives of
the South Sudanese can be achieved.

Now is not the time to take our eyes off the ball
in South Sudan. What we can learn from the Sudan
is how quickly hard-won peace gains can unravel.
That underscores the need for the full and timely
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement. We have
been informed by a recent IGAD communiqué that
the political impasse over the removal of the Minister
of Defence and Veteran Affairs has apparently been
resolved, but not acknowledged as such. We urge
the parties to avoid taking unilateral measures. We
also request that efforts be redoubled in support of
constitution-making and election preparations. In
our estimation, the constitution-making process is
10 months behind schedule, election planning is nine
months behind, and several aspects of the transitional
security arrangements remain pending. As it stands
today, South Sudan is not ready to roll out an electoral
process. We have heard that directly from Government
members, political parties and civil society, all of
which recognize that there is a new urgency to deal
with those priorities.

The President (spoke
Mr. Haysom for his briefing

However, we also believe that with a united
effort among all parties and the appropriate political
will, it may be possible for South Sudan to make up
the gap. To that effect, I welcome the initiative of the
Government to form a joint task force with the United
Nations, IGAD and the African Union to advance the
constitution-making and electoral processes, which
held its first meeting a few weeks ago. I further urge
the relevant stakeholders to double down on enacting
a national elections law in Parliament and to support
the National Elections Commission so that the South
Sudanese people can begin to decide the form and
content of their new constitutional and electoral
system. However, no electoral process can be credible
or successful without adequate civic and political space
for all citizens to participate in it, and a great deal needs
to be done in that regard. I welcome the engagement of
civil society in quarterly dialogues with the UNMISS
leadership on the requirements for expanding civic
and political space and addressing the nature of their
participation in it, as well as our engagement with the
leadership of political parties in the Political Parties
Council. Both groups have underscored the need for
urgency if the elections are to be held next year.
4/18

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Gituai.
Mr. Gituai: At the outset, let me congratulate
you, Madam President, and the United Arab Emirates
on your election as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council for the 2022–2023 term and on your
second presidency of the Council, this time for this
month of June. I would also like to thank you for inviting
the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission (RJMEC) to address the Council. The
RJMEC is the official oversight body responsible for
overseeing, monitoring and evaluating the status of the
implementation of the 2018 Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan and among other things, it is mandated to submit
reports to and brief the Council on a quarterly basis.
Over the past five years of the implementation of
the Revitalized Agreement, South Sudan has enjoyed
its longest period of relative peace and stability since
it became independent in 2011. However, the pace
of its implementation has been slow, and much of
what was expected to be implemented by the end of
the 36 months stipulated for the transitional period
has not been achieved. The agreement has therefore
been extended for 24 months, from February 2023 to
February 2025, in order to enable the completion of the
unification of forces, the drafting of the final version
of the constitution and the holding of credible, free and
fair elections in December 2024. My briefing to the
Council will therefore briefly highlight our assessment
of the South Sudan peace process and the RJMEC’s
ongoing efforts in support of its implementation. I will
conclude with some recommendations.
Overall, key achievements in the implementation
of the Agreement include the following.
In terms of governance, the executive and
legislative arms of the Revitalized Transitional
Government of National Unity have been established
and operationalized at both the national and state levels.
The dispute over the number of states was resolved, and
the Revitalized Agreement was incorporated into the
Transitional Constitution. In addition, some crucial
legal, judicial and institutional reforms are ongoing.
23-17774

20/06/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

On the transitional security arrangements, the
training and graduation of approximately 55,000 of
83,000 troops of phase I of the necessary unified forces
is complete. Those troops remain in their training areas
awaiting deployment to their respective units. However,
phase II and the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process have yet to commence.
On humanitarian affairs, the opening of key
humanitarian corridors has facilitated the return
of some South Sudanese refugees and internally
displaced persons. Some economic reforms have been
implemented, encouraging greater transparency and
accountability, but that too remains a work in progress.
On transitional justice, progress is being made in
the drafting of the bills for the establishment of the
Commission for Truth, Reconciliation and Healing
and the Compensation and Reparation Authority. Once
established, those institutions will drive forward the
much-needed process for reconciliation and healing in
South Sudan.
In terms of the permanent constitution, the law
to govern its making has been enacted, and steps
are being taken to operationalize it. I would like to
underscore that the Agreement states that elections at
the end of the transitional period should be held under
the permanent constitution.
The main challenges that have slowed down the
progress in the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement include the trust deficit among the parties,
the lack of adequate resources, capacity gaps, persistent
levels of intercommunal violence in the states, negative
activities of the holdout groups and natural calamities
such as floods. Most recently, additional strain has been
placed on humanitarian and other resources in South
Sudan by the influx of refugees and returnees from the
conflict in the Republic of the Sudan.
Elections are due in December 2024, which is around
18 months from now. In order to conduct free, fair and
credible elections, the following critical benchmarks
need to be attained as per the Revitalized Agreement:
the completion of the unification and redeployment of
forces, in order to provide election-related security; the
reconstitution and operationalization of the institutions
tasked with the preparation and conduct of elections,
namely, the Political Parties Council and the National
Elections Commission; the making of a people-led and
-owned permanent constitution, to guide the conduct of
elections; judicial reforms to enhance the capacity and

S/PV.9353

independence of the judicial institutions to deal with
election-related disputes; and the improvement of the
overall political and civic space in which multi-party
elections are conducted.
At this critical juncture of the extended period of
the Revitalized Agreement, the Revitalized Transitional
Government of National Unity requires more support
from the Council and the international community
for it to be able to complete the implementation of
the critical pending tasks of the Agreement. Without
predictable and adequate funding, our assessment is
that South Sudan will continue to struggle to adhere
to the implementation schedule of the Agreement.
In RJMEC’s view, the international community can
support the South Sudanese efforts, especially by
directly funding the constitution-making process,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and the
preparation and conduct of elections.
With regard to RJMEC’s efforts in support of the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement, RJMEC
continues to monitor, evaluate and oversee the mandate
and tasks of the Revitalized Transitional Government of
National Unity, including the adherence by the parties
to the agreed timelines and implementation schedule,
in accordance with chapter VII of the Revitalized
Agreement. RJMEC’s objective and impartial reports
and all the inclusive stakeholders’ monthly plenary
meetings continue to inspire confidence in the peace
process and encourage the parties to stay the course
of peace.
Our regular quarterly evaluation reports to the
Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the African Union Peace and Security Council and
the Security Council help to create focus and unity
of purpose and inform policy decision-making
on South Sudan and the implementation of the
Agreement. RJMEC continues to oversee the work of
all the Agreement institutions and mechanisms, break
deadlocks among the parties and regularly engage with
the parties to the Agreement, key peace partners and
other South Sudanese stakeholders in a bid to build
consensus and expedite progress.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan legitimizes the
Transitional Government of National Unity in South
Sudan and remains the most plausible blueprint for a

23-177745/18

S/PV.9353

peaceful transition and in building enduring peace
in the Republic of South Sudan. With the prospects
of elections looming only 18 months away, there is a
need to focus our collective efforts on South Sudan
at this critical time and ensure that the Agreement be
implemented in letter and spirit. In that regard, I would
like to appeal to the Council to remain seized of the
peace process in South Sudan and to engage with the
Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity
to expedite the implementation of the peace agreement
and to ensure the conduct of the elections as scheduled,
as well as to consider visiting Juba at this critical time
of election preparations and to stand in solidarity with
the people of South Sudan.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Gituai
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Impagliazzo.
Mr. Impagliazzo: For more than 50 years,
the community of Sant’Egidio has been a distinct
international actor and a community close to vulnerable
people and dedicated to peace, interreligious dialogue
and humanitarian aid. It has also been able to conduct
international mediation and facilitation in different
parts of the world, from the General Peace Agreement
for Mozambique, signed in Rome in 1992, to Burundi,
and from Guatemala to Kosovo and Mindanao. Indeed,
we believe that war is the mother of all poverty. Today
I address the Security Council about the crisis in
South Sudan.
First of all, I want to thank the United Arab Emirates
presidency for inviting us to brief about our work before
the Council. Sant’Egidio has been following with care
and concern the situation in South Sudan since the
1990s, well before its independence. Several times,
Mr. John Garang, the founding father of the country,
visited our headquarters in Rome to seek avenues for
dialogue in the midst of a struggle for independence.
Our initiative, called the Rome initiative, was born in the
aftermath of the signing of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan in the complicated phase of creating the
Government of National Unity. Several political and
military entities had rejected the Agreement, and it was
necessary to bring them in.
Pope Francis has personally intervened since his
memorable spiritual retreat in the Vatican, enabling
the creation of the precondition for convening in Rome
the non-signatories to the Revitalized Agreement, with
6/18

20/06/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

a full mandate from President Salva Kiir Mayardit
to negotiate with them. The Rome initiative led to
mutual recognition between the Government and the
non-signatory opposition and created a negotiating
framework for political engagement. Despite the forced
interruptions due to the coronavirus disease pandemic,
the dialogue has reduced the level of violence in the
country and created new hope for peace.
The Rome initiative allowed representatives of
the South Sudan Opposition Movements Alliance,
the alliance of non-signatories, to be trained for their
future inclusion into the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism. The process is more inclusive now, and it
is moving further in that direction. The Rome initiative
represents a political dialogue complementary to and in
harmony with international institutions. Sant’Egidio is
committed to continuing on that path with the intention
of creating grounds favourable to eradicating violence.
At this juncture, I must mention the important
contribution made by civil society representatives
and leaders of the country’s Christians and various
religious denominations. That participation will
only increase in the coming stages and is a decisive
impetus in calling government and opposition leaders
to their responsibility to the South Sudanese people in
their suffering.
Finally, I would like to thank those who have
supported and are supporting that effort with active
participation and a constant exchange of information
and guidance. I thank the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, through Special Representative
Nicholas Haysom; the countries of the region; the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development for
its efforts in obtaining the Revitalized Agreement;
the institution’s board for its implementation and,
in particular, the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission, the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism; the troika — the United States, United
Kingdom and Norway; the Swiss Confederation, Canada,
Italy and Japan; and international organizations, such
as the World Food Programme and the International
Committee of the Red Cross.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Impagliazzo for his briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
23-17774

20/06/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Special
Representative
Haysom,
Ambassador
Gituai and Mr. Impagliazzo for their comprehensive
briefings today.
The United States is alarmed about the 8 June
reports of deadly intercommunal violence in the Malakal
protection of civilians site. We condemn the reported
attacks and offer our deep condolences to the families
affected by the violence.

S/PV.9353

Coupled with a cost-of-living crisis, consecutive
years of flash floods that have damaged viable land for
cultivation and livelihoods, and a continued outbreak
of waterborne and other diseases in several states, the
crisis has placed a further strain on social cohesion.
The immediate implementation of the Transitional
Government’s commitments is the best way to ensure
the effects of the Sudan crisis can be mitigated in
South Sudan.

We commend the Governor of Upper Nile state
and state authorities working in coordination with the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) on
strengthening security measures, including securing
the perimeter of the Malakal protection of civilians
site. While we also commend UNMISS for its rapid
deployment of peacekeepers to quell the violence,
we are concerned that the Mission had not adopted
measures to address potential violence in advance,
despite early signals of tensions between the two
communities. We look forward to the results of the
independent assessment by 15 October on UNMISS’
implementation of its protection of civilians mandate
and where we need to help the Mission to address gaps.

Despite the challenges the country faces,
South Sudanese officials need to make progress on
implementing the road map and political transition.
We again stress that the only way for the Transitional
Government of South Sudan to achieve a successful
transition to a permanent Government is to create
and maintain a stable environment in which civilians
are protected.

We are gravely concerned about the welfare of
civilians and internally displaced residents, who
remain in a vulnerable and life-threatening situation in
and around the Malakal camp. We are also alarmed by
reports of armed groups moving towards the protection
of civilians site and by rumours concerning the presence
of small arms inside the camp.

The United States remains committed to the cause
of peace and to the people of South Sudan.

We urge UNMISS, in close coordination with state
authorities, but unilaterally if it must, consistent with
its mandate, to restore calm and security and ensure the
protection of civilians and internally displaced persons
inside and outside the camp, especially vulnerable
populations. We further urge South Sudanese
transitional authorities to prevent such movement by
armed groups towards the protection of civilians site.
The influx of civilians from continued fighting
in the Sudan has further deteriorated South Sudan’s
already declining humanitarian situation and caused
greater strain on the protection of civilians site. More
than 100,000 individuals have crossed the border from
the Sudan into South Sudan, with the expectation that
180,000 more will cross over the next three months,
according to the emergency response plan of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Organization for Migration.

South Sudan’s transitional leaders must deliver
the results to which they committed in the Revitalized
Agreement for the Resolution of Conflict in South
Sudan and address immediate issues, such as the
ongoing violence in Upper Nile state and the dire
humanitarian situation.

Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haysom,
Mr. Gituai and Mr. Impagliazzo for their briefings today.
Malta fully supports efforts towards a peaceful
and stable transitional process in South Sudan, with
the Revitalized Agreement for the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan and its accompanying road
map at the centre. We reiterate our call for the timely
implementation of all pending tasks and for the
transitional period to be completed without further
delay. We welcome the recent graduation of troops
for the necessary unified forces. At the same time,
we also underline the need for them to be sufficiently
trained and deployed to regions in the country that face
increasing outbreaks of violence.
We are concerned about the implications from the
ongoing political impasse and encourage parties to
continue to honour their commitments, as envisaged
in the Revitalized Agreement. While we support
the Agreement’s verification bodies, including
the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, we reiterate our call for constructive

23-177747/18

S/PV.9353

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

engagement. It is only through an inclusive civic
space that the electoral and constitutional processes
can be achieved by the end of 2024. We highlight the
importance of the National Elections Act to be passed,
and the reconstitution of the Political Parties Council
and the National Elections Commission to follow — all
necessary conditions for the conduct of free, fair and
credible elections.
Furthermore, Malta supports calls for the
reinforcement of the 35 per cent quota for women, as
prescribed by the peace agreement, and urges their full,
equal and meaningful participation in all processes,
including the Constitution’s drafting. Today we were
pleased to hear voices from civil society and other
associations, such as the Community of Sant’Egidio,
which can spearhead a sustained and lasting peace.
We welcome the efforts being made by the authorities
of South Sudan in hosting more than 100,000 people
who seek refuge from the conflict in the Sudan. We also
commend the role that President Salva Kiir Mayardit has
displayed within the mission of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development towards mediating a ceasefire
in the Sudan.
Malta is deeply concerned about the recruitment
and radicalization of youth. With children often being
the first victims of conflict and grave violations still
being registered, we support child-protection measures
and welcome, in that context, child protection training
conducted by the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS). We also underline the role that youth have to
play in shaping a lasting peace.
As vulnerability to violence is present in Upper Nile
and Jonglei states, we deplore the violent scenes at the
Malakal protection of civilians site in the Upper Nile
state on 28 May. We call for calm and underline the role
of local leaders in encouraging their communities to
refrain from violence.
Malta condemns all acts of sexual and genderbased violence. We support the deployment of United
Nations police officers in high-risk areas and the work
of UNMISS in conducting capacity-building activities,
underlining the need for accountability and the protection
and rehabilitation of survivors.
With 76 per cent of South Sudan’s population in need
of humanitarian assistance, climate shocks and flooding
continue to precipitate instability. We are supportive of
life-saving and needs-based humanitarian assistance,
including through key European Union-funded projects
amounting to €81 million this year alone.
8/18

20/06/2023

Malta strongly condemns all attacks against
humanitarian personnel and convoys and reiterates that
perpetrators must be held accountable. We commend
the use of patrols by UNMISS to ensure the protection
and safety of humanitarian workers.
To conclude, Malta reiterates its support to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haysom and
UNMISS, with a reinforced mandate since last March’s
renewal, but with the same determination that has
driven its work. As UNMISS continues to assist the
Government in its primary responsibility to protect
civilians, we urge all parties to cease all violence and
to solidify a transition that places the destinies of the
people of South Sudan at the front and centre.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to make this statement on behalf of
the African members of the Security Council, namely
Gabon, Ghana and my country, Mozambique (A3).
The A3 would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his very enlightening
briefing. We would also like to thank Mr. Charles
Tai Gituai, interim Chairperson of the reconstituted
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, and
Mr. Marco Impagliazzo, President of the Community of
Sant’Egidio, for their briefing and their dedication to the
cause of world peace. We welcome the participation in
this meeting of our brother, His Excellency Ambassador
Akuei Bona Malwal, Permanent Representative of
South Sudan.
(spoke in English)
It is the firm belief of the A3 that South Sudan
has been making important progress towards the
consolidation of the State and the rule of law,
particularly regarding the constitutional and electoral
process. The inaugural meeting of the joint task force
for the constitution-making and electoral processes,
held on 1 June, is a clear testament in that regard.
While we acknowledge the country’s efforts, we stress
the importance of all parties working collectively to
overcome their political differences and sustain the
progress achieved.
The A3 welcomes the engagement of the members
of the quartet — comprising UNMISS, the African
Union Mission in South Sudan, the Special Envoy of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
23-17774

20/06/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

(IGAD) and the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission — in supporting the efforts
of the South Sudan stakeholders, particularly in
addressing the current political deadlock. We call on
the parties to honour their commitments and expedite
the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan, including completing the outstanding
tasks required before the end of the transitional period.
The A3 strongly believes that the firm commitment
of all parties will pave the way for the consolidation
of political stability towards the lasting peace and
sustainable development that the South Sudanese
people are eager to see.
The A3 notes with appreciation the reduction in
incidents of intercommunal violence at the subnational
level, particularly in Jonglei state. Nevertheless, we
remain concerned over the persistence of vulnerability
to violence in some regions of the country, mostly
communal and cattle-related. That vulnerability is
further exacerbated by climate shocks that continue to
have a negative impact on the security situation of some
communities, causing severe disruptions of livelihoods,
protracted displacement and human insecurity,
especially with the convergence of cattle herders in the
same areas. Initiatives to promote dialogue between
communities and cattle herders, focusing on sharing
of resources and peaceful coexistence, are powerful
tools that need to be further leveraged. We urge the
international community to support such efforts.
The A3 encourages UNMISS to continue taking
measures to protect civilians, mitigate violence
and support peace dialogues within the scope of its
mandate, engaging local and traditional leaders to
de-escalate tensions and facilitate conflict resolution.
Furthermore, we encourage UNMISS to expand its
technical assistance and support to accountability
mechanisms and strengthen the criminal justice chain,
aligning accountability support with dialogue and
reconciliation processes across South Sudan.
The A3 reiterates the need to reinforce capacitybuilding for relevant South Sudanese authorities,
particularly in logistical, financial and judicial matters,
for an enhanced protection-of-civilian response. We
take this opportunity to reiterate that attacks on civilians
are unacceptable. We condemn in the strongest terms
such heinous acts.

S/PV.9353

The spillover effects of the current military
confrontations in the Sudan remain a matter of great
concern. The influx of South Sudanese returnees,
Sudanese refugees and third-country nationals,
combined with the reduction in the flow of goods
and fuel from the Sudan, places further pressure on
vulnerable communities and exacerbates the already
dire humanitarian situation.
Due to efforts of the Government and humanitarian
workers, the people in South Sudan have been
receiving humanitarian assistance, despite the attacks
targeting humanitarian convoys, and we commend all
such efforts. The A3 strongly condemns attacks on
humanitarian workers and calls on all parties to respect
international humanitarian law and give unhindered
access to humanitarian organizations.
Gabon, Ghana and Mozambique encourage
UNMISS to continue its efforts in supporting South
Sudanese authorities to create conditions to facilitate
humanitarian assistance to the people in need. While
welcoming the African Union and IGAD’s post-conflict
needs assessment for South Sudan, the A3 reiterates
its call for the international community to step up its
financial support for humanitarian assistance, which
remains severely underfunded.
(spoke in French)
Children, the most vulnerable group in conflict
situations, are paying a heavy price for the persistence
of violence in the country. In this respect, we recognize
the Government of South Sudan’s efforts aimed
at implementing measures to prevent and combat
violations of children’s rights. Given the complexity
of the challenges facing the country and the current
regional dynamics, we encourage close collaboration
between UNMISS, IGAD and the African Union, as
well as other United Nations missions and agencies,
in order to address these challenges together, using a
holistic approach.
In conclusion, Gabon, Ghana and Mozambique
express their deep gratitude to the troop- and
police-contributing countries for their commitment to
and sacrifices in South Sudan. We commend IGAD,
the African Union, the Community of Sant’Egidio and
all other committed actors for their efforts aimed at
helping the people and the Government of South Sudan
overcome their difficulties and pave the way for lasting
peace in the country.

23-177749/18

S/PV.9353

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative Nicholas Haysom, Mr. Charles
Tai Gituai and Mr. Marco Impagliazzo for their
briefings. I welcome the Permanent Representative of
South Sudan to today’s meeting.
Recently, South Sudan has continued to promote
the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement for
the Resolution of Conflict in South Sudan, steadily
advanced the Constitution-making and electoral
processes, reached an agreement on the sharing ratio
of unified forces and taken substantive steps in the
legislative work in such areas as national security, fiscal
administration and finance. This progress deserves
our recognition.
China encourages all parties to continue to work
with a greater sense of urgency, act in line with the
Revitalized Agreement and the extended road map,
accelerate work in key areas and create favourable
conditions for the political transition. Facing the
tensions and differences in the implementation of the
Agreement, all parties should prioritize the country’s
long-term development in the interests of the people
and find solutions through dialogue and consultation so
as to maintain overall stability and unity.
South Sudan is the youngest country in the world.
The international community should be more patient,
as needed, with the country’s political process and,
in particular, respect South Sudan’s sovereignty and
ownership, and it should avoid external pressure and
interference that could aggravate tensions.
China supports regional organizations in playing
their important roles. We welcome establishment of a
joint task force by the United Nations, the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
at the request of the South Sudanese Government. We
look forward to close communication between the task
force and South Sudan to advance such key processes
as Constitution-making and general elections.
The reporting period witnessed reduced
intercommunal violence in South Sudan. The efforts of
the Government of South Sudan to that end should be
recognized. That having been said, in the Upper Nile
and Jonglei States and other places, where attacks on
internally displaced persons camps and humanitarian
vehicles have occurred from time to time, the security
situation remains fragile. China encourages the South
Sudanese Government to strengthen conflict prevention
10/18

20/06/2023

and promote national reconciliation. At the same time,
enhancing the Government’s security capacity is key to
improving the security situation.
South Sudan has repeatedly stressed that the
Security Council’s arms embargo imposed on it has
had a serious negative impact on the maintenance of
national security. Countries of the region have also
repeatedly called for the lifting of unjustified sanctions
against South Sudan. The Security Council should
listen carefully to the voices of South Sudan and the
international community and lift the relevant sanctions
without delay.
The economy and people’s livelihoods are
important factors affecting South Sudan’s peace and
stability. Recently, South Sudan has been experiencing
dire economic conditions, with a drastic devaluation of
its currency, high inflation and a severe food shortage.
As of now, 4 million people are displaced, and 9 million
are in need of humanitarian assistance. The conflict in
the Sudan has also exacerbated the humanitarian crisis
in South Sudan.
The international community, especially developed
countries, should help the people of South Sudan address
their daily difficulties and increase humanitarian
and development support with no political strings
attached. The International Monetary Fund and other
international financial institutions should continue to
increase their financial support to South Sudan.
China has always attached great importance to
the difficulties faced by South Sudan and actively
provided assistance within its capacity. Recently,
China has provided emergency food aid, including
rice, to the country, benefiting 10 States and three
administrative areas in South Sudan and supporting
returnees and refugees affected by the conflict in
the Sudan. Chinese peacekeepers have repaired two
bridges and 40 kilometres of roads in Western Bahr El
Ghazal, and provided interconnectivity to 30,000 local
residents. China stands ready to continue to work with
the international community and provide constructive
support for peace and development in South Sudan.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Mr. Charles Tai Gituai
and Mr. Marco Impagliazzo for their briefings.
I acknowledge the presence of the Permanent
Representative of South Sudan at today’s meeting.
23-17774

20/06/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The situation facing South Sudan is definitely one
of the most complex in terms of humanitarian, political
and human rights challenges.
First, we are concerned about the humanitarian
situation in the country, which has worsened since the
beginning of the conflict in the Sudan, in particular
with the displacement of refugees, adding to the nearly
2.2 million internally displaced persons in the country.
This depletes available resources, creates tensions and
has caused a serious humanitarian crisis in the areas
surrounding the Sudan.
We condemn the attacks on humanitarian convoys.
Protection must be strengthened so that work can be
carried out to provide assistance to the most vulnerable,
and to demand free access for humanitarian aid, in
accordance with international humanitarian law.
Secondly, on the political aspects, we are
concerned about the slow implementation of the
Revitalized Agreement for the Resolution of Conflict
in South Sudan and the delays in meeting the targets
agreed in August 2022. For the political transition to
finally be achieved, it is necessary for all parties to
commit to the peace process and its implementation.
In that regard, we call for there to be no new political
deadlocks that could be perceived as a violation of the
Revitalized Agreement and could hinder the mutual
confidence-building measures between the parties.
As we have been saying in our statements, women’s
participation is fundamental in the electoral processes
and in the transition to peace, in accordance with the
provisions of resolution 1325 (2020). In that connection,
we encourage the Government to redouble its efforts to
reach the 35 per cent minimum quota for women in the
transitional institutions and executive bodies, and we
highlight the role played by the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) in training women towards
that goal.
My delegation also considers it necessary to preserve
the civic space where dialogue can prevail, without
restrictions on freedom of opinion and expression,
and to open more avenues for journalists, human
rights defenders, humanitarian personnel and media
correspondents to carry out their work.
Turning to the human rights situation, we are
concerned about the data in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2023/433), with regard to the acts of violence
that have increased by 36 per cent, many of which

S/PV.9353

targeting women and children, including acts of sexual
violence. We condemn the 39 grave violations verified
by the United Nations country task force on monitoring
and reporting, which include killings, maimings, the
recruitment and use children in conflict, abduction and
rape. Ecuador, as a signatory of the Paris Principles
and the Vancouver Principles and as Vice-Chair of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, is deeply
committed to implementing lasting solutions to prevent
child recruitment and to protect the rights of children
and young people in conflict settings. Furthermore,
the 22 extrajudicial executions of persons accused of
intercommunal violence must be investigated. Indeed,
all those crimes must be investigated and punished.
We welcome all efforts to promote dialogue and
the search for a ceasefire in the Sudan, especially by
neighbouring countries and the President of South
Sudan. We encourage the Government of South Sudan
to continue the efforts to crystallize peacebuilding
hand in hand with the Peacebuilding Commission in
order to mobilize international support and achieve
sustainable peace.
Finally, we congratulate UNMISS on its work
carried out in a complex internal context with increasing
humanitarian demands. We highlight the cross-cutting
nature of the gender agenda in its report and appeal for
any restrictions that could jeopardize the fulfilment of its
mandate to be avoided.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haysom for
his update and underline our support for the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). I also thank
Mr. Charles Tai Gituai and Mr. Marco Impagliazzo
for their informative briefings. Let me also thank the
Community of Sant’Egidio for the work they do in
different countries. We welcome the presence of South
Sudan at this meeting.
Albania
welcomes
the
Secretary-General’s
report (S/2023/433) and shares his concerns about the
challenging situation in South Sudan, which has been
worsened by the ongoing fighting in the Sudan, leading
to an influx of weapons, refugees and interruptions of
cross-border trade.
I will briefly touch upon three areas.
First, we are concerned by the delayed progress
in the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic

23-1777411/18

S/PV.9353

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of South Sudan and the road map. We welcome the
advancements in the constitution-making and electoral
processes, but further efforts are required to expedite
the progress and facilitate the transition to a permanent
government. We call on the transitional Government
to focus on advancing outstanding reforms, including
passing and enacting the National Elections Act, and
to turn deployment plans for the necessary unified
forces into concrete action. The Government must also
work with UNMISS to effectively prepare for peaceful
and inclusive elections, ensuring the meaningful
participation of women and civil society.
Secondly, the protection of civilians remains a
strong concern. That is further hampered by ongoing
subnational violence across South Sudan. Regions such
as Upper Nile and Jonglei have witnessed significant
violence, mass displacement and high levels of sexual
violence. Similarly, we express deep concerns about
the recent ethnic clashes in the Malakal protection of
civilians site. We urge the Government to intensify its
efforts in tackling the ongoing violence, prevent further
escalations and ensure accountability.
To that end, the influx of refugees from the Sudan,
including South Sudanese returnees, raises concerns
about the risk of further intercommunal violence and
ethnic clashes. The Government must work to address
the root causes, mitigate tensions and collaborate with
UNMISS to scale up the protection of civilians.
Thirdly, the dire humanitarian situation, including
food insecurity, requires our attention. Criminality and
road ambushes targeting humanitarian and commercial
convoys have affected more than 460,000 people. We
call on the Government to facilitate safe and unimpeded
access for humanitarian partners to deliver critical aid
across South Sudan. We strongly condemn violence
against humanitarian personnel and assets and call for
full accountability for those crimes.
In conclusion, the electoral and constitutional
processes are crucial elements to building a stable and
peaceful South Sudan. We cannot allow the spillover
effects of the crisis in the Sudan to impact the transition
process. The Government must redouble its efforts,
implement the outstanding benchmarks of the peace
agreement and work closely with UNMISS to lay the
groundwork for free, fair and democratic elections.
Mr. Olmedo (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Special Representative Nicholas
Haysom; Mr. Charles Tai Gituai, interim Chairperson
12/18

20/06/2023

of the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission; and Mr. Marco Impagliazzo, President
of the Community of Sant’Egidio, for their briefings.
I welcome the representative of South Sudan to
this meeting.
We are concerned by the delay in implementing the
road map. Preparing for the elections to be held in South
Sudan at the end of 2024 requires in particular a legislative
and constitutional framework, the establishment of
institutions and the allocation of budgetary resources.
The United Nations has been mandated to provide its
technical assistance to complement the efforts of the
authorities. We also encourage the authorities to preserve
the conditions for democratic debate.
France is concerned about the impact of the conflict
in the Sudan on the stability of South Sudan. The conflict
has already worsened the humanitarian situation, with
more than 100,000 refugees returning to South Sudan.
France and the European Union stand in solidarity
with the countries in the region. The European Union
will provide €81 million in humanitarian assistance to
South Sudan in 2023. France has mobilized €41.3 million
to address the humanitarian crisis in the Sudan and its
regional impact.
We also recognize South Sudan’s mediation efforts.
However, we regret the Sudan’s attempt to undermine
peace efforts in the region.
The regional context must not divert attention
from South Sudan and its political transition. France
welcomes the region’s efforts to support that process. On
24 May, the European Union member States approved
€5.8 million in funding for the monitoring mechanisms
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
We also support the work of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, which continues to perform
essential functions with regard to the protection of
civilians and capacity-building in South Sudan. France is
playing its part by supporting reintegration projects with
its embassy on the ground and by providing expertise
in the management of weapons and ammunition
stocks. The South Sudanese authorities should take
full advantage of the support of the United Nations,
the region and the international community to speed
up the implementation of the political transition. That
is essential in a context where regional instability is
exacerbating existing vulnerabilities.
23-17774

20/06/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, and
the interim Chairperson of the reconstituted Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, Mr. Charles
Tai Gituai, for their briefings. We are also grateful to
Mr. Marco Impagliazzo, President of the Community
of Sant’Egidio, for his report, and we welcome the
participation in today’s meeting of Mr. Akuei Bona
Malwal, Permanent Representative of South Sudan to
the United Nations.
South Sudan is currently going through a difficult
time. The conflict in its neighbour the Sudan is having
a palpable impact on the situation, leading to various
serious problems. The number of refugees and South
Sudanese returnees is nearing 90,000 and is putting an
additional heavy burden on the country. Against that
background, we welcome the political and diplomatic
efforts that President Salva Kiir Mayardit has made
since the start of the confrontation in the Sudan. Juba,
along with the other capitals in the region, is well aware
of the complicated political dynamics in the country,
and that is an essential factor in the quest for a path to
resolving the issue.
Despite the situation’s complexity, the Government
has been able to make progress in its State-building
process and in implementing its commitments under the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan and the associated road
map. We note the productive work of Parliament, the
launch of the preparations for the elections to be held in
December 2024 and the work done on the Constitution.
We agree on the need to accelerate those processes and
to abide by the previously agreed timelines. However,
all of that demands broader support for Juba. We
continue to view as a priority the targeted efforts of
the South Sudanese authorities to form a unified armed
force of South Sudan as a guarantor for the further
advancement of the peace process and the successful
holding of the general elections. We note that phase I
of establishing a unified army has been completed and
agreement reached on the mid-level command structure
and a budget for the deployment of military graduates.
However, the launch of phase II remains stalled.
We are concerned about the reports of continued
outbreaks of violence in some peripheral areas of South
Sudan, with localized clashes and intercommunal
armed conflicts that have provoked fresh flows of
refugees and displaced civilians. The clashes among

S/PV.9353

the various opposition groups are also worrisome.
We strongly condemn all violations of the peace
agreement and acts of violence against civilians,
including humanitarian workers. We take note of the
response measures undertaken by the Government. We
commend the mediation efforts of the African Union
and States members of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and look forward to the continuation
of the important work of the Community of Sant’Egidio
to bring new groups back to a path of dialogue. We
urge all non-signatories to the peace agreement to join
the peace process. We support the work of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), which is
contributing significantly to stabilizing the situation
and implementing the peace agreement. We call for
the close coordination of efforts by UNMISS and
the local authorities in order to successfully resolve
the intercommunal conflicts. We urge the Mission to
pay greater attention to stabilizing the situation and
assisting the South Sudanese authorities in fulfilling
their commitments under the transitional period.
The Security Council sanctions regime imposed
on South Sudan has noticeably complicated the
deployment of unified armed forces units and has
made strengthening State security structures more
challenging. The parameters of the arms embargo are
being relaxed, but that is not enough. We believe firmly
that we should take more decisive steps towards easing
those restrictions, in line with Juba’s request, which
is echoed by the African Union. We are categorically
opposed to the use of Security Council sanctions
as a means of exerting pressure or interfering in the
internal affairs of South Sudan, as well as to attempts to
complement such sanctions with illegal and unilateral
restrictive measures.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
Mr. Nicholas Haysom, the interim Chairperson of
the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, Mr. Charles Tai Gituai, and the President
of the Community of Sant’Egidio, Mr. Marco
Impagliazzo, for their insightful briefings. Japan takes
note of the recent report of the Secretary-General on
UNMISS (S/2023/433), which describes the progress and
challenges in South Sudan and highlights the relevance
of the Mission’s mandate. Japan would like to thank
all UNMISS personnel for their service in protecting
civilians and mitigating violence in a challenging

23-1777413/18

S/PV.9353

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

environment. As a troop-contributing country, we are
committed to our continued deployments to UNMISS. I
would like to make four points concerning the long-term
peace and security and stability of South Sudan, which
are closely linked to UNMISS’s mandate.
First, implementing the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan remains crucial. Its implementation should be
in line with the timelines established in the road map
adopted as a basis for sustained peace in South Sudan.
In that regard, we commend the progress that has been
made, such as the approval of the 2023 bill amending the
2012 national elections act and the ongoing preparations
for the deployment of the necessary unified forces.
However, we are concerned about the fact that the
implementation of other aspects has been delayed. Japan
calls on all stakeholders to cooperate with South Sudan
on the comprehensive implementation of the agreement
in order to ensure that general elections can be held in
December 2024.
Secondly, we have seen a reduction in incidents
of intercommunal violence at the subnational level.
However, we are concerned about the possibility
that the situation will be aggravated by the influx of
returnees and refugees from the Sudan. In that regard,
we welcome President Salva Kiir Mayardit’s engagement
with the leaders of the region to resolve the conflict.
Japan emphasizes the necessity of greater international
coordination and continued collaboration.
Thirdly, the speedy deployment of the necessary
unified forces should be arranged with due consideration
of the strategic defence and security review. Other
essential tasks include the unification of the command
structure and the development of weapons and
armaments management.
Lastly, we welcome the fact that the South Sudanese
Government is cooperating with the United Nations,
the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and related organizations in various areas.
However, numerous violations of the status-of-forces
agreement continue, as well as attacks on humanitarianassistance operations. We are particularly concerned
about undue restrictions and taxation by the Government.
Greater cooperation with UNMISS is needed to ensure
that the Mission can fully implement its mandate.
In conclusion, Japan stands by the Government and
the people of South Sudan in their endeavour to steadily
implement the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
14/18

20/06/2023

of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. We
also firmly support UNMISS, as well as humanitarian
players, in that regard.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haysom,
Mr. Gituai and Mr. Impagliazzo for their briefings. I also
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of South Sudan at this meeting today.
As we have heard, fighting across the border in the
Sudan has exacerbated the already critical humanitarian
situation in South Sudan. Approximately 120,000 people
have been registered crossing the border, moving to areas
already faced with significant humanitarian needs and
aggravating political and intercommunal tensions. The
United Kingdom welcomes the Government of South
Sudan’s provision of transport for people returning home
and other refugees. We encourage all efforts to maintain
the safety and security of all returnees, refugees and host
communities. We commend the United Nations system
and humanitarian partners for their swift response to
the crisis, and we urge an agile strategy and careful risk
management for the evolving context.
The United Kingdom is particularly concerned
about the recent intercommunal fighting in the Malakal
protection of civilians camp, resulting in the reported
killing of 13 people and burning of 4,000 homes. We
welcome the response by the peacekeepers of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan to de-escalate
the tensions and their wider efforts to protect civilians
across South Sudan. In order to prevent further tragedies
from occurring, we urgently need to find solutions to the
tensions in Malakal and address the root causes of South
Sudan’s fragility.
The United Kingdom reiterates its call on the South
Sudanese Government to do all it can to stop subnational
violence, provide basic services for its people and deliver
meaningful progress on the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. We welcome the recent establishment of a joint
electoral and constitution-making task force, co-chaired
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom. However, as we have heard, electoral and
constitution-making processes are now more than nine
months behind schedule, with the National Elections
Act and National Constitutional Review Commission
still awaiting reconstitution. Legislation alone will not
deliver sustainable peace in South Sudan. Laws need to
be enacted, and the institutions they create need to be
financed. There needs to be a peace dividend.
23-17774

20/06/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The United Kingdom remains committed to the
people of South Sudan and their journey towards peace
and stability. We call on the Government of South
Sudan to expedite the journey by stopping the violence,
ending corruption and delivering justice, essential
services and free and fair elections for its people.
Mr. Moretti (Brazil): I begin by thanking
Special Representative Haysom, Mr. Gituai and
Mr. Impagliazzo for their knowledgeable insights.
I also thank the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), the reconstituted Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission and the Community of
Sant’Egidio for their valuable work. I acknowledge the
presence of Ambassador Bona Malwal and welcome the
delegation of South Sudan to this meeting.
Like other members of the Security Council, Brazil
remains concerned about the effects on South Sudan
of the ongoing hostilities in the Sudan. We regret that
heavy fighting north of the border has led thousands of
people to leave their homes, separate from their families
and flee the Sudan, many of them to South Sudan. We
are worried about the pressure on scarce resources in
South Sudan, particularly in Upper Nile state and Renk
county. We are especially concerned about the situation
in parts of South Sudan that lack food and clean water.
We worry that the kind of fighting over resources
that we saw in Malakal could spread and even raise
ethnic tensions elsewhere. In that context, Brazil fully
supports the tireless work that UNMISS, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and the Office for the Coordination for
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) have done in South
Sudan since the outbreak of the conflict in the Sudan.
We deem it crucial that the international community
provide the additional funds that the Secretary-General,
UNHCR and OCHA have requested in recent appeals.
Additional and flexible funding for food security and
humanitarian assistance in South Sudan is pivotal to
preventing conflicts. We condemn the attacks that
have killed humanitarian actors in the line of duty and
express our condolences to their families and loved
ones. We call on South Sudan to redouble its efforts to
provide safety for those essential workers and ensure
that perpetrators are brought to justice.
Persistent violence in Abyei, Upper Nile, Jonglei and
elsewhere makes it clear that the current peacekeeping
efforts would benefit from additional peacebuilding
initiatives. We have already expressed our appreciation
for the growing involvement of South Sudan with the

S/PV.9353

Peacebuilding Commission. Nevertheless, South Sudan
and the international community can do more to support
additional efforts in peacebuilding. The Community of
Sant’Egidio’s briefing today shows yet again the critical
role that dialogue and conciliation play in the pathway
to sustain peace. We believe that conflict-resolution
tools inherent to peacebuilding are valuable to South
Sudanese civilians, especially women, girls and boys
who live outside and far away from Juba. Widespread
teaching, learning and use of such instruments would
lead to virtuous cycles that sustain peace and prevent
new waves of violence.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in
French): I would like to begin by thanking Special
Representative Haysom and the interim Chairperson
of the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, Mr. Gituai, for their briefings. We also
thank our partner, the Community of Sant’Egidio, and
appreciate its efforts towards facilitating an inclusive
dialogue for lasting peace in South Sudan. I also
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of South Sudan.
First of all, I would like to commend the solidarity
demonstrated by South Sudan towards the women and
men fleeing the devastating conflict in the Sudan and
the Government’s efforts to support a peaceful solution
to the conflict. The consequences of the conflict are
putting increased pressure on social cohesion, the
political situation and the humanitarian needs and
necessary response to that situation in South Sudan.
That is why, at the high-level event on the crisis in
the Sudan and the region, held in Geneva yesterday,
we announced additional funding to support the
humanitarian response.
While the international community’s attention
is focused on the Sudan, efforts must be redoubled
to achieve the key benchmarks of the transition that
will determine the future of South Sudan. Switzerland
reiterates its commitment to supporting the Government
and the people of South Sudan during the transition.
Let me underscore three aspects.
First, with regard to the political process, we
strongly encourage the parties to respect the deadlines
set out in the road map and to set up without delay the
bodies that have been planned. The adoption of the
electoral law and the establishment of the joint task
force to support the constitution-making and electoral
processes are encouraging steps. The drafting of a

23-1777415/18

S/PV.9353

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

new constitution must be done in an inclusive way, by
taking into account the voices of all, including those
of women and young people. In collaboration with the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and other partners, Switzerland helped to sponsor a
debate on constitutional governance, organized by
the University of Juba. For such debates, which can
encourage acceptance of a new constitution, to occur,
a free political and civic space, in which the freedoms
of expression, assembly and press are guaranteed,
is imperative.
Secondly, in terms of international law, the
protection of civilians remains critical to ensuring
the success of the political transition. Despite the
decrease in intercommunal and subnational violence,
we are concerned about the dramatic increase in human
rights violations and violent incidents affecting the
population. In that regard, we express our deep concern
about the renewed violence at the protection of civilians
site in Malakal. We call on all parties to promote
conflict prevention while equally taking into account
the impact that the conflict in the Sudan could have on
the social fabric, above all in border regions. We stress
the importance of promoting accountability in order
to break the cycles of violence. We therefore welcome
UNMISS’s support to the Government in deploying ad
hoc and mobile courts to strengthen the rule of law.
Thirdly, we remain deeply concerned about the
deteriorating humanitarian situation, which is affecting
more than three quarters of the population. To date, the
humanitarian response plan for 2023 is funded only
to 30 per cent. The international community must do
more to meet those fundamental needs. In that context,
attacks on humanitarian personnel and convoys are
unacceptable and illegal and must cease immediately.
We call on all the parties to respect international
humanitarian law and to allow and facilitate the safe,
rapid and unhindered passage of humanitarian aid. We
commend UNMISS for providing protective escorts to
humanitarian partners, enabling food to be distributed
before the onset of the rainy season.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate our
full support to the Special Representative and UNMISS.
Its new mandate underlines the importance of taking
account of the negative effects of climate change and
affirms the necessity of protecting civilians and fully
implementing the road map. The coming months will
require all actors to work together to meet the needs and
expectations of the population. To that end, Switzerland
16/18

20/06/2023

recently renewed its partnership with the reconstituted
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission and the
Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring and Verification Mechanism, which are key
instruments for moving the transition forward.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United Arab Emirates.
At the outset, I thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Mr. Gituai for their valuable briefings. We welcome
Mr. Impagliazzo’s statement, which illustrates the
importance of supporting political initiatives and efforts
that foster dialogue and mutual understanding among
people of different religions and cultures for achieving
peace. We hope that the Rome peace talks result in
solutions to South Sudan’s current challenges and reaffirm
our commitment to supporting those noble endeavours.
I also welcome the participation of the representative of
South Sudan in today’s meeting.
As we all know, the path to peace begins when the
parties show their willingness to engage in meaningful
dialogue to overcome differences and lay the foundations
for peace. That is particularly essential when discussing
the situation in South Sudan and is what I would like
to emphasize in my statement. First and foremost,
intercommunal dialogue must be strengthened to end the
cycle of violence and establish a culture of peace at the
grassroots level. We therefore believe that the efforts of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
are essential when engaging with local and traditional
leaders and establishing a platform to discuss issues,
de-escalate tensions and reaffirm the commitment of
local communities to the values of peaceful coexistence.
We also believe that continued dialogue and
engagement among all stakeholders, including women
and young people, is vital to rebuilding confidence among
the parties and making further progress in implementing
the Revitalized Agreement for the Resolution of Conflict
in South Sudan. I would like to point to the positive steps
taken by South Sudan in that regard, such as the approval
of the amendment to the National Elections Act and the
submission of a number of important bills, as well as
the approval of the national budget for the deployment
of the necessary unified forces. We stress that this
trajectory should continue taking into account the road
map and the deadlines it specifies. We also emphasize
that upholding the national interest takes priority over all
other considerations.
23-17774

20/06/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In order to consolidate peace, we must continue to
address the grave security challenges in South Sudan,
especially in the light of the recent events in Upper Nile
state, particularly the city of Malakal. The country is
still witnessing the targeting and killing of civilians
and humanitarian workers and attacks on humanitarian
and commercial convoys. That is hindering the ability
of aid to reach those in need and the refugees who are
arriving in South Sudan in the face of regional tensions.
In that context, we commend the role of UNMISS in
supporting and strengthening the Government’s ability
to protect civilians and in taking proactive measures,
including troop deployments, in line with the Mission’s
mandate. We also appreciate its commitment to
ensuring the protection of humanitarian workers and
facilitating humanitarian access.
In conclusion, we look forward to seeing
diplomatic efforts continue at the regional level, with
the steadfast support of the international community in
helping South Sudan overcome its challenges. Regional
organizations, including the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, have
demonstrated their leadership role in supporting the
country’s stability. That includes launching a postconflict needs assessment and supporting the adoption
of the Constitution and the electoral process as part of
the trilateral task force in order to meet the aspirations
of the people of South Sudan.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): As this is my first time
addressing the Security Council since your country
assumed the presidency for this month, I would like to
congratulate you and your delegation, Madam President,
on your leadership of the Council and its work. I would
also like to welcome and thank Mr. Haysom, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Charles
Tai Gituai, the interim Chairperson of the reconstituted
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, and
Mr. Marco Impagliazzo, President of the Community of
Sant’Egidio, for their insightful briefings. We hope they
will contribute positively towards our shared goal for
sustainable peace and security in South Sudan. I would
also like to thank the Ambassador of Mozambique and
the other African members of the Council for their
comprehensive and welcome statement.

S/PV.9353

My delegation has taken note of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the situation in South Sudan
(S/2023/433) submitted pursuant to resolution 2677
(2023), which requested the Secretary-General to
report on the implementation of the Mission’s mandate
every 90 days. Throughout the reporting period, South
Sudan experienced relative peace and security across
the country. The revitalized Government is committed
to ensuring that the country is completely peaceful
and that the lives of common citizens are returning to
normalcy. To that end, Juba continues to extend an olive
branch to those who are still outside of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan. We call on all peace-loving
partners to join us in consolidating what has been
achieved and to work collaboratively to involve those
who are still outside the Revitalized Agreement in order
to arrive at a state of affairs that will enable the country
to enjoy lasting peace. We acknowledge the significant
delays in meeting the agreed benchmarks and remain
committed to expediting the pending tasks necessary
for the successful implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement. We therefore want to assure the international
community that despite the challenges we are facing, we
are committed to doing all we can to make meaningful
progress towards our goals.
In his report, the Secretary-General reminded the
Security Council of the impact and devastation of the
floods that have followed four years of incessant rainfall
and the implications that has for the peacekeepers’ work,
especially in Bentiu, where the dikes need to be further
enhanced. Conversely, the poor rainfall this year in some
parts of the country leads us to expect a poor harvest,
which is likely to result in cases of starvation and possible
internal displacement and migration, probably creating
security-related instabilities and communal tensions.
We recognize the threat caused by floods, drought
and climate-related shocks to the stability and the
security of our nation, as we have witnessed in the
conflicts across the country between cattle herders and
farmers. We urge the international community and the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to
join South Sudan, through initiatives that will prioritize
conflict prevention and early warning, and invest in
sustainable development through an agreed mechanism
for mitigation and adaptation that leaves no one behind.
Since the inception of the conflict in the Republic of
the Sudan, South Sudan has experienced a migration
of refugees and returnees from the Sudan. Given the

23-1777417/18

S/PV.9353

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

quick turn of events, we were caught flat-footed, and no
emergency preparations were readily available. Given
South Sudan’s already difficult humanitarian situation
and economic challenges, we do not have the immediate
financial capacity to be able to remedy the dire situation.
While we are thankful for the efforts made thus far, we
are appealing to the international community to redouble
its efforts and commitment to help the displaced.
The Government of South Sudan wishes to
express its deepest appreciation to UNMISS, the
Intergovernmental
Authority
on
Development
(IGAD) and those countries that are assisting in the
implementation of the road map. We urge those partners
and friends that have yet to join in support of the
implementation of the road map to do so, to allow the
parties to effectively and positively implement the road
map and allow for the successful conduct of the general
elections, as provided for in the Revitalized Agreement.
South Sudan is grateful for the ongoing support of
UNMISS, the African Union, IGAD, the reconstituted
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, the Com-

18/18

20/06/2023

munity of Sant’Egidio and other related organizations
and mechanisms within the Revitalized Agreement, as
well as the troop- and police-contributing countries that
are helping to ensure our continued progress towards a
brighter future. We assure the international community
of our continued commitment to implementing the Revitalized Agreement and achieving lasting peace and
stability in South Sudan.
In conclusion, notwithstanding the challenges the
Revitalized Agreement faces in its implementation, the
parties are committed to its full implementation. We
strongly call on the international community, regional
partners and friends of South Sudan not to give up on
South Sudan.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

23-17774
