S/PV.5564 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-first year

5564th meeting
Thursday, 9 November 2006, 3.15 p. m.
New York

President:

Mr. Voto-Bernales . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Li Junhua
Mr. Ikouebe
Mr. Kaarsbo
Mr. Faivre
Mr. Christian
Mr. Vidouris
Mr. Omura
Mr. Al-Bader
Mr. Sitnikov
Mr. Babicz
Mr. Johnston
Mr. Salaita
Mr. Brencick

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
Letter dated 6 November 2006 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Qatar to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2006/868)
Letter dated 7 November 2006 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Azerbaijan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2006/869)
Letter dated 8 November 2006 from the Permanent Representative of Cuba to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2006/871)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

06-61024 (E)

*0661024*

S/PV.5564 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.25 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Brazil, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, South Africa, the Syrian Arab Republic
and the United Arab Emirates in which they request to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
9 November 2006 from the representative of Qatar in
which he requests that an invitation be extended,
pursuant to rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, to His Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani,
Permanent Observer for the League of Arab States to
the United Nations, to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Yahya Mahmassani.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Mahmassani to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.
As I indicated in this morning’s session, I wish to
remind all speakers to limit their statements to no more
than five minutes in order to enable the Council to
carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed
version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Azerbaijan.

2

Mr. Shukurov (Azerbaijan): Mr. President, in my
capacity as the Chairman of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference (OIC) Group at the United Nations,
I would like to inform you that the OIC Group adopted
the following statement on 7 November, in response to
the recent developments in the occupied Palestinian
territory, which I would like to read:
“The OIC Group at the United Nations met at the
ambassadorial level in New York on 7 November
2006 to discuss the continued deterioration of the
situation on the ground in the occupied
Palestinian territory as a result of the military
aggression being carried out by Israel, the
occupying Power in the Gaza Strip.
“The OIC Group at the United Nations expressed
its grave concern at the continued deterioration of
the situation on the ground in the Palestinian
territory occupied by Israel since 1967 during the
recent period, particularly as a result of the
excessive and indiscriminate use of force by
Israel, the occupying Power, which has caused
extensive loss of civilian Palestinian life and
injuries, including among children and women.
“The OIC Group at the United Nations
condemned in particular the military assaults
being carried out by Israel, the occupying Power
in the Gaza Strip, which has caused loss of life
and extensive destruction of Palestinian property
and vital infrastructure.
“The OIC Group at the United Nations
emphasizes the need to preserve the institutions
of the Palestinian National Authority and
Palestinian infrastructure and properties.
“The OIC Group at the United Nations expressed
grave concern about the dire humanitarian
situation of the Palestinian people and called for
the provision of emergency assistance to them.
“The OIC Group at the United Nations decided to
call for the convening of the Security Council’s
meeting on this issue and urged the Security
Council to shoulder its responsibility, in
accordance with the United Nations Charter and
the preservation of international peace and
security, by taking the following measures.
“First: demanding that Israel, the occupying
Power, immediately cease its aggression against
the Palestinian civilian population in the occupied

06-61024

S/PV.5564 (Resumption 1)

Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
and immediately withdraw its forces from within
the Gaza Strip to positions held prior to 28 June
2006.

7 women. We join the call for an independent
international investigation into this incident and its
implications for the violations of international
humanitarian law.

“Second: calling for an immediate ceasefire
between the Israeli and Palestinian sides.

This slaughter comes in the wake of the images
of unarmed Palestinian women being fired at and killed
in the streets of Gaza. These images represent the ugly
faces of occupation, sustained by indiscriminate and
disproportionate use of military force and utter
disregard for international human rights and
humanitarian law.

“Third: calling also for the establishment and
dispatch of a United Nations observer force to
supervise the ceasefire.
“Fourth: calling upon Israel, the occupying
Power, to scrupulously abide by its obligations
and responsibilities under the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949.
“The OIC Group at the United Nations called
upon the international community, including the
Quartet, to take immediate steps, including
confidence-building measures between the
parties, with the objective of resuming peace
negotiations and restarting the peace process in
accordance with General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions.
“The OIC Group at the United Nations decided to
endorse the draft resolution tabled by the Arab
Group at the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee under agenda item 32, entitled ‘Israeli
aggression in the Gaza Strip’.”
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Let me begin by
extending the felicitations of the Pakistan delegation
on Peru’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. It is particularly gratifying to
see an old friend back in New York. We would also like
to extend our congratulations to Ambassador Kenzo
Oshima and the Japanese delegation for a very
successful and active presidency last month.
We appreciate the decision of the Security
Council to hold this emergency meeting in response to
the call by the League of Arab States, the Organization
of the Islamic Conference and the Non-Aligned
Movement. It is perhaps a measure of the impunity
enjoyed by Israel that, even as the Council decided to
meet, additional horrendous actions took place, such as
yesterday’s action in Beit Hanoun, which killed 18
members of a family, including 8 children and

06-61024

It is unfortunate that the momentary sense of
optimism generated last year by the Israeli withdrawal
from Gaza quickly dissipated into despair and renewed
violence. Hopelessness and violence have both risen
sharply in recent months. Each passing day of violence
and reprisals is a setback to the quest for a peaceful
settlement of the Palestinian question and durable
peace in the Middle East.
After the devastating conflict in Lebanon earlier
this year, which raged while the Security Council
watched helplessly for 30 days, it became obvious that
a comprehensive approach was essential to bringing
about a durable peace and stability in the Middle East.
A high-level delegation of the League of Arab States
came to this Council last September with an important
initiative — to bring an end to the Arab-Israeli conflict
and to achieve comprehensive peace through the
revival of the peace process and negotiations. It is
unfortunate that the Security Council did not deem it
appropriate to take any follow-up action on that
initiative and on the strong commitment for peace
which it embodied. No wonder there is a crying need
for the Council to restore its credibility.
We must address all the festering problems of the
region comprehensively and fairly. It is time to end
Israel’s conflicts with all its neighbours. It is time, first
and foremost, to end the tragedy of Palestine, which is
at the core of the Middle East conflict and the major
source of the humiliation, anger and desperation that is
felt by people throughout the Muslim world. Given the
human suffering, given the threat to international peace
and security, and given the responsibility entrusted to
this Council by the Charter, this Council must respond
to the call of the Arab and Islamic world for an
immediate ceasefire in the occupied Palestinian
territories — a ceasefire which is credible, sustainable
and verifiable.

3

S/PV.5564 (Resumption 1)

To this end, Pakistan would urge the two sides,
Israel and the Palestinians, to take a series of
immediate and simultaneous confidence-building
measures.
To Israel, we ask that it immediately end its
military campaign in Gaza; release Palestinian
prisoners, including cabinet members and legislators;
remove checkpoints and other obstacles to facilitate
access and movement of civilians and humanitarian
workers; halt and reverse construction of the separation
wall; freeze settlement activities and dismantle
outposts constructed in the West Bank since 2001;
release customs and back payments to the Palestinian
Authority; and accept negotiations with the Palestinian
Authority led by President Mahmoud Abbas.
To our Palestinian brothers, we also appeal that
they halt rocket attacks and violence, secure release of
the captured Israeli soldier, achieve internal cohesion
and establish a national unity Government, with
authority given to the Palestinian Authority and to
President Abbas to negotiate with Israel.
In conclusion, I would like to say that the Middle
East is a great challenge. President Musharraf has
stated that the greatest challenge to global security, to
the campaign against terrorism, to the promotion of
harmony among civilizations and to the credibility of
the United Nations is the cauldron of conflict that is
the Middle East. We must put out these fires.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Hachani (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to address you, Mr. President, and other members
of the Security Council in order to express our
appreciation for your quick response in holding this
urgent meeting on behalf of the Arab States, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the NonAligned Movement to consider the serious
developments that are taking place in the occupied
Palestinian territories.
Let me also congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I would also like to thank your
predecessor, the Ambassador of Japan, for his
presidency last month.
The Security Council is meeting today in light of
the serious Israeli military escalation in the occupied
Palestinian territories. Tunisia has followed with

4

concern this brutal Israeli aggression against the
northern Gaza Strip, which has caused many victims
among the Palestinian people — women, children and
the elderly. The most recent were victims of the
bombing yesterday in Beit Hanoun, which also
destroyed infrastructure.
This escalation clearly is a serious threat to the
security and stability of the Middle East region. In a
communication from the Foreign Ministry issued on
4 November 2006, Tunisia condemned repeated Israeli
acts of aggression. They are a grave violation of all
laws, norms and international legality. This Israeli
aggression against Palestinian territories is being
pursued at a time when the Palestinian people and
international public opinion are seeking to resume talks
between Israelis and Palestinians in order to
reinvigorate the peace process, with a view to bringing
about a comprehensive settlement to this conflict, and
to spare the region and its peoples further war and
suffering.
Violence begets violence. It fuels feelings of
hatred and despair. There is no other choice for the
parties than the choice of peace and a return to
negotiations. We reiterate the invitation to Israel to end
its acts of oppression and aggression. We believe that it
is high time for the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibilities in order to put an end to the violations
that the Palestinian people are subjected to. The
Council must take the necessary measures to create an
international force to protect Palestinian civilians, in
keeping with the call from President Ben Ali of the
Republic of Tunisia. In this regard, we hope the
Council will adopt the Arab draft resolution on this
matter in order to end this bloodshed and the dangers
that still threaten the future of the region.
Mr. Abdalhaleem (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me, at the outset, to extend to you, Sir, my
congratulations for presiding over the Council this
month. We value the active role of your country, Peru,
on the international scene. The recent Latin AmericanArab Summit bears witness to that important and vital
role. We look forward to its continuation during the
coming summit meeting of Africa and Latin America.
I would also like to extend my thanks to the
previous President, the representative of Japan, for his
wise management of the work of the Council during
the last month.

06-61024

S/PV.5564 (Resumption 1)

My delegation aligns itself with the statements by
the representative of Qatar on behalf of the Arab
Group, the representative of Cuba on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, and Azerbaijan on behalf of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference.
My country is following with serious concern the
development of the situation in the Palestinian
territories and the military practices of the occupying
authority, in which it uses internationally prohibited
weapons against populated areas and continues to
destroy and demolish houses and Arab land. It is also
imposing a policy of starvation and siege on the Gaza
Strip for lengthy periods, which will lead to further
deterioration and instability in the region and will
make it very difficult to reach a permanent peace.
Since the Palestinian people have freely elected a
national Government in a clear, democratic
environment, it has been subjected to collective
punishment because of its democratic choice. Israeli
policies and practices in the Gaza Strip have led to a
horrific deterioration in economic, social and
humanitarian conditions. More than 900,000
Palestinian civil servants have been affected by the halt
of external assistance to the Government. Israel has not
paid what it owes in taxes, customs and tariffs to the
Palestinian Authority, which is now more than
$500,000,000. Checkpoints and closures have led to
the destruction of Palestinian exports, the bankruptcy
of companies and displacement of their employees.
Other practices have besieged the Palestinian people
and destroyed their will to stand up to the occupier, a
steadfastness that they have shown for five decades.
Last week, Israeli tanks killed tens of
Palestinians, including a large number of women and
children, and injured hundreds in Beit Hanoun, in
Gaza, in a brutal attack on unarmed civilians, who
were mowed down mercilessly by Israeli tanks. This
incident is a continuation of the aerial bombardment
that Israel is carrying out against residential areas, in
addition to the extrajudicial killings and arbitrary
targeting of civilians, demolition of homes, destruction
of infrastructure and arrest and detention of
democratically elected officials. Even children were
not spared prisons. The report of the Committee points
to tens — in fact, hundreds — of Palestinian children
who have been detained and imprisoned in Israel.
In the West Bank, despite the clear and explicit
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice

06-61024

that stipulates halting the construction of the separation
wall, the Israeli occupying authority continues to
construct the wall and build more than 550 barricades.
Israel practises all forms of intransigence, which is
reported by all forms of media and is having the worst
effect on Palestinian citizens, particularly the sick, the
disabled and the students and those who are facing the
worst kind of collective punishment and abuse by
Israeli soldiers. They suffer beating, have their clothes
removed and are forced to sit in mud or stand for long
hours under the sun or experience exposure to cold
weather and all forms of torture.
The political positions that give the Zionist entity
the unjust right to continue its barbaric aggression
against the defenceless Palestinian people under the
pretext of self-defence unjustly support this explicit
aggression. They give free rein to the Zionist entity to
continue its atrocities against the Palestinians.
My country condemns this aggressive Zionist
attitude and calls upon the Security Council, the
international community, all human rights institutions
and all peace-loving people to move urgently to
condemn this aggression and to put an end, by all
means possible, to the inhumane practices that are
perpetrated daily by Israel against the steadfast
Palestinian people.
The time has come for the international
community, the Security Council in particular, to
shoulder its responsibility vis-à-vis the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories and the indescribable
suffering of civilians. Decisive steps should be taken
immediately to force Israel to implement resolutions of
international legitimacy and to put an end to Israeli
practices against the unarmed Palestinian people and
their property by stopping its aggression in occupied
Palestinian territories and Jerusalem. Israel should
withdraw immediately from the Gaza Strip. An
international investigative committee should be
established to look into the massacre that was
perpetrated by the Israeli forces on 8 November 2006
in Beit Hanoun. Relevant United Nations agencies and
other
organizations
should
send
emergency
humanitarian assistance to the needy in the occupied
territory and force Israel to provide full compensation
for the harm that has befallen the Palestinians.
The international community, represented here in
this Council, should take immediate and urgent
measures to protect the Palestinian people and to force

5

S/PV.5564 (Resumption 1)

Israel to implement without delay the General
Assembly’s and the Council’s resolutions that are
based on its withdrawal from the territories it occupied
in 1967.
We would like to remind Security Council
members that Israel is the only country in the world
that has no borders. That is because it is an entity based
on expansion.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Chabar (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, I would like first to congratulate you
and your friendly country, Peru, on presiding over the
Council this month, and I wish you every success. I
would like to pay tribute to your predecessor, the
representative of Japan, for his efforts and wisdom in
guiding the work of the Council last month.
My delegation associates itself with the
statements made by the representative of Qatar on
behalf of the Arab Group, Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and Cuba on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. All previous
speakers have voiced the same concern that Morocco
feels with respect to the occupied Palestinian
territories. We would like to reiterate some of these
concerns, because we are interested in developments in
the Middle East conflict, particularly the PalestineIsrael component.
We strongly denounce the Israeli attacks on Gaza,
particularly the bombardment of Beit Hanoun on
8 November by the Israel Defense Forces, causing the
deaths of civilians, including women and children. We
are shocked by this act of aggression, which cannot be
justified. We convey our condolences to our brothers in
Palestine, while reiterating our feelings of solidarity
with them and our full support and hope that they will
regain their rights.
At the same time, we voice our indignation at the
Israeli Government’s escalation of violence against the
defenceless Palestinian people and its continuous
targeted killing, collective punishment, the destruction
of economic and social infrastructure, the kidnapping
of freely elected Government officials and the
economic and security blockade of the territories.
These are all flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law, human rights and all agreements and
treaties, including the Fourth Geneva Convention

6

relevant to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War.
Confronted with this military pressure in the
Palestinian territories, and noting Israel’s overt
intention to continue this kind of aggression, we call
upon Israel to learn the bitter lesson of its attack on
Lebanon last summer. The logic of force is incapable
of solving political issues. It leads only to more
violence and counter-violence. It threatens stability in
the entire region and deeply separates peoples who can
coexist only with mutual respect.
The Kingdom of Morocco rejects any and all acts
of violence against civilians regardless of who
perpetrates them. Here, we appeal for restraint in order
to spare the region the disasters of further escalation.
Given the complications in this situation and the
growing tension between the parties, Morocco believes
we can act to restore communication between the
parties in order to revive the peace process. We insist
that this is linked to genuine political will on both
sides. We would like to recall that the Arab party at the
Security Council ministerial-level meeting on
21 September declared its honest and sincere desire for
peace and the steps to attain it.
Morocco would like to point out all the efforts
that have been made regionally and internationally to
move ahead with the peace process. We reiterate the
need for the parties to back up their words with action
in order to restore confidence by taking effective
measures that lead to the resumption of negotiations.
An immediate ceasefire would be the first step,
followed by abstaining from anything that could
ratchet up tension, stopping the isolation of the
Palestinians, ending the unjustified siege, freeing
Palestinian funds and tax money, and providing moral
and material support for efforts to create a unity
Government that would serve as a partner in the peace
process. It goes without saying that those efforts
require the full and clear support of the international
community. In this regard, the Security Council, more
than ever, has a responsibility to maintain international
peace and security in the region.
The draft resolution before the Council contains
first steps and measures, in particular the invitation for
a complete end to active aggression against the
Palestinian people and the sending of international
observers.

06-61024

S/PV.5564 (Resumption 1)

Putting an end to violence is a priority, but we
also have to address the essential political facets. In
that connection, the Quartet has a particular
responsibility to create momentum in the peace
process. We must look at the Palestinian track from the
economic and humanitarian perspectives and must
consider effective political measures that can produce a
resumption of negotiations, not only on the PalestineIsrael track, but also on the other two tracks: IsraelSyria and Israel-Lebanon.
We reaffirm the importance of the primary terms
of reference on which the peace process is based: the
Road Map, the principle of land for peace, the Arab
Peace Initiative and relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002) and 1515 (2003).
Some of those terms of reference set out clearly
defined objectives within a clearly defined timetable,
in order to bring the parties closer to a solution.
Although the Israel-Palestine conflict is the
mother and the core of the Arab-Israel conflict, we will
not achieve lasting and comprehensive peace in the
region without continuous and parallel efforts on all
fronts. Peaceful coexistence among all the peoples and
religions of the Middle East will make it possible for
peace and love to prevail over hatred, through the
creation of two States living side by side in peace:
Israel and independent Palestine with Jerusalem as its
capital.
I reaffirm my Government’s full support for all
efforts to revive the peace process and to spare the
region any more years of a conflict that has already
lasted far too long.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. De Palacio España (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me first of all to tell you, Sir, how
happy I am to see you among us again, now as
President of the Security Council for the month of
November. I wish you every success in that task. I also
welcome the initiative to hold this open debate; it is
fully justified by the gravity of the situation in the
Middle East, in particular in the occupied territories.
Spain fully endorses the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Finland on behalf of the
European Union.

06-61024

The Middle East is presently undergoing the
worst crisis in years as a direct consequence of the
recent war in Lebanon and the prolonged violence in
the occupied territories. We are gravely concerned
about the growing violence between Israelis and
Palestinians, as well as confrontations among
Palestinians. International peace plans and regional
initiatives are at a standstill, which poses serious risks
for international peace and security.
Nevertheless, precisely because the use of war as
an instrument to resolve conflicts in the region has
been shown to be useless, Spain believes it is urgent
that we commit ourselves to working jointly with
regional actors and the international community in
order to achieve a fair, comprehensive and lasting
solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict. The situation
brooks no delay. The opportunity provided by
resolution 1701 (2006) will not last much longer.
We believe that two parallel steps must be carried
out: on the one hand, concrete action in the region to
create an atmosphere more propitious to peace through
short-term and medium-term measures; and, on the
other hand, the promotion of international consensus to
launch a peace initiative that addresses all tracks —
Israeli, Palestinian, Lebanese and Syrian — and
includes all actors, in order to overcome the current
deadlock.
Among the first set of measures that are more
short-term and should generate trust among the parties,
we think that the immediate liberation of soldiers and
prisoners and the release of Palestinian tax revenues
retained by Israel should be carried out. Moreover, a
border management system should be established that
makes it possible to harmonize legitimate security
concerns with the need to facilitate the circulation of
goods and persons. In addition, there must be support
for the Palestinian Authority in its efforts to form a
Palestinian Government with which the international
community can fully cooperate.
Let us not forget that without preconditioning the
political process on the security situation, we must put
an immediate end to violence through a commitment
by the parties to refrain from striking out against each
other, with a view to reopening the channels for
dialogue.

7

S/PV.5564 (Resumption 1)

However, we must be realistic and accept that in
the present circumstances, it is unlikely that the parties
to the conflict will take the initiative. Spain therefore
believes that, in the longer term, peacebuilding will
require the convening of an international conference to
demonstrate political commitment to a renewed peace
process. Here, it would also be necessary to reactivate
the Road Map, and to ensure greater participation by
regional actors in the activities of the Quartet.
Spain believes that the meeting of the
Mediterranean Forum, held on 27 and 28 October 2006
in Alicante, Spain, was a good starting point in efforts
to achieve such a consensus. In the final declaration,
Ministers for Foreign Affairs and heads of delegation
from countries on both sides of the Mediterranean,
members of the Forum, agreed on the elements I have
set out, as well as about the need to set in motion a
renewed multilateral process involving all of the
relevant actors to facilitate negotiations among all the
parties on all the tracks.
Such negotiations must be based on the terms of
reference accepted by all of the parties at the 1991
Madrid Conference and on the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council, as well as on clearly defined
parameters on the solution of final status issues. That
set of measures, at the local, regional and international
levels and within a political context that makes it
possible to reconcile the parties, are the way to emerge
from the current deadlock and achieve a just,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mrs. Juul (Norway): This meeting takes place
against the backdrop of yesterday’s Israeli military
action in Gaza. The numbers are indisputable and
shocking: 19 Palestinians were killed in Beit Hanoun
alone, a majority of them women and children. Our
condolences go to those who lost loved ones. Norway
condemns this massive use of military force by the
Israel Defense Forces in their attempts to stop the
firing of home-made rockets from Gaza.
Since June this year, more than 300 Palestinians
have lost their lives, many of them children. Countless
others have suffered injuries and have been left
homeless and traumatized. Along with the damaging
effects of the Israeli military action, the overall
humanitarian situation in Gaza is becoming more and

8

more critical, increasing human
undermining the prospects for peace.

suffering

and

Norway’s Minister for Foreign Affairs was in
Gaza yesterday and could see for himself the rapidly
deteriorating
humanitarian
situation
and
the
widespread destruction left behind by the recent Israeli
military campaign. In Gaza, my Minister met with
President Abbas; he also met with Israel’s Minister for
Foreign Affairs. He brought with him a clear message:
while Norway recognizes Israel’s right to defend itself
and its citizens, we cannot accept military retaliation
that is so disproportionate and contrary to international
humanitarian law. Actions such as yesterday’s serve
only to cultivate hatred and to reinforce continued
armed resistance. That is not the way to improve
Israel’s security. There is no military solution to this
conflict, and we urge Israel to end its incursions into
Gaza.
It is also our long-standing position that the
Palestinian leadership must bring an end to the firing
of rockets into Israeli territory. Such acts of terror
serve neither the Palestinian population nor the
prospects for peace. We also urge the Palestinian
leadership to provide for the safe return of the
kidnapped Israeli corporal Gilad Shalit.
Norway supports the efforts of President Abbas to
establish a Government of national unity reflecting the
principles set out by the Quartet. We strongly
encourage all parties and the international community
to support those efforts. The road to peace starts at the
negotiating table. Only a process of negotiations can
bring about a comprehensive settlement based on the
Road Map, the commitments made at Sharm el-Sheikh
and all relevant resolutions adopted by the Security
Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Yousfi (Algeria) (spoke in French): Permit
me at the outset to express to you, Sir, my delegation’s
sincere congratulations on the assumption of the
Security Council presidency by your country, Peru, for
the month of November and to wish you every success
in carrying out that mission. I also thank you for
having convened this meeting. Likewise, I should like
to congratulate Ambassador Kenzo Oshima, Permanent
Representative of Japan, on his successful guidance of
the work of the Council during the past month. My
thanks go also to Ms. Angela Kane, Assistant

06-61024

S/PV.5564 (Resumption 1)

Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for her briefing
on the tragic events currently taking place in the
occupied Palestinian territory, particularly the Gaza
Strip.
The difficult circumstances and the gravity of the
security and humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory give this Security Council meeting
particular importance. They offer my delegation an
opportunity to express its deep concern and to
condemn most energetically the most recent Israeli
aggression, which has caused the cruel loss of innocent
human lives, including those of women and children,
as well as significant destruction of basic infrastructure
in the Palestinian territory, in flagrant violation of
international legality.
The Israeli army’s latest incursion into the Gaza
Strip, characterized by the abusive, disproportionate
and indiscriminate use of force against the civilian
population, is taking place at a difficult time when the
Palestine Authority, facing serious challenges, is
working to find a solution to the governmental crisis.
Since the beginning of the year, that crisis has served
as an additional pretext for Israel to strengthen its
blockade of the Palestinian territory and to transform
the Gaza Strip into a vast prison for an already sorely
tested civilian population.
Today, it is very symbolic to note that Israel’s
latest aggression against the Palestinian people is
taking place at the very time when the General
Assembly’s Special Political and Decolonization
Committee is discussing precisely the issue of the
tragic human rights situation in the occupied Arab
territories, and to note that Israel is committing this
inexcusable massacre — there is no other word to
describe it — of the innocent civilian population in
Beit Hanoun on the very day when the Committee is
concluding its general debate on that issue, while Israel
is announcing with great fanfare its withdrawal from
the martyred city following several days of massacre
and destruction. That shows Israel’s scorn for the
international community and its lack of interest in the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations and in respect for international legality.
The impunity with which Israel, itching for war,
periodically launches army attacks in Palestinian cities
and villages against an exhausted and defenceless
civilian population, without arousing any reaction on
the part of the international community, and puts

06-61024

forward unacceptable and fallacious pretexts to justify
its aggression, must be firmly condemned and
denounced by the international community. History
will not pardon complicit silence, which is interpreted
as an encouragement for the criminal activities of the
Israeli army.
Following its Operation Summer Rains, carried
out last summer, with its trail of destruction and
innocent victims, including women and even children,
Israel recently returned with its Operation Autumn
Clouds, as if to create the impression that its army is
not engaged in a barbaric aggression against the
Palestinian population, but rather is taking actions for
which the international community is asked to show its
indulgence, if not its admiration. At this rate, my
delegation is entitled to ask whether it is planned that
the skies will someday clear up for occupied Palestine
and whether the quest for peace is really on the agenda
of the international community, particularly the
Security Council.
The right to self-defence and the fight against
terrorism have been held up, abusively and ad
nauseam, as pretexts enabling Israel to commit its
excesses, which are reprehensible and contrary to
international legality. Those excesses do not spare
Palestinian institutions, political figures — who have
been abruptly imprisoned for no apparent reason —
basic infrastructure or, above all, the civilian
population, which is subjected to daily humiliation.
The Palestinian people’s exercise of its free democratic
choice in 2006 seems to have given Israel an additional
reason to carry out collective punishment against a
people whose latest transgression appears to have been
to democratically choose its leaders.
The gravity of the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory causes my delegation to appeal
forcefully to the Security Council to end its apparent
complacency regarding Israel’s repeated attacks against
the Palestinian people, to shoulder its Charter
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security and to exert the pressure necessary
to compel Israel to immediately end its aggression
against the Palestinian people and withdraw its troops
from the Gaza Strip. The Council must also impose a
ceasefire and compel Israel to comply strictly with its
obligations under the Geneva Convention of 12 August
1949 relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War.

9

S/PV.5564 (Resumption 1)

My delegation remains convinced that, given the
current impasse in the Middle East peace process, the
United Nations must once again take up that issue and
shoulder its full responsibility in the quest for a
settlement to the conflict. The relevant Security
Council resolutions — particularly resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), which remain fully valid — are
the foundations for a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace that ensures respect for the legitimate rights of
the Palestinian people, including its right to selfdetermination and its right to create an independent,
viable State living side by side in peace with its
neighbours.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
His Excellency Mr. Paul Badji, Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.
Mr. Badji (spoke in French): At the outset, I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for November. I am confident that, under your skilful
guidance, the Council’s work will be carried out
constructively and effectively.
I also take this opportunity to congratulate your
predecessor, Ambassador Kenzo Oshima, Permanent
Representative of Japan, for his outstanding leadership
of the Council in October.
I thank you, Sir, and the other members of the
Council for giving me the opportunity, in my capacity
as Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
participate in this important debate on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
We meet today in the Security Council to
consider the deeply disturbing events that have taken
place in Beit Hanoun in the Gaza Strip. We all know
what happened. Nineteen Palestinians were killed in
the early morning yesterday when Israeli forces fired
artillery rounds on six houses in a city where most
people were still asleep. Seven children and six women
were among those killed. Some 53 other people were
wounded, including 25 children and 12 women.
According to certain sources, the Israeli military
operation in that region, which began on 1 November,
has already claimed 77 lives.
The Israeli army’s continued excessive use of
force in the occupied Palestinian territories constitutes

10

an act of war against the Palestinian people. The use of
tanks, aircraft and combat helicopters, as well as
missiles and artillery guns, is clearly and blatantly
disproportionate. The number of Palestinian civilian
victims, including innocent women and children among
the killed and injured, continues to grow.
The Committee has also urged the Palestinian
militants to cease firing Qassam rockets into Israel
from northern Gaza, which provoked the violent
response of the Israeli army. Nothing whatsoever can
justify those acts, which violate international law.
The tragic developments in the situation have
dashed the faint remaining hopes of the Palestinian
leaders of finding a way to resume dialogue and revive
the peace negotiations. Not only has the Palestinian
people, which is already living in horrendous
conditions, been further downtrodden and humiliated;
it must also deal with dangers that grow day by day.
The latest Israeli operation in the Gaza Strip and
the West Bank has gone virtually unnoticed by the
international community, as have the ongoing building
of settlements and the separation wall and the serious
humanitarian crisis in the West Bank and Gaza. We
urge Israel, the occupying Power, immediately to end
its military operations, to conduct a credible in-depth
inquiry into yesterday’s horrific incident, and to act in
conformity with the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Times
of War by protecting Palestinians. We call on both
parties immediately to cease all acts of violence and to
show the utmost restraint in order for calm to be
restored.
The Committee believes that the Security Council
needs to shoulder its Charter responsibilities and help
to end the bloodshed and suffering in the occupied
Palestinian territories. Israel must end its military
incursions into Palestinian territory and its targeted
assassinations of Palestinians. It must also lift the
severe restrictions that have imposed untold daily
suffering and difficulties on the Palestinian people.
For its part, the Committee will continue to work
with legitimate representatives of the Palestinian
people, above all the President of the Palestinian
Authority, who support the principles of non-violence,
recognize the State of Israel and respect and abide by
all previous Israeli-Palestinian agreements. The
Committee also advocates a negotiated settlement to
the conflict leading to the emergence of a viable,

06-61024

S/PV.5564 (Resumption 1)

democratic and independent Palestinian State living
side by side in peace and security with Israel and its
other neighbours. Such a settlement would allow the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict to be resolved and the
occupation that began in 1967 to end, on the basis of
the Madrid conference; the principle of land for peace;
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003); agreements previously
concluded between the parties; the Arab peace
initiative; and the acceptance of Israel as a neighbour
living in peace and security in the context of a
comprehensive settlement. Only a comprehensive
settlement will enable the Palestinian people to
exercise its inalienable rights.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Al-Shamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): On behalf of the delegation of the United Arab
Emirates, it gives me great pleasure to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council this month and to thank you for your
quick response in convening this important meeting.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Japan, for his wise stewardship of the Council last
month.
The United Arab Emirates aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of Qatar on
behalf of the Group of Arab States.
My country has closely followed the truly grave
humanitarian catastrophe of the Palestinian people in
the occupied territories, as embodied in the heinous
massacre committed in cold blood yesterday morning
by the Israeli occupation forces in Beit Hanoun, the
Gaza Strip, which killed at least 20 people, 13 of whom
were from the same family, and gravely wounded 45
others, mostly women and children.
That criminal and gruesome Israeli act, which is
contrary to all international human rights instruments,
could have been fully and easily prevented if the
Security Council had acted from the first day by calling
upon Israel, the occupying Power, to end its open and
brutal war against the people of Gaza, including its
current attacks.
The continuing inaction on the part of the
international community, especially as regards Israel’s
gross violations of the human rights of the Palestinian

06-61024

and Arab peoples, has not only encouraged Israel to
continue its destruction of Palestinian cities and
villages and their vital infrastructure; it has also
encouraged it to launch ferocious military attacks
against unarmed civilians before the eyes of the world.
Israel’s military attack against Beit Hanoun — which
included the deliberate, widespread and barbaric
demolition of homes, mass detention, extrajudicial
killings and the targeting of ambulances and
emergency medical personnel — has, over the past
eight days, resulted in more than 70 deaths and the
wounding of at least 300 civilians, 20 per cent of
whom are in critical condition.
The United Arab Emirates would like to declare
its solidarity with the Palestinian people as they face
Israeli massacres and other violations that are
tantamount to genocide — a crime under international
humanitarian law. I wonder how the international
community can believe the justification put forth by
the representative of Israel this morning that the crimes
committed by the Israeli war machine in Beit Hanoun
and the occupied Palestinian territories — in which
they employed the most lethal of weapons — were acts
of self-defence. Israel is committing the most heinous
acts of killing and oppression in violation of
international instruments and norms and in total
disregard for the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, which guarantee the right of the Palestinian
people to live in dignity, peace, stability and security in
their homeland, like all other peoples of the world. We
therefore reiterate our earlier position that Israel’s
ongoing contempt for, and violation of, its obligations
under United Nations resolutions, international law,
human rights covenants and previous agreements
concluded with the Palestinians will not bring about
security and stability for the Israeli people. Rather,
they will lead to increasing frustration among
Palestinians and will escalate violence and tension in
the entire region.
We therefore call upon the international
community, and the Security Council and the Quartet
in particular, to take urgent steps to condemn Israel’s
actions, urgently act to investigate those actions, bring
the perpetrators to international justice, compel Israel
to pay the necessary compensation and ensure that it
strictly commits itself to halting its ongoing attacks
against the Palestinian people, especially given the
current conditions in the occupied territories, which
have become very dire. Necessary measures should

11

S/PV.5564 (Resumption 1)

also be taken to ensure following: protection for the
Palestinian people; the lifting of Israeli blockades;
Israel’s full withdrawal from Gaza and all other
Palestinian and Arab territories occupied since 1967,
including Al-Quds Al-Sharif; and Israel’s commitment
to the implementation of all the provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention in all the territories, in
accordance with its legal obligations under the
Convention and in line with United Nations resolutions
and the relevant norms of international law.
In conclusion, while we hope that the
international community will not once again fail to
take decisive steps to prevent the escalation of violence
and tension in the Palestinian territories and the
broader Middle East region, we also wish to emphasize
that peace, cooperation and stability in the region will
not be achieved without a demonstration of the
international community’s serious determination to
guarantee an end to Israeli aggression, to help the
Palestinian people establish a Government of national
unity and to provide that Government with the
financial and economic assistance necessary to rebuild
the vital State institutions that have been destroyed and
to overcome the current serious humanitarian crisis.
That would pave the way for the establishment of an
environment conducive to the continuation of peace
negotiations to find a just, lasting and comprehensive
solution to the question of Palestine and the overall
situation in the Middle East in accordance with the
Arab Peace Initiative, which supports the vision of two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace, security and mutual respect.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. Yahya Mahmassani, Permanent Observer
of the League of Arab States to the United Nations.
Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): Allow me,
first of all, to convey our congratulations to you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for November. I also wish to express our
gratitude to the Permanent Representative of Japan for
his stewardship of the Council last month. We also
thank Assistant Secretary-General Angela Kane for her
briefing to the Security Council this morning.
The escalation of Israel’s serious and continuous
military operations in occupied Palestinian territory is
a continuation of Israel’s established policy to use
military force to dictate a solution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict. That approach has proved futile and has only

12

resulted in further bloodshed and destruction. The
League of Arab States condemns Israel’s acts of
aggression against the Palestinian people as well as its
brutal invasion of the Gaza Strip. That action has
already claimed numerous Palestinians lives, due, in
part, to unrestrained firing upon Palestinian civilians in
Beit Hanoun in the Gaza Strip. We also condemn the
use by Israeli forces of internationally prohibited
weapons against Palestinians and its deliberate
destruction of vital Palestinian infrastructure. We
believe that the continuation of Israel’s acts of
aggression will result in a further escalation of an
already tense and complex situation in the region. That
will, in turn, hinder efforts aimed at finding a peaceful
resolution of the problem.
Israel’s continued acts of aggression on
Palestinian territory and against the Palestinian people
are further evidence of Israel’s intention to be neither a
real participant in the peace process nor a contributor
to regional stability. The international community, and
especially the Security Council, should therefore
seriously consider the Arab request to work towards
the revival of the peace process. We wonder why it is
that the Quartet, which has been entrusted with
following the situation in Palestine, has not yet played
its role in that regard and call upon it to play its proper
role in the peace process.
We also call upon the Secretary-General to
establish a fact-finding commission to investigate
Israel’s ongoing acts of aggression in the occupied
Palestinian territories, which are in violation of
international law, as well as to submit a report to the
Security Council on this matter as soon as possible.
It is obvious that the events unfolding before our
eyes today reflect the tragic collapse of the entire peace
process between the Israelis and the Palestinians.
Israel’s logic of using force as the only course of action
cannot lead to a resolution of this conflict. In our view,
the only viable option to bring about peace is a return
to the negotiating table by both the Palestinian and
Israeli sides.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Al-Murad (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend my profound gratitude to
you, Mr. President, for responding to the request by the
States of the Non-Aligned Movement and the Islamic
and Arab Groups to hold this important meeting to

06-61024

S/PV.5564 (Resumption 1)

discuss the deteriorating situation in the occupied
territories that has resulted from Israel’s acts of
aggression against the Gaza Strip.
We believe that the speedy response by the
Security Council in discussing these developments
represents a recognition of the seriousness of the
situation in the occupied territories and of its negative
impact on peace and security in the Middle East region
and in the world as a whole. We hope that the Council
will shoulder its responsibilities and take urgent
measures to put an end to Israeli acts of aggression
such as those that occurred recently, which killed
dozens of people and injured many more.
Israeli practices in the occupied territories have
reached a level of intensity that cannot be ignored.
Military incursions into the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip have become routine, and the death of civilians,
including women, children and the elderly, hardly
attracts the attention of the international community,
which should call on it to halt or prevent such
practices, which violate the norms of international law.
Israeli forces have in the past few days carried out
massacres in Beit Hanoun and in other parts of the
occupied territories, the most recent of which occurred
yesterday and in which nearly 20 martyrs were killed,
most of them women and children.
Even more surprising are the statements made by
Israeli officials to the effect that the recent massacre
was due to a technical failure. These acts of aggression
are perpetrated under the pretext of self-defence. That
is a flimsy justification, and the fact that some accept it
raises questions as to their credibility and neutrality. It
is unreasonable to attempt to justify Israeli practices in
the occupied territories — practices that violate Israel’s
obligations under international humanitarian law — by
saying that they constitute acts of self-defence, because
those who are really defending themselves are the
Palestinian people, who are resisting the occupation.
Can civilized countries that champion and defend
human rights and are bound by the provisions of
relevant international agreements and conventions
accept such acts? The list includes extrajudicial
killings; the disproportionate and excessive use of
force; the demolition of homes; the destruction of
Palestinian institutions; and the continued construction
of the separation wall, despite the emphasis by the
International Court of Justice, in its advisory opinion
dated 9 July 2004, of the illegality of the wall given

06-61024

that it contravenes internationally binding resolutions
by imposing restrictions on the mobility of Palestinians
in the occupied territories and in continuing the policy
of siege and collective punishment.
All those practices represent a flagrant and
explicit violation of the provisions of the 1949 Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilians in Time of War. We believe that the
Contracting Parties and those who adhere to that
Convention are obligated to implement its provisions
and condemn those practices rather than ignore them.
Kuwait strongly condemns the military
aggression that is being carried out by the occupying
Israeli forces in the Gaza Strip, which has led to
massive destruction and heavy loss of life. We call for
an immediate end to this aggression against civilians
and for the withdrawal of Israeli forces from
Palestinian territory. We call also for the establishment
of an international mechanism to monitor the ceasefire
and urge the international community, as represented in
the Security Council, to shoulder its responsibility to
rein in the Israeli Government by taking immediate
measures to protect the civilian population. It must also
ensure that such practices do not recur, as that would
lead to further deterioration in the living conditions of
the Palestinian people and reduce the opportunities for
resuming the peace process, which is at a stalemate
because of Israel’s intransigence, as it continues to
reject all initiatives to move the process forward and
persists in taking unilateral action.
The State of Kuwait emphasizes its firm and
principled stance in support of the struggle of the
Palestinian people to realize all of their legitimate
political rights and to establish an independent State on
their territory, with Al-Quds as its capital. I would like
to emphasize that as long as the Palestinian people
cannot enjoy their legitimate rights, in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, the principle
of land for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative, there
can be no just, lasting and comprehensive solution to
the Palestinian question, which lies at the heart of the
Arab-Israeli struggle.
On that basis, we call on the international
community, including the Quartet, to pressure the
Israeli Government to persuade it that there can be no
military solution to this question and that the solution
lies in the resumption of negotiations and of the peace
process, leading to Israel’s full withdrawal from the

13

S/PV.5564 (Resumption 1)

occupied territories and the implementation of
internationally binding resolutions and of the
requirements set out in the road map.
The State of Kuwait has great hopes that the
Security Council will shoulder its responsibilities in
the maintenance of international peace and security and
adopt the draft resolution before it, because the
Council’s continued failure to take measures against
Israel will undoubtedly give rise to the feeling that that
country has special immunity from international
condemnation of its crimes and that it is exempted or
excepted from compliance with international
conventions and agreements and international law. That
would encourage Israel to continue its aggression and
its inhuman practices, and thus the vicious circle of
violence and instability in the region would continue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Mr. Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): May
I offer our congratulations to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We wish also to thank your predecessor,
who presided over the Council last month.
The Government of Jordan strongly condemns the
aggression committed by Israel against the Palestinian
people and its continued military operations in the
Gaza Strip, which have recently caused numerous
Palestinian victims.
Jordan condemns the horrendous crime
committed by Israel in Beit Hanoun on 8 November
2006. We also condemn the policy of collective
punishment carried out by Israel against the
Palestinians. The Government of Jordan calls on the
Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities in
order to put an immediate end to all forms of Israeli
aggression and to the suffering of the Palestinian
people.
Israeli military operations against the Palestinian
people will only heighten tensions and hinder current
efforts to lend assistance and end the human suffering
being endured by the Palestinian people. We also
emphasize the need for urgent action by the
international community and influential global Powers
so that the peace process can resume and be put back
on track. There is a dire need to resume that process as
soon as possible.

14

The deterioration of the current situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories and its continued
downward spiral threatens more than ever before
prospects for the establishment of a Palestinian State as
well as security and stability in the region. Israel
persists in the commission of heinous acts such as the
killing of Palestinians and the occupation of
Palestinian territory, the building of settlements,
flagrant violations of international law and the
continued denial of all Palestinian rights for many
decades now. All of these are very serious issues that
intensify the suffering of the Palestinian people, fuel
forces of extremism and fan the flames of hatred.
The events clearly demonstrate that there will be
no unilateral solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The only viable route to a fair resolution is through
direct and early negotiations between the two sides to
ensure the implementation of United Nations
resolutions and of the basic principles of the Road Map
and the Arab Peace Initiative, with a view to
establishing an independent, sovereign Palestinian
State. All of us, therefore, are duty-bound to continue
to support President Abbas and to ensure that
international assistance is provided to the Palestinian
side.
Furthermore, Israel, for its part, should take
immediate steps to put an end to its military operations,
keep the Gaza Strip crossing points open, remove
restrictions on freedom of movement and release tax
revenue owed to the Palestinian side.
We would also like to underscore the need to find
a solution to the question of prisoners and abductees,
which would help to defuse the tense situation. Israel
should show the flexibility that is needed to help revive
the political process so that negotiations can be
resumed between the two sides. Israel should also take
specific, concrete steps to put an end to the occupation.
Once again, we urge all the parties concerned to make
every possible effort to that end. Bringing about peace
and ensuring the establishment of a Palestinian State
should remain our basic priority.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow me
to join previous speakers in congratulating you,

06-61024

S/PV.5564 (Resumption 1)

Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month, and in thanking your
predecessor. I would also like to express our
appreciation for your decision to convene this urgent
meeting of the Security Council to address the latest
aggression and atrocities of the Israeli regime.
The international community has witnessed with
outrage and indignation yet another round of Israeli
aggression and an escalation in its persistent policy and
practices of State terrorism and war crimes against the
Palestinian people. The recent Israeli aggression
against the Palestinian people, especially in the Gaza
Strip and in Beit Hanoun, has raged in flagrant
defiance of the most basic principles of international
law and the fundamental provisions of the United
Nations Charter. It has been described by the Israeli
regime’s own officials as one of the largest of its kind
against the Gaza Strip, once more displaying for all to
see the lawless nature of that regime.
More than 100 Palestinians, including several
women and children, have been killed so far; over 350
have been wounded, and many of them are in critical
condition. The international community was deeply
shocked and appalled to learn that 19 Palestinians,
including women and children, were massacred in cold
blood, and dozens of others wounded, when the Israeli
regime shelled homes in Beit Hanoun yesterday. To
add to the misery and suffering of the innocent
Palestinian civilians, the Israeli regime has, in many
cases, even blocked medical crews from gaining access
to the injured and the dead in Beit Hanoun, and has
placed hospitals in the area under siege. It has even
attacked and killed Red Crescent Society paramedics in
the Gaza Strip in yet another flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law.
As Palestinian officials have said, the destruction
wreaked by the latest Israeli aggression against Beit
Hanoun is worse than anything the town has suffered
as a result of past Israeli aggression. There is no
electricity, the people have no water or food, telephone
lines have been cut and infrastructure is damaged.
The magnitude of the crimes of the Israeli regime
in Beit Hanoun was partly reflected in the recent
statement by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) in Gaza, which has called the situation there
“desperate”, adding that

06-61024

“Death, destruction and despair are the terms to
describe the situation [which] is very grim ... There
is destruction and devastation everywhere ... The
entire population has been living in fear.”
The Israeli aggressors and assassins have
callously spared no effort to deprive Palestinian
civilians of even their basic necessities and continue to
perpetrate crimes and acts of brutality which are
reminiscent of the savagery committed in medieval
times.
We strongly condemn the aggression, war crimes,
crimes against humanity and State terrorism of the
Zionist regime perpetrated systematically against the
Palestinian people over the past six decades. Its recent
acts of brutality are equally appalling and must be
strongly condemned. It is evident that this latest
example of brutality, which, like the numerous
previous ones, has targeted civilians and vital civilian
infrastructure, is an act of collective punishment and a
war crime, carried out in defiance of the most basic
principles of international law and international
humanitarian law. It is imperative that the international
community at long last truly address the situation and
prevent these terrorist designs against the Palestinians
from continuing.
Regrettably, owing to the inaction imposed on the
Security Council by certain permanent members, all of
these crimes continue to be committed —there has
been no meaningful action by the Council. Indeed, the
impunity with which the Israeli regime has carried out
its crimes so far has emboldened it to continue and
even to increase its aggressive policies and terrorist
acts.
The international community and the Security
Council must take resolute measures, which are long
overdue, to counter these illegal, aggressive and
criminal policies and actions by the Israeli regime, to
stop its war machine and its acts of State terrorism and
to help put an end to the violence brought about by the
persistent illegal occupation of Palestinian territory. As
the
ongoing
aggression
seriously
threatens
international peace and security, the Security Council
has an enormous responsibility under the Charter to
take necessary and prompt steps with a view to putting
an end to this aggression. We hope that, recognizing
the need for taking decisive action in the face of this
new escalation in the region, all members of the

15

S/PV.5564 (Resumption 1)

Security Council will live up to their responsibilities in
properly addressing this grave situation and, as a first
step in this regard, adopt the draft resolution before the
Council.
Indeed, the Council should take the calls and
concerns of the international community about the
Zionist regime’s aggressive policies and inhuman
practices in the occupied territories more seriously and
stop the Israeli regime from insolently making a
mockery of the international community and of the
Security Council by hypocritically preaching peace
here and carrying out acts of terror, horror and
barbarism and crimes against humanity in the region,
particularly in the occupied Palestinian territory.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Petranto (Indonesia): I would like to begin
by thanking you, Mr. President, for having convened
this urgent meeting. Once again, a brutal series of
events is unfolding in Palestine, culminating yesterday
in brutal artillery attacks by Israel which killed 19
Palestinian civilians, including children and women, in
the Gaza town of Beit Hanoun, and wounded dozens of
other innocent civilians.
Before continuing, my delegation would like to
express its condolences to the Palestinian people for
their terrible and painful losses.
It will be recalled that yesterday, the
Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, spoke with horror of her experience during her
visit to the area. She spoke of the despair of people
trying to come to terms with death and destruction on a
scale not seen in Gaza for many years.
The continued military offensive by Israel in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, is a threat to the prospects of achieving a
negotiated solution to the conflict based on the twoState solution. In view of these events and the tragic
humanitarian situation on the ground, we are deeply
concerned that this body has taken no action to
intervene.
My delegation once again condemns Israel’s
aggression and its excessive and disproportionate use
of force without any regard for the lives of
Palestinians, including innocent women and children.
We condemn Israel’s policy of collective punishment,

16

which continues to cause extensive loss of life and
damage to infrastructure, institutions and property. As
a result of these military incursions, the humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory has
become even worse. The deterioration is from an
already precarious level of despair, which began with
the most recent elections, held earlier this year.
My delegation once again calls on Israel to
recognize that there is no military solution to the
situation in the Middle East. Israel must resist
temptation to exercise its military strength and must
stop all aggression against Palestine. Israel must
withdraw fully from Gaza and from the rest of the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, as stipulated in General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions relevant to the question of
Palestine. Furthermore, Israel must abide by its
obligation under the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,
international law and other rules of humanitarian law.
We are deeply concerned that these flagrant
violations of international law continue to be
undertaken by Israel. The unfortunate impression is
being conveyed that the international community is
condoning Israel’s behaviour even though this global
institution has, on many occasions, called for the rule
of law to be respected by all. At the same time,
Palestinian militants should stop firing rockets into
Israel’s territory.
My delegation calls on the Security Council to
accept and exercise its responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
further urge the Council to express a sense of urgency
in view of the terrible humanitarian conditions endured
by the Palestinian people as a result of Israel’s
aggression and its policy of military might.
The Council must make certain that this killing
and this wanton destruction of infrastructure do not
recur, particularly in view of the fact that, as the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East has reported, Israeli forces
are still present in other parts of Gaza. We also call
upon the international community, particularly the
Quartet, to take immediate steps to halt the conflict and
to revive the peace process towards a just solution, in
accordance with relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, the Road Map and the Arab Peace Initiative of
2002. In this connection, my delegation supports the

06-61024

S/PV.5564 (Resumption 1)

draft resolution submitted by Qatar, which we believe
serves as a basis for moving forward.

seriously about the real reason why Israel dares to
continue blindly to kill Palestinians.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

Many people, whether they be politicians,
diplomats or political analysts, believe that the answer
is that some influential Powers in the Security Council
have paralysed its capacity to punish Israel for its
previous crimes and to hold it accountable to the
Council for the State terrorism that has been its
foundation since its inception.

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We are very happy to see a Peruvian friend,
well versed in diplomacy, returning to preside over
today’s emergency Security Council meeting to
consider the current Israeli aggression against the
Palestinian people in the occupied territory,
particularly in the Gaza Strip.
I would like at the outset to align myself with the
statements made by the representative of Qatar on
behalf of the Arab Group, by the representative of
Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and by
the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.
Over the decades, a great deal has been said
before the Council about the crimes perpetrated by
Israel’s Government, army and terrorist gangs in the
occupied Arab territories. The collective consciousness
of the Security Council is full of innumerable
memories of hundreds of long meetings devoted to
considering the massacres and the crimes perpetrated
by Israel against the Palestinians, the Lebanese, the
Syrians, the Jordanians and the Egyptians.
How many times has the Council considered draft
resolutions condemning Israeli massacres? How many
times has a well-known State used its veto power to
block a collective and otherwise unanimous trend
within the Council to condemn Israel for its crimes and
hold it responsible for its criminal acts?

Our astonishment increases when some speakers
make every effort to turn the facts upside down in
asserting that the right of Palestinians to defend
themselves, in the face of a brutal and barbaric
occupation that has no precedent in history, is itself a
form of terrorism, while depicting Israel’s terrorism
against unarmed Palestinians as legitimate selfdefence. Is there a falsification of facts more painful
than this? Is it rational that such a falsification should
occur within the walls of the Council Chamber?
In July, the delegation of the United States
prevented the Security Council from adopting a draft
resolution condemning an Israeli massacre similar to
the one perpetrated yesterday in Beit Hanoun, namely,
the Gaza massacre, even though the draft resolution
enjoyed otherwise unanimous support. If the Council
had succeeded in condemning Israel’s criminal
behaviour at that time in July, yesterday’s massacre
would not have occurred. Those who impede justice
and accountability for Israeli war crimes in the
occupied Palestinian territory bear a large part of the
responsibility for the present shedding of innocent
blood there.

The Palestinian question is not a humanitarian
issue; it is first and foremost a political issue. As long
as we ignore the need to impose a just and
comprehensive political solution to this problem, Israel
will feel that it is not subject to accountability, that it is
allowed to do what nobody else can do and that it is
exempt from legal principles. This has led Israel to
escalate its aggression against the unarmed Palestinian
people under the yoke of occupation and against its
immediate neighbours.

The climax of this absurdity is that some have
taken to saying that the massacre at Beit Hanoun
occurred because of an error, as Israel claims. In fact,
we have heard such claims many times before in this
Council; we have heard the same pretext used as Israeli
justification for killing women, children, members of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
and even United Nations staff members. This Israeli
justification, which has been totally rejected,
demonstrates that Israel is an irresponsible State, not
qualified to deal with the international community.

It is axiomatic that we must call upon the Council
today to put an end to the bleeding of our people, our
tragedies, our pain and suffering. It is as though such a
call had become a matter of routine for the Security
Council and the United Nations. We wonder very

Most speakers have referred to the terms of
reference of a just and comprehensive peace: Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference and
the Arab Peace Initiative. The walls of the Council
Chamber reverberate with those terms of reference

06-61024

17

S/PV.5564 (Resumption 1)

because they have been echoed here many times
before. The pretexts offered for the continuation of
Israeli’s occupation and aggression are no longer
acceptable. It is as if some were trying to push the
region towards despair, towards the unknown and
towards an explosion as the only solution. Injustice has
long prevailed among the peoples of the region.
It is neither morally nor politically acceptable
that, for some, memory should be so short concerning
the Israeli-Arab conflict and the suffering of our people
under Israeli occupation. Nor is it acceptable that some
speakers should call upon Syria to exercise what they
call its influence or to play a positive role. Syria’s
positive role is well known; Syria is part of the
solution, not part of the problem. Everyone knows the
sincere wish of my country to bring about peace — but
a just and comprehensive peace. Everyone knows the
will of my country, Syria, to bring about this peace as a
strategic option. The problem for those who have any
doubts about Syria’s role is that they do not want to
understand the facts, or even to recognize their own
shortcomings and responsibilities, or their shortsightedness in the way they deal with the question of a
just peace in the region.
My country is making every possible effort to
support the formation of a government of national
unity in Palestine. Some might make the error of
thinking that the problem lies in this aspect of the
Palestinian question. The problem lies in the continued
Israeli occupation and aggression against the
Palestinian people. That is the core of the problem.
The Arab Group has submitted an emergency
draft resolution to be adopted by the Security Council
in order to put an end to Israeli massacres in the
occupied Palestinian territories. The draft resolution
enjoys the direct support of the Non-Aligned
Movement, the Organization of the Islamic Conference
and most delegations that have spoken today. We
would prefer that endorsement of the draft resolution
not be limited to those groups. We would like to see
other States, from the North, join those that called for
and prepared the draft resolution. The issue of justice is
not geographic; it is political.
We appeal to all members of the Council to adopt
the draft resolution as quickly as possible in order to
maintain peace, so that the Council does not send the
wrong message to our peoples under occupation that

18

laws are worthless and that violence is the only way to
bring about the liberation of occupied lands.
The time has come to send this clear message to
Israel: that the continuation of its occupation of the
occupied Arab territories will lead to tension in
international relations and that it will seriously threaten
international peace and security. The time has come for
the Council to take action.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya.
Mr. Mubarak (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to extend to you,
Mr. President, and to the other members of the Council
my sincere and profound thanks for convening this
emergency meeting to consider the Israeli acts of
aggression in the Gaza Strip and the occupied
Palestinian territories.
On behalf of my delegation, I convey our
profound and sincere condolences to the Palestinian
people with regard to the killing of unarmed civilians
in Beit Hanoun in the Gaza Strip as a result of the
barbaric and brutal acts committed by the Israeli
occupying forces. We express our strong condemnation
of the continued Israeli contempt for innocent
Palestinian lives, particularly the lives of women and
children. This is a clear and flagrant violation of
international law and norms and the role of the United
Nations and its Security Council. The Council has
continued to hold repeated meetings to consider the
bloody violence that has been occurring in the
occupied Palestinian territory since 1967. The violence
is due to continuous Israeli aggression and to the
Council’s inability to take decisive measures to stop
the repetition of such aggression, sometimes because it
adopts resolutions that it cannot implement.
The brutal massacre perpetrated by the Israeli
occupying forces yesterday, which killed elderly
people, women and children in Beit Hanoun, was not
the first and only massacre in the annals of the
occupying Israeli forces, nor will it be the last. It is
simply one in a series of massacres perpetrated in Deir
Yassin, Kafr Kassim, in Sabra and Shatila, the first
Qana incident, Jenin, the Ibrahimi Mosque — the
Tomb of the Patriarch in Hebron — the second Qana
incident and, finally, in southern Lebanon, in Gaza and
now in Beit Hanoun.

06-61024

S/PV.5564 (Resumption 1)

Israel has committed those massacres, which
have transcended the massacres and atrocities of the
Second World War. It is as if the Israelis had not
learned the lessons of the past or benefited from
international agreements. Israel has refused to receive
fact-finding missions and investigative committees to
examine its practices that violate the rights of the
Palestinian people.
The international community deliberately ignores
these Israeli violations and breaches, as manifested in
the Security Council’s inability to take strict punitive
measures. There are those who use self defence as a
pretext to justify the practices of the occupation, which
has been rejected by all international laws, norms and
instruments.
Double standards and double positions,
inattention to and overlooking Israeli practices
destabilize the credibility of the Security Council and
cast doubt on its main role — the maintenance of
international peace and security. In fact, they impact
the prestige of the United Nations itself and open the
door to more tension and aggressive acts. That can
threaten security and stability in the region and in the
world as a whole.
We convey to the Security Council the requests of
the innocent victims to take immediate steps to protect
the Palestinian people from the continuous aggression
of the Israeli occupying forces, which violates the
provisions of international law and the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 in particular. We make a strong
call for sending an international observer force to
provide the needed protection for the Palestinians and
their property. We also call for immediate measures to
stop repressive and oppressive measures, such as the
closing of border crossing points and the siege by
Israeli forces that aims at starving the Palestinian
people and confining them to a large prison by
constructing the separation wall that it has been
building in the occupied territories. This threatens the
lives of the Palestinian people as a whole; it blackmails
and starves the population by preventing assistance
from reaching them and by not releasing their due
customs and tax revenues.
All efforts and initiatives concerning the
Palestinian question since 1948 have not been
successful, because they did not deal with the root
causes of the problems, namely guaranteeing the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people.

06-61024

President Muammar Al-Qadhafi has provided a
vision of Palestinian and Jewish rights at the same
time, through living in one democratic State on an
equal footing on the land of Palestine, to be recognized
by its neighbours, like what occurred in South Africa.
The Israeli Government has always ignored such
initiatives, as well as resolutions and agreements of
international legitimacy. It has always rejected the
principle of investigating acts of violence and
destruction that continuously target innocent
Palestinian people. Israel justifies its aggressive
conduct sometimes as “self defence” and other times as
“military mistakes”. Israel’s objective is to quash the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people and
their inalienable right to self-determination on their
national territory.
The time has come for the Council to shoulder its
responsibility vis-à-vis the humanitarian crisis faced by
the Palestinian people. We call for serious
consideration by the Council of the draft resolution
presented by the brotherly State of Qatar on behalf of
the Arab Group. This is the least we and you can do
here.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Tarragô (Brazil): This debate is taking place
against the backdrop of an increasingly grave situation
in the Middle East. The stalemate in the peace process
keeps the whole region under permanent instability, as
once again proven by the recent tragic developments.
This situation of virtual diplomatic paralysis
fosters the escalation of tension and hostilities and
poses a renewed challenge to the Security Council as
regards the effectiveness of its reaction, its methods of
work and its transparency. It also highlights the need to
urgently address the underlying causes of the conflict.
Unless prompt and concrete measures are adopted, the
Council may be faced with a full-scale crisis beyond its
control.
Brazil has often expressed its condemnation of all
acts of violence, particularly all forms of terrorism. We
have voiced our dismay at the spiral of brutality
predicated on retaliation and revenge that characterizes
daily life in parts of the Middle East. Too many
innocent lives have already been claimed.
In line with that, we call upon the Israeli
Government to cease all military operations in Gaza

19

S/PV.5564 (Resumption 1)

without delay, and on the Palestinian side to also halt
attacks against Israel. We call for a full investigation of
the incident that took place yesterday in Beit Hanoun,
which, through the constant use of disproportionate
force, provoked the death of many innocent civilians.

by the United Nations, with the participation of
countries of the region and others that could assist,
through their capacities and successful experience, the
Middle East countries and peoples in finding ways to
live peacefully despite their differences.

Peace will not be achieved by merely trying to
force a final capitulation. Only the resumption of
negotiations that involve all interested parties can
result in a just and comprehensive agreement capable
of paving the way for a lasting peace to the ArabIsraeli conflict in all its aspects.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
the representative of South Africa.

Brazil calls upon the international community to
lend its continued support for prompt humanitarian
action to the Palestinian people, who are now facing
one of the most serious humanitarian crises ever.
Particular attention must be paid to the sensitive
issue of the large number of Palestinian prisoners
detained in Israel. It is critical, as a confidencebuilding measure, that the Palestinian political leaders
now detained in Israel should be promptly released.
Furthermore, we call for the return of the
abducted Israeli soldier and the setting up of conditions
for achieving a durable solution of the crisis, including
the end of the launching of Qassam rockets against the
Israeli population.
The creation of a free, democratic and
economically viable Palestinian State, in accordance
with the legitimate aspirations of its people, living side
by side in peace and security with the State of Israel, as
established in Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), and within
internationally recognized borders, is a sine qua non
condition to ensure lasting peace and stability in the
Middle East. Brazil stresses the need to put in motion a
political process for the development of a strategy and
its pertinent timeline to implement the vision of two
States. Such a strategy should take into account the
Quartet Road Map, the principle of land for peace
derived from the Madrid Conference and the
recommendations of the Beirut Arab League summit.
The international community should seize this
opportunity to put back on track the Middle East peace
process and to end, once and for all, the conflicts that
have caused so much suffering and despair. In this
regard, I wish to reiterate President Lula’s proposal
made at the beginning of the current session of the
General Assembly to call a broad conference sponsored

20

Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Allow me to join
others in congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November and to express our gratitude to Ambassador
Oshima of Japan for the able manner in which he
conducted the work of the Council during the month of
October.
It is with sadness and frustration that we are once
again gathered here in response to another attack on
innocent civilians. At the outset I would like to
reiterate my Government’s condolences to President
Abbas and the Palestinian people for the loss of life
suffered.
My delegation would also like to associate itself
with the statement delivered earlier today by the
representative of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The South African Government has expressed
deep concern at the escalation of the conflict in the
Middle East. The recent attacks in Gaza are raising
tensions in the region to new dangerous heights, at a
time when we would have hoped that all sides in the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict would be looking at ways to
end the negotiation deadlock and move the peace
process forward.
The increase in violence is threatening regional
and international peace and security and we urge the
Security Council, in line with its Charter obligations,
to act decisively and to take urgent action to resolve
the conflict. My delegation reiterates the position that
no party should take unilateral action that seeks to
predetermine issues that can only be resolved through
negotiation.
We call on the Israeli Government to refrain from
that type of action and, as a major military Power in
the region, to act with restraint so as to avoid further
civilian casualties and the destruction of vital
infrastructure. Equally, we call on the Palestinians to
stop firing rockets into Israel. From our experience, the

06-61024

S/PV.5564 (Resumption 1)

only lesson that we have been able to learn from such
retaliatory actions over the past decades is that they
merely give rise to more violence.
The draft resolution presented by Qatar deserves
serious consideration by the Council. The Security
Council should call for an immediate ceasefire and call
for the establishment of a United Nations observer
force to supervise the ceasefire. The Security Council
has been seized with this matter for more than 40
years. Its failure to find a lasting solution to the crisis
has denied hope to the people of Palestine. Without
hope, the people in the region will believe that they
have no other recourse but to engage in more violence
and counter-violence.
It is of concern that every time there is progress,
those that do not want change use the opportunity to
make the situation worse. In that regard, the
international community must accept its responsibility
and relaunch the peace process.
In conclusion, we wish to reiterate our
unwavering support to the Palestinian people in their
struggle for the establishment of an independent State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living
side by side with Israel, with both States enjoying
secure and internationally recognized borders. The
vision of a two State solution, as enshrined in Security
Council resolution 1397 (2002), and the principle of
land for peace must, therefore, underpin any permanent
settlement of the Middle East conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of Israel has asked to make a further
statement. I give that representative the floor to make
his statement.
Mr. Carmon (Israel): As we took part in
consultations today, more Qassam rockets were
launched by terrorists in Gaza towards the town of
Sderot, and other areas in southern Israel. Three
persons were wounded and four more persons were
treated for shock — and we speak only of today — yet
another day of terrorist attacks from Gaza.
As some of the representatives here today
referred to the present, i.e., to ongoing Israeli activity, I
thought it would be only right to update them on the
actual facts. As we spoke today, more terror was
launched against my country.
Today, we have been dealing with the escalation
of the situation in our region, due to the increased

06-61024

terrorist activities against Israel, and Israel’s selfdefence response, and, in light of the tragic event
yesterday that we have been talking about; we have
heard pretty hard remarks on a complicated issue and a
very complicated situation.
Among the things we have heard here today, I
must refer to two specific presentations that I think are
completely
unacceptable
coming
from
the
representatives of two Member States of this
Organization. Responsibility for the pressing changes
in the reality on the ground discussed this morning
belongs to the Palestinian Authority — and we have
explained that — it is nevertheless clear that extremists
are also being urged by outside forces acting for their
own selfish agenda.
Many in this Chamber would not argue that
extremists, such as Hamas, are fuelled by Syria and
Iran, who indirectly orchestrate chaos in Gaza,
Lebanon and probably elsewhere behind the scenes.
Let me remind them that Syria is still being
investigated by this very Council for perpetrating such
activity in Lebanon. Let me remind you that Syria is
home to countless terrorist organizations and leaders,
in particular Khaled Mashaal, the exiled leader of
Hamas who maliciously undermines any progress and
stalls all efforts towards peace. Mashaal’s most recent
vicious theatrics, taking — as they say — an offer he
could not refuse to thwart negotiations on the release
of the kidnapped Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit, confirm
his relentless objectives to obstruct and destroy all
prospects for peace. Note also that Mashaal resides in
the capital of Syria. To receive a lecture from the
representative of Syria on who should or should not be
part of the international community completely
surpasses the limits of the regular cynicism we have
been accustomed to.
As far as Iran is concerned, that Government is
led by a President who denies the Holocaust, while
preparing the next one — acquiring the capabilities to
do so — while making an open call to wipe Member
States off the map. As if that were not enough, Iran’s
infamy was reconfirmed for us again last week, when
Argentina, a member of the Council, called for judicial
arrest warrants of Syrian and Iranian political officials,
including a former president, in connection with the
1994 attack on the Amia Jewish Community Centre in
Buenos Aires, which killed 85 people and wounded
300 more. Another blatant act of terrorism, carried out
by Hizbollah in 1992 — destroying the Israeli embassy

21

S/PV.5564 (Resumption 1)

in Buenos Aires, killing 22 people and wounding
hundreds — also originated in Tehran.
It is clear that Iran is not just a destabilizing
influence in the region. The international community
must take steps to nullify the ongoing threat posed by
Iran to world peace and stability, as well as its longstanding policy of sponsoring terrorist organizations.
Finally, Syria and Iran, by financing terror and
harbouring terrorists, are trying to divert international
attention from their own problems, as they already did
once before this year, during the summer conflict in
Lebanon. They have reconfirmed for the Council in no
uncertain terms why the danger from Damascus and
Tehran must be stopped before it is too late.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The observer
of Palestine has asked to make a further statement, and
I give him the floor.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I did not ask for the
floor to make another statement with regard to some of
the issues that have been discussed in this body. Of
course, I could very easily make comments about those
things. For example, I could talk about the Prime
Minister of Israel, who stated again today that
aggression against Gaza would continue and that what
he called “accidents” — similar to what happened in
Beit Hanoun — would most likely be repeated. That
means that he is completely disregarding this debate
among almost all countries from every corner of the
globe.
I could also refer to the actions of the Israeli
Government with regard to extremism. While President
Abbas is trying to create a unified Government on the
Palestine side and to prepare the atmosphere for a
resumption of negotiations, what are the actions of the
Israeli Government? It was only the other day that a
Deputy Prime Minister — and we know his name; I do
not need to mention it — was added to the
Government. His positions are very well known: he is a
segregationist and an advocate of ethnic cleansing.
If one wanted to derail this debate in the Security
Council by raising those issues, one could do so very
easily. But I have not taken the floor to exercise the right
of reply; I asked for the floor simply to say that we thank
all delegations that have conveyed condolences to the
families of the victims of the massacre and to the
Palestinian leadership. We will convey those messages to
the families, to our people and to the leadership.

22

We also urge all members of the Security Council
to adopt the draft resolution before them as soon as
possible. We would prefer that they adopt it today, if
they are ready to act. But, whatever the case, we urge
them to act on the draft resolution as quickly as
possible. We hope that, this time, the Council will not
let our people down. We hope that the Council will be
able to adopt the draft resolution in order to send the
appropriate message to everyone in the Middle East,
including the Israeli occupying authorities and the
Palestinian people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic has
requested the floor to make a further statement, and I
call upon him now.
Mr. Darwish (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): What the representative of Israel said in his
most recent statement before the Council reflects very
clearly the fact that falsification and distortion are part
and parcel of the nature of that occupying regime,
which unfairly established its state on the land of
others, carried out murder and destruction and
practised the most brutal forms of collective crime in
modern history. The words of the representative of
Israel do not cover the horrific nature of the criminal
practices of his regime. The statements of most
delegations that spoke at this important meeting made
it crystal clear that condemnation is only the minimal
reaction to the Israeli regime. The Security Council
must effectively stand up against all forms of terrorism,
murder and massacre carried out by that unjust regime,
which rejects opportunities for peace, while using
pretexts of which it is often the main cause. Without
occupation, murder, deportation, destruction, the
uprooting of trees and the most brutal forms of tyranny,
we would not be witnessing what is happening now.
Resolving this problem in a just and
comprehensive manner will spare us all this endless
controversy, which is due to Israel’s obstinate refusal
to accept the olive branch that has been extended to it,
because its political doctrine is not, apparently,
consistent with the essence of a just and
comprehensive peace.
What the representative of Israel said has become
a tedious rumination. The offices of Hamas in
Damascus are press offices, and Hamas, as everybody
knows, is a Government elected by the Palestinian
people, who are waging resistance. As to what he said

06-61024

S/PV.5564 (Resumption 1)

about Lebanon, we would like to ask: who benefits the
most from what happened in Lebanon? I believe that
the answer is clear and easily understood.

place in front of the Israeli Mission, condemning the
behaviour of the occupying state and exposing its lies
and consistently false claims.

The best evidence of the brutality of Israel’s
current action is the anger that it has caused on the
Arab street, and even on the streets worldwide. As the
Security Council meets, a demonstration is now taking

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

06-61024

The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

23
