A/RES/59/39

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
16 December 2004

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 143

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 2 December 2004
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/59/509)]

59/39. Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its thirty-seventh session
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it
established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law with a
mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of
international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in
particular those of developing countries, in the extensive development of
international trade,
Reaffirming its belief that the progressive modernization and harmonization of
international trade law, in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of
international trade, especially those affecting the developing countries, would
contribute significantly to universal economic cooperation among all States on a
basis of equality, equity and common interest and to the elimination of
discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to the well-being of all peoples,
Having considered the report of the Commission on its thirty-seventh session, 1
Reiterating its concern that activities undertaken by other bodies in the field of
international trade law without adequate coordination with the Commission might
lead to undesirable duplication of efforts and would not be in keeping with the aim
of promoting efficiency, consistency and coherence in the unification and
harmonization of international trade law,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Commission, as the core legal body within the
United Nations system in the field of international trade law, to coordinate legal
activities in this field, in particular to avoid duplication of efforts, including among
organizations formulating rules of international trade, and to promote efficiency,
consistency and coherence in the modernization and harmonization of international
trade law, and to continue, through its secretariat, to maintain close cooperation with
other international organs and organizations, including regional organizations,
active in the field of international trade law,

_______________
1

04-47860

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/59/17).

A/RES/59/39

1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on its thirty-seventh session;1
2.
Commends the Commission for the completion and adoption of its
Legislative Guide on Insolvency Law; 2
3.
Also commends the Commission for the progress made in the work on a
draft convention on electronic contracting, on a draft instrument on transport law, on
a draft legislative guide on secured transactions and on model legislative provisions
on interim measures in international commercial arbitration, and for the
Commission’s decision to undertake a revision of its Model Law on Procurement of
Goods, Construction and Services 3 to reflect new practices, including those
resulting from the increasing use of electronic communications in public
procurement; 4
4.
Endorses the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal
body within the United Nations system in the field of international trade law, aimed
at increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities of international and
regional organizations active in the field of international trade law, and in this
regard appeals to relevant international and regional organizations to coordinate
their legal activities with those of the Commission, to avoid duplication of efforts
and to promote efficiency, consistency and coherence in the modernization and
harmonization of international trade law;
Reaffirms the importance, in particular for developing countries, of the
5.
work of the Commission concerned with training and legislative technical assistance
in the field of international trade law, and in this connection:
(a) Welcomes the Commission’s initiatives towards expanding, through its
secretariat, its training and legislative technical assistance programme;
(b) Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for organizing seminars
and briefing missions in Azerbaijan, Colombia, Serbia and Montenegro, the Sudan,
Thailand, Venezuela and Yemen;
(c) Expresses its appreciation to the Governments whose contributions
enabled the seminars and briefing missions to take place, and appeals to
Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations,
institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law Trust Fund for Symposia and, where
appropriate, to the financing of special projects, and otherwise to assist the
secretariat of the Commission in carrying out training and legislative technical
assistance activities, in particular in developing countries;
(d) Reiterates its appeal to the United Nations Development Programme and
other bodies responsible for development assistance, such as the World Bank and
regional development banks, as well as to Governments in their bilateral aid
programmes, to support the training and legislative technical assistance programme
of the Commission and to cooperate and coordinate their activities with those of the
Commission;

_______________
2

Ibid., chap. III.
Ibid., Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 and corrigendum (A/49/17 and Corr.1), annex I.
4
Ibid., Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/59/17), chap. VIII, paras. 81 and 82.
3

2

A/RES/59/39

6.
Takes note with regret that, since the previous session of the
Commission, no contributions have been made to the trust fund established to
provide travel assistance to developing countries that are members of the
Commission, at their request and in consultation with the Secretary-General,
stresses the need for contributions to the trust fund in order to increase expert
representation from developing countries at sessions of the Commission and its
working groups, and reiterates its appeal to Governments, the relevant bodies of the
United Nations system, organizations, institutions and individuals to make voluntary
contributions to the trust fund;
Decides, in order to ensure full participation by all Member States in the
7.
sessions of the Commission and its working groups, to continue, in the competent
Main Committee during the fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly, its
consideration of granting travel assistance to the least developed countries that are
members of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the SecretaryGeneral;
Recalls its resolutions on partnerships between the United Nations and
8.
non-State actors, in particular the private sector, 5 and in this regard welcomes the
Commission’s consideration of the means of actively engaging non-State actors in
its work, 6 and encourages the Commission to further explore different approaches to
the use of partnerships with non-State actors in the implementation of its mandate,
in particular in the area of training and technical assistance, in accordance with the
applicable principles and guidelines and in cooperation and coordination with other
relevant offices of the Secretariat;
Approves, in conformity with its resolutions on documentation-related
9.
matters, which, in particular, emphasize that any reduction in the length of
documents should not adversely affect either the quality of the presentation or the
substance of the documents, 7 the conclusions reached by the Commission in
paragraphs 124 to 128 of its report1 regarding the imposition of page limits on its
documentation, and requests the Secretary-General to bear in mind the particular
characteristics of the mandate and work of the Commission in implementing page
limits with respect to the documentation of the Commission;
10. Also approves the conclusions of the Commission in paragraph 130 of its
report regarding the need for the continuing provision of summary records of its
meetings relating to the formulation of normative texts;
11. Stresses the importance of bringing into effect the conventions emanating
from the work of the Commission for the global unification and harmonization of
international trade law, and, to this end, urges States that have not yet done so to
consider signing, ratifying or acceding to those conventions;
12. Notes that 2005 will mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of
the United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods 8
and the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Model Law on International
Commercial Arbitration of the United Nations Commission on International Trade

_______________
5

Resolutions 55/215, 56/76 and 58/129.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/59/17),
chap. XV, sect. A.
7
Resolutions 57/283 B, section III, para. 29, and 58/250, section III, paras. 2 and 17.
8
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1489, No. 25567.
6

3

A/RES/59/39

Law, 9 and in this regard welcomes initiatives being undertaken to organize
conferences and similar events to provide a forum for assessing the experience, in
particular of courts and arbitral tribunals, with those texts;
13. Expresses its appreciation for the preparation of a digest of case law on
the United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods,
intended to assist in the dissemination of information on the Convention and
promote its adoption, use and uniform interpretation, and for the progress of work
on a digest of case law relating to the Model Law on International Commercial
Arbitration.
65th plenary meeting
2 December 2004

_______________
9

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fortieth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/40/17),
annex I.

4
