A /72/PV.48

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

48th plenary meeting

Monday, 13 November 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 11
Sport for development and peace: building a
peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal
Draft resolution (A/72/L.5)
The President: I want to start my statement today
by acknowledging that sport is not always associated
with the United Nations, which is understandable.
The things that happen on a tennis court or a running
track look very different from what we are doing here.
However, there is in fact a strong link between sport and
the values and work of the United Nations, and today’s
meeting gives us an opportunity to reaffirm that link. I
want to make three points in that respect.
First, simply put, sport can bring people together. It
is founded on universal values that include discipline,
fairness and respect for opponents and rules. We may
speak different languages or have different customs or
viewpoints, but once we step onto a field or court, we
are all part of the same system. In that way, sport can
be a universal instrument that can promote both peace
and unity. The United Nations has used such a tool
before, particularly through its peacekeeping missions
and country teams. Sport has helped open doors in
the communities that the United Nations serves. It
has been used to build confidence and trust in postconflict settings, and it has played an important role
in the reintegration of ex-combatants, including child
soldiers. Certainly, sport alone cannot stop conflict

or bring about peace, but I believe that a football or a
hockey puck is a better peacekeeping tool than a gun.
It costs less money. It can build rather than destroy. It
brings people together instead of sending them fleeing
for their lives, and it invokes enthusiasm, not fear. I am
confident that the United Nations will continue to use
that tool in its work on the ground.
The second point that I want to make is that the
Olympic Games and the United Nations aspire to the
same ideal, that is, an ideal based on humanity. It is
predicated on the fact that no matter what is going on in
State capitals around the world, people will always have
a space in which to engage and connect. That space can
be the finish line of an Olympic sprint, or a Hall such
as this one. Whether as athletes or diplomats, we must
use such spaces. We must show that humankind can
triumph over politics.
The last point that I want to make relates to
youth. Sport can offer young people a platform for
empowerment. It can give hope for a brighter future.
It can enable young people to build their capacity for
strategic thinking, teamwork and leadership, and
it can provide a route out of underdevelopment and
poverty. Increasingly, the United Nations is working to
engage and empower young people all over the world.
We must reach out to young people in a way that will
resonate with them. Sport offers a major opportunity
in that respect. We have already seen some success in
mobilizing athletes and sports teams to promote the
Sustainable Development Goals. We should work to
support and replicate and expand on those examples.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-37640 (E)

*1737640*

A/72/PV.48

In conclusion, I want to stress the link between sport
and the values and work of the United Nations. It is a
link that we should do more to strengthen. That is why
we should warmly welcome Olympic gold medallist
Ms. Kim Yuna to the General Assembly today, and why
we should seek out opportunities to support and use
sport as a driver of peace, development and humankind.
A major opportunity of this kind will present itself in
February, when the XXIII Olympic Winter Games will
be hosted in the Republic of Korea. It is more important
than ever to reaffirm the ideals of the United Nations
and the Olympic Games on the Korean peninsula.
We must seize that opportunity. I therefore wish the
Republic of Korea every success in hosting the Winter
Games and look forward to being in Pyeongchang
myself next February to attend the Games.
I call on all countries to participate in the 2018
Winter Olympics. Let us demonstrate once again the
power of sport to bring us together and overcome
political, cultural and historical divides.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Republic of Korea to introduce draft resolution
A/72/L.5.
Mr. Lee Hee-beom (Republic of Korea): On behalf
of the Government of the Republic of Korea, it is a
great honour and privilege for me to introduce draft
resolution A/72/L.5, entitled “Sport for development
and peace: building a peaceful and better world through
sport and the Olympic ideal”.
In less than 90 days, the entire world will enjoy
the most spectacular Olympic Winter Games in
Pyeongchang on the Korean peninsula. The Republic
of Korea is ready to welcome the world. We are ready
to act as hosts to the Olympic family, the world’s
media and spectators from around the world. I am very
pleased to report to the General Assembly that we have
completed all the preparations for the Games, including
the construction of all competition and non-competition
venues. We have also finished building new roads, and a
high-speed train will be open to the public in December.
The Olympic flame arrived in Korea on 1 November
and is currently travelling across the country, ready to
welcome the world.
As we all know, the General Assembly has made it
a tradition to adopt the Olympic Truce draft resolution
every two years since the adoption of resolution 48/11,
in 1993. It is about reminding everyone and respecting
the ancient Olympic tradition in Greece of ceasing
2/28

13/11/2017

all hostilities during the Games. The draft resolution
serves the purpose of ending all conflicts during the
Olympic Truce. It begins seven days prior to the opening
of the Olympic Games, and concludes on the seventh
day after the closing of the Paralympic Games. The
Olympic Truce ensures the safe passage of the athletes
and all other Olympic-accredited personnel when
they travel to and from the Olympic Games. The draft
resolution also signifies the Assembly’s strong wish
that the Pyeongchang Games will provide a window
of opportunity to foster an environment conducive to
building and sustaining peace on the Korean peninsula
in North-East Asia.
The Olympic Truce is about the promotion of peace
through sport. We Koreans still vividly remember the
1988 Seoul Olympic Games — an exemplary case of
promoting peace by bringing East and West together.
The 2000 Sydney Summer Olympic Games was another
good example in that regard. With strong support from
the International Olympic Committee, the delegations
of both Koreas walked into the Olympic stadium during
the opening ceremony, marching together hand-in-hand
under the same flag.
Those two events demonstrated the power of sport,
which unites people. It is my strong belief that we
should and can continue that tradition. I believe that
the Olympic Games represent the best expression of
our values translated into action. Since 2004, we have
been running our own Olympic Truce programmes so
as to emphasize the importance of the Olympic Truce
Movement in tandem with the Olympic values of
excellence, friendship and respect. For the past 14 years,
Gangwon province, which is the regional Government
of the host city of Pyeongchang, has welcomed more
than 1,900 young students from 83 countries. Through
the Pyeongchang Dream Programme, it has provided
young participants from developing countries, or
countries with no winter season and no winter-sport
facilities, with a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to
experience and enjoy winter sports. I am very happy to
inform the Assembly that two participants in the Dream
Programme have become Olympians in Olympic
Winter Games. In addition, seven other participants
have represented their countries in the Youth Olympic
Games. We have also directly engaged more than
6 million students through various school visits and
cultural activities since 2014. The online educational
component is currently accessible to all young Koreans
and will remain open even after the Games in order
17-37640

13/11/2017

to continue to promote peace and the Olympic ideals.
Moreover, we have held numerous activities, such as
the National Model United Nations Conference and
other special programmes, to encourage young people
to engage in dialogues on the topics of peace and
reconciliation. More than 1 million students from many
countries have participated in our peace initiatives, of
which we are very proud.
On this occasion, I would like to welcome three
Korean high-school students who have participated
in our programmes. They are here with us today to
represent the young people of Korea and their desire for
a peaceful Olympic Games. As International Olympic
Committee President Thomas Bach has reiterated, no
other event brings the entire world together like the
Olympic Games. Against that background, during a
plenary meeting of the General Assembly in September,
President Moon Jae-in of the Republic of Korea
expressed his commitment to peace on the Korean
peninsula and his earnest desire for it (see A/72/PV.11).
I would like to take this opportunity to assure Member
States once again that we, the Organizing Committee
for the Olympic Games, together with the Korean
Government, are committed to ensuring a secure and
peaceful Olympic Games so that everyone can feel safe
and comfortable throughout their stay.
The Pyeongchang Games will be the first of three
consecutive Olympic and Paralympic Games in NorthEast Asia. Our partners and friends from Tokyo 2020
and Beijing 2022 will also stand before the Assembly
to support the draft resolution. We Koreans hope that
those three Olympic Games will provide a window
of opportunity for promoting peace and economic
cooperation in North-East Asia. We hope that our
joint action today will lead to a chain reaction for the
promotion of peace within the region and beyond.
Together we are more powerful than any one of us
working alone.
I would like to emphasize that the values of peace
and sport go hand in hand with the Olympics. We
want to share that message as we aim to open up new
horizons for sport. On behalf of the Government and
the people of the Republic of Korea, the host city of
Pyeongchang and the Organizing Committee, I would
like to thank the President of the General Assembly for
convening this plenary meeting, and to cordially ask
that the Assembly support the draft resolution before
it today.

A/72/PV.48

The President: Before proceeding further, as
mentioned in my letter dated 8 November, I should like
to consult members with a view to inviting Ms. Kim
Yuna, Olympic gold medallist in figure skating and
Goodwill Ambassador for the 2018 Pyeongchang
Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games, to make a
statement on this occasion.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly, without setting a precedent, to invite
Ms. Kim Yuna to make a statement at this meeting?
It was so decided.
The President: In accordance with the decision
just taken, I now give the floor to Ms. Kim Yuna,
Olympic gold medallist in figure skating and Goodwill
Ambassador for the 2018 Pyeongchang Olympic and
Paralympic Winter Games.
Ms. Kim Yuna: I would like to thank the President
of the General Assembly and Member States for giving
me this opportunity to address the Assembly this
morning on the role of sport and the Olympic ideal in
promoting peace.
As a former figure skater, a two-time Olympian
and a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador, I stand proudly
before Member States as Honorary Ambassador for the
Pyeongchang 2018 Olympic and Paralympic Winter
Games to share my personal experience in witnessing
the power of sport in breaking down the walls of race,
region, language and religion all around the world.
One hundred and twenty-three years ago, the father
of the modern Olympics, Pierre de Coubertin, said that
the Olympic spirit is not the property of any one race or
one age. We might want to add today that the Olympic
spirit is not the exclusive property of any one nation or
region of the world or of any one religion or faith. The
Olympic Charter now states that the goal of Olympism
is to place sport at the service of the harmonious
development of humankind, with a view to promoting
a peaceful society concerned with the preservation of
human dignity. I strongly believe that that is the spirit of
the Olympic Games and that it represents the potential
and the power of sport.
I first experienced the same spirit and power as a
10-year-old child watching the South and North Korean
delegations walk into the Olympic stadium together in
2000. Today I hope to witness that power again as the
General Assembly adopts draft resolution A/72/L.5.

17-376403/28

A/72/PV.48

I firmly believe that the Pyeongchang 2018 Olympic
and Paralympic Winter Games will help to spread the
message of peace through one of the few languages that
has the power to unite people around the world — the
graceful and universal language of sport. Pyeongchang
represents perhaps the most sincere effort to cross
the frozen border between the South and the North
and to foster a peaceful environment. In particular,
I am confident that the upcoming Pyeongchang 2018
Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games will be one of
the best possible platforms not only for transmitting
that message but also for sharing the Olympic spirit of
peace for humankind with the entire world.
I would like to promise to everyone that I will do
my best to help Pyeongchang 2018 serve as the model
for a successful Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games
for all the years to come. In turn, I would like to ask
for the continued support of the Assembly to help to
build the legacy of Pyeongchang for the benefit of all
future Olympic and Paralympic Games and the spirit of
world peace. I humbly ask Member States to continue
to support the Pyeongchang Olympic and Paralympic
Winter Games and the ideals of the Olympic Truce
Movement. I hope to see members again next year
in Pyeongchang.
Ms. Picco (Monaco) (spoke in French): For
the twenty-third time, the Olympic and Paralympic
Winter Games will open in February. The world’s
attention will be focused on the opening ceremonies
and the 15 disciplines of the Pyeongchang Games in
the Republic of Korea. For the fifty-second time, the
Summer and Winter Games will become symbols of
effort, excellence and fair play. For the twelfth time, the
General Assembly today is calling for the observance
of the Olympic Truce.
Allow me to warmly congratulate our friends from
the Republic of Korea delegation for the draft resolution
(A/72/L.5) that was just introduced to the General
Assembly, which we will adopt by acclamation. The
Principality of Monaco is proud to be a co-author of
that text, which is an affirmation of our belief that
sport and the Olympic ideal can build a peaceful and
better world.
The call to respect the Olympic Truce represents
more than just a powerful symbol of peace. The titles
of the agenda item and of draft resolution are directly
inspired by the values that are supported and promoted
by the Olympic Movement. That is no coincidence, given
4/28

13/11/2017

that the Movement brings together the International
Olympic
Committee,
206
National
Olympic
Committees, the International Sport Federation, the
various Organizing Committees of the Olympic Games
and all people who adhere to the values ​​of the Olympic
Charter. The Olympic Movement has unique reach.
It seems particularly important today to recall that
Olympism and its values, as enshrined in the Olympic
Charter, are in line with the principles and ideals that
transcend our work in this forum and are enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations. Let us not forget that
Olympism is also, and perhaps even first and foremost,
a philosophy of life — a balance between the qualities
of the body, will and spirit. Humanity, dignity and the
rejection of all forms of discrimination are fundamental
principles of Olympism.
The United Nations, like the Olympic Movement,
has ambitious agendas with universal and converging
principles. Our Heads of State and Government
adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and recognized that sport, because of its cross-cutting
nature, can make a significant contribution to the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda. The Olympic
Movement is equipped with the Olympic Agenda 2020,
which is based on good governance and ethics. Those
principles are essential because the Olympic Games are
the global showcase of the Olympic ideal. In addition,
the promotion of human rights is intrinsic to the Games.
At the ninth forum and fifth assembly of European
athletes, held in Monaco in October, His Serene
Highness Prince Albert II stated that athletes are at the
heart of the Olympic Movement and that their protection
is of the utmost importance in the Agenda 2020. Let
us acknowledge that the actions of the International
Olympic Committee are of even greater significance.
The commitment of the Committee, which becomes
apparent to the world every two years, is constant
and requires all the energy and work of its President,
members and all those who adhere to the principles of
the Olympic Charter and embody and promote them on
a daily basis.
Education, health, inclusion, gender equality,
empowerment, tolerance and respect, among other
things, are part of the Olympic values ​​that contribute to
the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). In February 2018, tens of millions of people
will turn their attention to the Republic of Korea, which
will mark the opening of a six-year Olympic sequence
17-37640

13/11/2017

A/72/PV.48

in Asia, with subsequent Games to take place in Tokyo
in 2020 and Beijing in 2022.

therefore enliven us in our every action at the service of
our States and multilateralism.

The Olympic flag and the United Nations flag will
soon be flown together again at the Pyeongchang site
and will complement the Olympic rings and torch,
symbols of our common future. We strongly believe
in the power of sport and its unique ability to unite.
That is why the draft resolution reflects our shared
hope that the Games provide an opportunity, as its
thirteenth preambular paragraph states, “to foster
an atmosphere of peace, development, tolerance and
understanding on the Korean peninsula and in NorthEast Asia”. We look forward to the series of athletic
achievements broadcast by the Olympic Channel,
which will send a strong positive message. In our dayto-day life, where mistrust sometimes takes precedence
over seeking mutual understanding, sport is a powerful
language and promotes respect for the rules that apply
to everyone equally.

By making the motto “Faster, Higher, Stronger”
our own, we can give ourselves the means to achieve
the Goals that our Heads of State and Government
adopted in the 2030 Agenda faster. We will aim higher
in our cooperation efforts. We will be stronger together
and truly united for a better world for all of humankind.
I hope that the Olympic and Paralympic Games in
Pyeongchang will be remembered as the Games of
understanding and friendship between peoples who are
united by the power of sport.

Having come through their qualifying events, the
athletes will soon compete under the motto “Faster,
Higher, Stronger”. They will thrill and inspire us with
their self-denial, efforts, perseverance and the humility
that they show in the long and difficult journey that
leads them to the Games. Qualifying for the Games
represents the culmination of years of sacrifice. It also
means undergoing a transformation from being merely
an athlete into an Olympian, with the corresponding
responsibilities. Being an Olympian means that one’s
duties go beyond just giving one’s best. The Olympians
will be the focus of rapt attention from their countries
and communities, and their actions and gestures will be
open to all and analysed.
Like Olympians, we owe it to ourselves to inspire
the young people we invoke so often in our speeches and
deliberations on peace, conflict prevention, respect for
human rights and the implementation of the sustainable
development agenda. We must ensure that the Olympic
Truce is respected. Let us ensure that the efforts of the
Games will be an appropriate expression of our hopes
and that they will blur our differences. Let us embrace
the Olympic values together and let the youth of the
world help us build a future of peace and brotherhood.
Like the athletes who are the ambassadors of
Olympism, we bear a significant responsibility,
entrusted as we are with the task of representing our
States in the United Nations. The Olympic spirit should

Ms. Velichko (Belarus): (spoke in Russian):
The delegation of Belarus welcomes draft resolution
A/72/L.5, of which Belarus is a sponsor, on building
a peaceful and better world through sport. One of its
key elements is a call to Member States to observe the
Olympic Truce under the Charter of the United Nations.
We hope that the draft resolution will serve not only as
a reminder of the wonderful ancient Greek tradition of
ceasing hostilities during the Olympic Games, but also
as a call to action for all States.
We hope that in the current context of international
instability, the upcoming Olympic Games will facilitate
the promotion of the value of peace, in accordance with
the fundamental principles of the Olympic Charter.
We support the efforts of the International Olympic
Committee and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees to facilitate the
participation of teams of refugees in the Games. The
development of physical capability through sport is a
key area of Belarus’s national policy.
Belarus is proud that it has earned the right to host
an important European competition in 2019, the second
European Games. We firmly condemn any attempt
to exploit sport for political gains. We advocate for
the preservation of the independence and autonomy
of sport, as well as the principle of equality before
the law and the preservation of the values and ethics
of sport. We are confident that the draft resolution to
be adopted today will help strengthen the role of sport
in promoting peace and development, strengthening
the principles of tolerance and respect and enhancing
mutual understanding among States and peoples in the
spirit of true Olympism based on friendship, solidarity
and fair play without discrimination.
Mr. Alduwaisan (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
My country is pleased to be participating in the

17-376405/28

A/72/PV.48

deliberations on this agenda item, as we firmly
believe in the importance of sport in solidly grounding
societies and relations among peoples and of educating
our youth well in that area. We also reaffirm our
support for resolution 67/296, adopted in August
2013, in accordance with which Member States,
the United Nations system, relevant international
organizations, civil society and the public and private
sector should cooperate, observe and raise awareness
of the International Day of Sport for Development and
Peace. We therefore reiterate the need to invest in our
young people, so as to build a better society through
programmes and plans of action aimed at helping them
to embrace noble principles and at combating crime,
extremism and corruption. Those ambitions cannot be
realized unless we use the institutions that have been
developed within our societies.
The language of sport and athletes has always been
one of peace, security and solidarity in confronting
violence and extremism. In the case of two of the fiercest
military adversaries in the First World War, soccer
brought together soldiers from both sides for a day. The
results that we could achieve in times of peace through
the same means are limited only by our imagination.
Another model example that promoted peace across
the African continent was aimed at combating racism
when, through sport, the South African leader Nelson
Mandela conveyed a message at the 1995 Rugby World
Cup, hosted by South Africa, in order to unify the
children of his people and combat apartheid.
In 1894, when Coubertin re-established the modern
Olympic Games, he believed in the importance of
sport as a form of spiritual energy and promoted that
philosophy so as to spread love and peace among peoples
through the Games. In that same vein, he established
the principles of the Games, whereby participation and
fair play, rather than winning, were to be the key goals.
The Olympic Movement brings to life the principles
of the Olympic Charter, as well as peace and human
dignity, thereby fostering development. The example
and experience of the Olympic Games provide us with
an opportunity to reflect on the power of sport to unite
us, the best illustration of which is the concept of the
Olympic Village, which brings athletes from more than
200 States together in one place. The guiding principal
of the Olympic ideal is that sport is synonymous with
peace, and is almost magically reflected in efforts to
promote peace and development.
6/28

13/11/2017

In conclusion, within the framework of the United
Nations we see today many similarities between the
principles of our Organization and the International
Olympic Committee in their parallel efforts aimed
at promoting peace through sport. The most striking
example of such cooperation and solidarity was the
support provided for a group of refugee athletes — a
first-of-a-kind moment in the history of the Olympic
Games — when in Rio de Janeiro more than 10 young
athletes participated in the 2016 Games and were given
an opportunity to move beyond war and conflicts.
Ms. Wong (Singapore): On behalf of my delegation,
I would like to express our sincere condolences for the
lives lost as a result of the earthquake that affected Iran
and Iraq this past weekend. Our thoughts and prayers
are with the victims and their loved ones.
Singapore is pleased to co-sponsor draft resolution
A/72/L.5, entitled, “Sport for development and peace:
building a peaceful and better world through sport and
the Olympic ideal”, under agenda item 11. Singapore
thanks the Republic of Korea for its successful efforts
in coordinating the draft resolution, which recognizes
the ideals represented by the Olympic Truce, and we
look forward to its adoption by consensus in the General
Assembly today.
The practice and goal of perfection in sport
represent a force for good in many societies. The values
of hard work and self-discipline and the determination
to do better inspire the human spirit. Sport brings
together people of various origins, creeds, cultures
and nationalities, and enhances mutual understanding
through a spirit of friendship and fair play. That is
the spirit of the Olympic Games, which, since the
first modern Olympic Games, in 1896, has not only
symbolized the pinnacle of achievement in sports,
but also plays a crucial role in bridging communities
and promoting tolerance, social inclusion, peace,
cooperation and sustainable development.
Singapore recognizes the importance of sport
in everyday life. Nationally, sport can bring together
diverse groups of people in a spirit of solidarity and
imbue them with a greater sense of pride in their
country. At the community level, sport helps to bring
about better health outcomes. Our Government has
therefore actively promoted sports in Singapore.
ActiveSG, a national sport movement, was launched to
encourage Singaporeans to become active by providing
access to affordable and exciting sports activities
17-37640

13/11/2017

and programmes. In addition, to ensure that sport in
Singapore remains an inclusive activity, the disability
sports master plan was launched in 2016 to ensure that
persons with disabilities are able to participate and
excel in sport if they so wish. Recognizing that areas
intended for sport are not only places for training but
also common spaces for people to gather and connect
with one another, we have also set up a master plan for
sports facilities to provide greater access to a network
of sports amenities and enable people to live better
through sport.
We are glad to see that some of our efforts have paid
off. At the Rio de Janeiro Paralympic Games in 2016,
the Singapore team did us proud by achieving our bestever result of two gold and one silver medal, won by
Paralympian swimmers Yip Pin Xiu and Theresa Goh,
respectively. The year 2016 was also a milestone for
us, as our swimmer Joseph Schooling won Singapore’s
first ever Olympic gold medal. Those achievements
show that success knows no boundaries. Individuals
from any country can succeed if they put their minds to
it and work hard for their goals.
The benefits of sport also transcend national
boundaries. Sport can help to promote closer ties and
friendships among neighbours and beyond. As part
of our ongoing contributions to sporting events in the
region, Singapore hosted the twenty-eighth Southeast
Asian Games and the eighth Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) Para Games in 2015. Our
athletes participated actively in the recent twenty-ninth
Southeast Asian Games and ninth ASEAN Para Games,
held in Kuala Lumpur. We are glad to see the many
transnational friendships and inspiring personal stories
of athletes that emerged during those events. We look
forward to supporting and participating in the series of
successive Olympic and Paralympic Games to be held
in North-East Asia, and hope that they will serve as
avenues to promote peace, dialogue and reconciliation.
Just as Baron de Coubertin, the creator of the
modern Olympic Games, once said,
“[t]he most important thing in the Olympic Games
is not to win but to take part. The essential thing is
not to have conquered but to have fought well”.
Sport inspires a nobler human spirit and is an enabler
of individuals and communities. The 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development has recognized the role
of sport in the realization of development and peace
and in the promotion of tolerance, respect and the

A/72/PV.48

empowerment of women and young people, as well as its
many contributions to health, education and our goals
of social inclusion. Let us continue to uphold the spirit
of the Olympic Truce and aim to build a sustainable,
inclusive and prosperous future for our peoples.
Ms. Mohamed Didi (Maldives): The Olympic
Movement is a celebration of humankind and human
values. Sport has the power to inspire and energize
human development, and the Olympic ideal has helped
to create equality and a level-playing field to bring out
the best in humankind. The Maldives is proud to be an
active participant in the Olympic Movement. Maldivian
athletes took the great leap forward by participating in
the Olympic Games for the first time in 1988. It was truly
a once-in-a-lifetime moment, not only for those who
participated, but for future generations of youth who
were inspired by the ideals of the Olympic Movement to
build a peaceful and better world through sport.
The Olympic Movement has an extraordinary
ability to give hope and renew aspirations precisely
when one is faced with difficult challenges. The
participation of an Olympic team of refugees during
the 2016 Summer Olympics Games in Rio de Janeiro
made history and gave optimism, courage and faith
to millions of refugees around the world. Not only
did those athletes help foster hope for millions of
people facing unimaginable barriers in reaching their
aspirations, it showed the world that through sport no
barrier is insurmountable.
My delegation commends that initiative, which
reflects the human connections among communities
that transcend boundaries. The President of the
Maldives, Mr. Abdulla Yameen Abdul Gayoom, has
prioritized youth development and empowerment
through opportunities that will unleash their creativity
and enable them to realize their full potential. That will
allow them to aim higher, dream bigger and dream new
dreams. Sport development is, of course, a significant
component of youth development. The Maldives enacted
its first sport bill in September 2015. The legislation
aims to assist in the promotion of competitive sports
and cultural activities at the international, national and
local levels. It also outlines policies and guidelines
for facilitating sports development with communitylevel participation.
The Maldives recognizes the important role that
sport plays in peace and security. That is why we
pioneered the implementation of Security Council

17-376407/28

A/72/PV.48

resolution 2250 (2015), on improving programmes
for youth. The Ministry of Youth and Sport of the
Maldives, in collaboration with the United Nations
Development Programme in the Maldives, held an
official ceremony in the Maldives in August 2016 to
launch the implementation of the resolution, becoming
the first country to do so in the Asia-Pacific region.
The Government of the Maldives continues to
make significant investments in sport infrastructure.
Such projects are designed for young people to develop
their leadership skills and to provide them with
support networks outside their homes. We have also
successfully conducted sport festivals that aim to create
peace and harmony within society. The Government
promotes the inclusion of women by giving them
greater opportunities, and has been encouraging female
participation in sport so as to challenge traditional
gender stereotypes.
It will be vital to empower our growing populations
of young people to be active citizens in their
communities, where they can foster economic and social
progress. Sport programmes, coordinated by the United
Nations, Government agencies and non-governmental
organizations, have been found to facilitate sustainable
development and peaceful coexistence. It is therefore
encouraging to see the role of sport in peace and
development reflected in all of the 17 goals in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, and to see that in
action in countries around the world.
One of the most important and enduring lessons
sport offers is building resilience even in the face of
enormous challenges. Sport is not a panacea for all
societal problems, nor can it resolve all global conflicts.
Nonetheless, for those who have lost their way, sport
can provide a sense of purpose, joy amid sorrow and
hope in the face of despair.
Ms. Fisher-tsin (Israel): We welcome the
upcoming adoption of draft resolution A/72/L.5,
entitled “Building a peaceful and better world through
sport and the Olympic ideal”, of which Israel is proud
to be a sponsor.
Sport and peace are intertwined. Sport encourages
teamwork, which extends well beyond the field, teaches
tolerance, which extends beyond the court, and builds
friendships that last far longer than those crucial final
seconds of overtime. Israel believes that sport is a key
ingredient in coexistence and goodwill. Sport is crucial
for rebinding communities. It builds inclusive societies
8/28

13/11/2017

and empowers young people, women and persons with
disabilities to achieve what they are capable of. Sport
lays the groundwork for peace and prosperity for all.
As a country in a conflict-ridden region, Israel
makes a point of ensuring that all young people learn to
play on the same team. Mifalot Chinuch is an initiative
founded by Hapoel Tel Aviv, one of Israel’s biggest
football clubs. Its goal is to see football not just as a
game but rather as a great uniting force — a universal
language and a common shared culture. Mifalot
Chinuch programmes provide an effective platform for
building bridges between Israelis and Palestinians, and
for seeing each other as teammates, not as the other.
Through teamwork, the hope for peace grows, one
scored goal at a time.
That educational model has extended beyond
the borders of Israel to local communities across the
world, including in Cambodia, Rwanda, Jordan, Haiti
and India. In Cambodia, Mifalot Chinuch established
a programme for the empowerment of young women
through sport entitled Levelling the Playing Field. Once
again, through sport, girls gain the confidence and
training to become tomorrow’s agents of change, achieve
gender equality and give back to their communities.
Mifalot Chinuch is just one example of the
remarkable ability of sport to build peace. This past
May, Israel spearheaded a local sport-for-peace effort in
Nigeria entitled “Israel Cares Kids’ Football League.”
The initiative targeted children aged 8 to 12 who
had been displaced from their homes by the terrorist
organization Boko Haram. Israel provided uniforms,
balls and coaches for the programme, giving over 200
children an outlet that provided trust, safety and calm.
Their participation in sport offers a sense of belonging
and a new group of friends, while also restoring hope
for peace.
Sport should be used as a tool to unite, not divide.
It should be used to create inclusion, not exclusion or
politicization. The lessons of sport have the power to
throw a wrench into the seemingly endless cycle of
conflict around our world. By giving every man, woman
and child full and equal access to sport, we grow closer
to a peaceful future for all.
Mr. Sharifuddin (Brunei Darussalam): Brunei
Darussalam fully supports the discussions under
today’s agenda item. We are also pleased to once again
be a sponsor of draft resolution A/72/L.5.
17-37640

13/11/2017

We join others today in giving due recognition
to the role that sport plays in development and peace
and in advancing social progress. We are pleased that
that is enshrined in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, specifically in its paragraph 37, which
recognizes sport as an important enabler of sustainable
development that promotes tolerance and respect and
contributes to the empowerment of women, young
people, individuals and communities, as well as to
education and social inclusion objectives.
We believe that sport is a powerful tool in the
promotion and advancement of peace and harmony.
That is evident, as sport leads to healthier lifestyles,
more interaction, friendship and community-building.
We should especially encourage our young people to
participate in sport programmes, events and exchanges,
which can promote mutual trust and respect, tolerance
and a greater appreciation of other cultures and ways
of life, and can also forge lasting bonds of friendship.
Instilling such shared values and ideals is important
to young people’s development. Sport can also act as
a positive outlet for countering the various challenges
that many of our youth face today, such as drug abuse,
violent extremism and high levels of unemployment.
Brunei Darussalam continues to emphasize
the positive contribution of sport to socioeconomic
development. Under our national policy, sport is a means
of enhancing the quality of life and building a healthy
nation. It also goes hand in hand with our National
Vision 2035, which aspires to create a well-educated
and highly skilled society with an improved quality of
life, as well as a dynamic and sustainable economy.
The development of sport remains a high priority for
the Government of Brunei Darussalam, and significant
investment has been made to provide sport with
adequate recreational infrastructure so as to promote
the creation of a healthy and active community.
Integral to that endeavour is inclusive,
multi-stakeholder collaboration between the public
and private sectors, as well as among national sporting
bodies. One such project is the My Happy City initiative,
whereby every Sunday the capital city is designated as a
car-free zone for people to engage in sporting activities
such as cycling, running and aerobics. It brings together
sport enthusiasts of all ages and abilities, irrespective
of their social background or economic status. Not only
has the initiative contributed to reviving our capital as a
centre for community, sporting, commercial and tourist

A/72/PV.48

activities, it has also promoted healthy lifestyles and a
sporting culture among the people. That is in line with
the vision for world health of the Director-General of
the World Health Organization.
At the same time, while recognizing sport’s
contributions to the empowerment of people, we are
also taking steps to train and develop quality athletes,
including women and persons with disabilities, who can
compete at the local, regional and international levels.
Our participation in various regional and international
sporting events, such as the Olympic Games, the
Commonwealth Games, the Islamic Solidarity Games,
the Asian Games and the Southeast Asian Games, has
helped our athletes strive for excellence and bring
sporting achievements and recognition to our country.
Moreover, such participation has enabled our athletes
to foster friendships with other athletes, thereby
promoting better understanding, respect and tolerance
of other cultures. All of those are values that contribute
to peace.
In conclusion, Brunei Darussalam is firmly
committed to working with other Member States and
related regional and international bodies in advancing
sport, particularly as such activities contribute to the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Ms. Al-Abdulla (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to thank the President for convening today’s
meeting under agenda item 11.
We align ourselves with the statements delivered by
the sponsors of draft resolution A/72/L.5, on building
a peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideals.
The draft resolution reflects Qatar’s conviction that
sport has the power to strengthen education, sustainable
development, peace, cooperation and solidarity at all
levels. By fostering peace and reflecting and embodying
the role of sport, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development also highlights sport as a means of
achieving sustainable development. Given the fact that
sport plays a role in encouraging tolerance, respect and
the empowerment of women and individuals, Qatar
accords particular importance to sport at the national,
regional and international levels. We have successfully
hosted a number of sporting events, such as the Asian
Games in 2006. The Ministry of Culture, Arts and
Heritage considers that sport can be used in order to
develop peace. We also hope to host the International

17-376409/28

A/72/PV.48

Football Federation World Cup in 2022, which would
be the first time that our region hosted such an event.
I would like to point out the key role that our
Ministry of Culture, Arts and Heritage has played in
preparing Qatar to host the World Cup through the
promotion of peace and mutual understanding, based
on the fundamental principle of the role that sport
plays in strengthening dialogue among peoples and
cultures and in promoting peace and development.
Sport also helps Qatar build towards its national vision
for 2030 and create a strong, healthy society, serving to
strengthen relations among the citizens of the country.
We have always supported the role that sport plays, and
we celebrate National Sports Day as a national holiday.
I would like to take this opportunity to highlight
the efforts of the Ministry of Youth and Sports to
promote sports and the excellence of sports across the
country. We also commend the additional efforts of the
Qatar Olympic Committee to facilitate the development
of sport. We have in place a number of programmes and
initiatives that strive for the same objective across all
levels. Through the Qatar Olympic Committee, we have
also provided significant assistance to communities
that are in need due to various difficult circumstances
across various areas of the world.
Mr. Hoshino (Japan): Sport has the power to
nurture dreams and bring hope to people. It has the
power to change the world, and even the future of
humankind. In the spirit of peace, I hope that the
international community will once again come together
to adopt this important draft resolution on the Olympic
Truce (A/72/L.5), as it has done every year since 1993.
Japan appreciates the initiative and leadership of
the Republic of Korea, the host of next year’s Winter
Olympic and Paralympic Games, in submitting this
year’s draft resolution. As a sponsor, Japan would like
to highlight the importance of the independence and
autonomy of sport and of ensuring that the Olympic and
Paralympic Games should be organized in the spirit of
peace, mutual understanding, friendship, tolerance and
the inadmissibility of discrimination of any kind. We
are grateful that those fundamental principles, drawn
from the Olympic Charter, are reflected in the draft
resolution. Japan firmly believes that next year’s games
in Pyeongchang will realize those ideals and objectives.
Japan will be next to host the Olympic and
Paralympic Games, in Tokyo in 2020. We want
the Tokyo 2020 Games to realize the three ideals
10/28

13/11/2017

of achieving personal best, unity in diversity and
connecting to tomorrow. Based on the concept of
achieving one’s personal best, the Tokyo 2020 Games
will aim to deliver an event where all athletes can
realize their greatest athletic performance and achieve
their personal best. Unity in diversity acknowledges the
importance of accepting and respecting differences so
that peace can be maintained and society continue to
develop and flourish. As for the concept of connecting
to tomorrow, I would like to recall that the Tokyo 1964
Games were a major factor in Japan’s rapid economic
growth at the time.
We hope that the Tokyo 2020 Games will enable
Japan to promote transformative changes that can
provide an opportunity to bring hopes and dreams to
the areas affected by the 2011 earthquake and tsunami
disaster. We believe that showing the world the affected
region’s recovery and reconstruction will be a way of
expressing Japan’s gratitude to all those who have helped
us in efforts that continue to this day. In that regard, the
Government of Japan is promoting exchanges between
the affected areas and the world.
Since 2014, in the lead-up to 2020, the Government
of Japan has been steadily implementing various
projects under the programme “Sport for Tomorrow”,
while recognizing that sport enables societal and
economic development. The programme aims to reach
over 10 million people in more than 100 countries.
More specifically, we are implementing such projects
as sending coaches and athletes abroad or inviting them
to Japan and providing sports facilities. We believe
that such projects contribute to the realization of the
Sustainable Development Goals.
In conclusion, Japan will continue working to
promote the sport so that the 2018 Pyeongchang
Games will be a success, not only in terms of the
Games themselves but also in building a spirit of peace
throughout the world. I would like to assure the General
Assembly that the Tokyo 2020 Games will do the same.
Ms. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to reiterate Cuba’s continued
support for the international community’s efforts to
promote sport as a means of fostering development,
peace and social inclusion. That is why we have decided
to sponsor the draft resolution introduced by the
Republic of Korea under this agenda item (A/72/L.5).
The widespread practice of sport as a right to be
enjoyed by all is one of the major achievements of the
17-37640

13/11/2017

Cuban Revolution in terms of human rights. Sport,
physical education and sport-related recreational
activities reach every corner of our country, and
universal access is guaranteed for young and old alike,
including programmes for special-education centres and
the disabled. Cuba has trained a considerable number
of specialized physical-education teachers responsible
for implementing our physical culture and health
development strategy in all communities in the country,
which has benefited all children and adolescents, young
people, women — including pregnant women — and
the elderly.
Cuba also has a network of sports facilities with
services in all municipalities to foster and encourage
the practice of sport. Each province in the country has a
school of physical culture, from which mid- and higherlevel professionals in the field graduate each year. The
achievements in this sector are further complemented
by our specialized centres for training athletes and
a robust sports-medicine system, which includes a
modern anti-doping laboratory recognized by the
International Olympic Committee, affirming Cuba’s
commitment to fighting that scourge.
Despite being a small developing country, over the
past 58 years Cuba has achieved sustained successes
in sport at the regional and global levels. We are the
one hundred and sixth largest country in the world in
terms of surface area, and eighty-second by population.
However, in terms of sport we rank first in the Central
American and Caribbean region, second in the
Americas and, on average, eighteenth at the Olympic
level, among more than 200 other countries.
Cuba’s worldwide solidarity with coaches and
physical-education teachers also enhance the prestige
of Cuban sport. True to its internationalist vocation,
Cuba has offered to cooperate in the development of
sport in many countries, and we will continue to do so
to the best of our ability.
All the achievements I mentioned have been possible
thanks to the political will of our Government and the
active participation of our people, despite the obstacles
imposed by the criminal blockade imposed against my
country, which has caused serious restrictions on the
development of sport.
Finally, Cuba reiterates its firm commitment to
the promotion of sport as a vehicle for the promotion
of peace, the building of fairer and more supportive

A/72/PV.48

societies and the making of a better world for present
and future generations.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): Dating back to the eighth
century before the common era, the ancient Olympic
Games were a force for peace and solidarity among
ancient Greek city-States, which would declare a truce
for a period of seven days before the beginning and
after the end of the Games. The ultimate goal was the
peaceful conduct of the Games, which was ensured by
protecting the host city from invasion and ordering
individuals and State authorities to refrain from
interfering with the safe passage of the athletes. As
Thucydides wrote, when States violated the truce, their
athletes were banned from participating in the Games.
The concept of the Olympic Truce was born
in antiquity and was respected and followed for a
period of 1,200 years. The Greeks viewed the Games
as an opportunity to replace conflict with friendly
competition. However, the truce ideal was also of
great importance in the revival of the Olympic Games
in the modern era as an invaluable tool for advancing
international cooperation and promote world peace.
In today’s world, an emphasis on Olympic peace
has become a major feature of modern Olympic
ideology. The foundation of the International Olympic
Truce Centre, for the creation of which Greece actively
engaged with the International Olympic Committee,
gave the pursuit of peace a new dynamism. Most
importantly, the inclusion of the Olympic Truce in the
United Nations framework through the adoption of
relevant resolutions granted a distinct role to the ideal.
We should bear in mind that, in a world of differences,
inequalities and conflicts, engagement in even a
temporary truce is an achievement for the international
community. It is therefore our responsibility to continue
to promote the Olympic Truce and spare no effort to
ensure its actual implementation.
In 2018, the Republic of Korea will host the
Pyeongchang Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games.
I take this opportunity to wish the Republic of Korea
every success in this demanding endeavour. For the
rest of us, it is our task to fulfil our responsibilities
by observing the Olympic Truce and thereby making
peace an attainable goal. We should all find inspiration
in next year’s Olympic Games and reflect on how sport
could be used as a useful tool to reduce tensions and
build bridges.

17-3764011/28

A/72/PV.48

Mr. Prasad (India): India welcomes the adoption of
draft resolution A/72/L.5, entitled “Building a peaceful
and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”,
which is in keeping with the affirmation of Heads of
State and Government in the Declaration of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development that sport is an
important enabler of sustainable development.
If sustainable development is about promoting
a range of economic, social and community-based
outcomes to build sustainable societies, the value of
sport as a means of bringing children, and therefore
their parents, and young people together to cooperate
and participate in tackling common issues cannot be
questioned. This is in addition to its direct value in
promoting the health of children and young adults,
which itself is a key element of development.
In that context, India would like to express its
appreciation for the work over the past decade of the
United Nations Office on Sport for Development and
Peace and for the valuable contribution of the Group
of Friends of Sport for Development and Peace. The
designation of 6 April as International Day of Sport for
Development and Peace has been an important marker
for emphasizing the relevance of sport to development
and peace.
The spread of the Olympic movement and its
popularity, as well as the immense following and
popularity of national and world championships of
major sports, such as soccer, basketball, cricket,
hockey and tennis, highlight their role as celebrations
of global goodwill. The stories of many sports
superstars who have risen from poverty and destitution
are powerful messages of hope and happiness to
millions of young people in the world. In turn, sports
stars can become valuable messengers by spreading
development messages.
As the national sport of India that reaches millions
of people in cities, towns and villages in the country,
cricket and its stars provide a very important platform
for spreading social messages. The greatest icon of
Indian cricket, Sachin Tendulkar, illustrates this fact.
Tendulkar was part of a popular national campaign
to promote hygiene among children that encouraged
schoolchildren to wash their hands before eating food.
Similarly, he has recently been a brand ambassador for
India’s Swachh Bharat, or Clean India, campaign.
Another Government initiative that has advanced
social and educational development in backward areas
12/28

13/11/2017

has been the system of sports hostels spread across the
country. These are residential sports schools, created
to take advantage of location-specific sports talent.
Sports hostels in eastern India, particularly in the states
of Bihar and Jharkhand, have provided an educational
platform for young girls from tribal areas in the two
states. This opportunity has paid dividends not only for
the young women themselves but also for India. Today,
India’s junior and senior women’s hockey teams are
dominated by players who have emerged from those
tribal areas.
Sport’s capacity for making a positive impact on
peace and security is vividly illustrated by UNICEF’s
Sports for Development programme in the Sukma
district of the leftist insurgency-affected Indian state
of Chhattisgarh, where Naxalism, the local leftist
insurgency, had become a very serious problem. The
UNICEF programme, initiated in 2006—2007, was an
effort to address issues arising from the civil strife in
the region, particularly with regard to children affected
by violence and displacement. Implemented through
khel mitras, or sports mentors, those mentors used
sports and games to connect with children so as to help
them to deal with the violence and resulting trauma and
encourage them to continue going to school. This, in
turn, provided the window for bringing key messages
to the children and their parents on development issues
and lifestyle changes. The programme’s success has
seen its expansion across primary schools in the state
of Chhattisgarh.
I would also like to mention two innovative sportfor-development programmes run by non-governmental
institutions in India, which highlight the potential of
sports as a community builder and contributor to
development initiatives. The first is Project KHEL,
a programme that uses sport as a platform to help
children from disadvantaged backgrounds to grow
into responsible and contributing members of society.
Working from Lucknow, a major city in central India,
Project KHEL works with orphans, street children,
children of migrant labourers and children from slums
in a four-month-long biweekly sports and games
programme, which focuses on building a personal
sense of worth in the children and on teaching them
problem-solving skills. Specific sessions also focus on
issues such as health, substance abuse, a civic sense and
personal hygiene. Today, the organization is working
with 10 partner institutions and two slum locations in
the city.
17-37640

13/11/2017

A similar programme in the western metropolis
of Mumbai is the OSCAR Foundation, which uses
football — soccer — to teach the value of education
and life skills to underprivileged children. The specific
objective of the programme is to support children
and young people in continuing in school. OSCAR’s
young leaders work as role models and mentors for
these children.
While organized sport is today a major source of
entertainment in the world and an industry on its own,
the challenge of extending the pleasures of sport and
its benefits to millions of young children in the less
developed and developing worlds should remain an
important objective. India therefore sees sport as an
important building block in creating a peaceful and
better world and will be supportive of all efforts to
spread the message of sports and development.
Mrs. Matar (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would first like to thank the Republic of
Korea for having submitted draft resolution A/72/L.5,
which seeks to build a peaceful and better world
through sport and the Olympic ideal. It is my pleasure
to underscore the fact that Bahrain will support the
adoption of the draft resolution out of the conviction
that sport should be used to achieve development and
to promote sustainable development, peace, education,
cooperation and health.
The capacity and potential of sport to cross borders
and transcend language means that it is a good way to
help settle conflicts and strengthen sustainable peace.
Sport is a universal phenomenon that brings people
together and can help to build strong partnerships in a
world that is increasingly unified. This is the truth. We
must therefore protect that unity by standing together
against hate, violence and extremism. In this regard, I
wish to underscore the importance of making sure that
sport serves development and peace and that it can be
used to counter all forms of discrimination and hatred.
With support from the King of Bahrain, we
are particularly eager to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals. We believe that sport can play
an important role in implementing these overarching
goals, since it can help to strengthen unity and peace. It
is for this reason that 7 February is National Sports Day
in Bahrain, dedicated to upholding the noble Olympic
ideals and promoting and practicing sport. It is our
deep conviction that sport can be used to strengthen

A/72/PV.48

and uphold human rights, as well as to reinforce global
respect for its values.
We believe that the active participation of people
with special needs is one way that we can achieve equal
rights. We therefore want to fully support athletes with
special needs to participate in events geared especially
to them, for example, basketball.
We have been able to carry out activities related to
sport in many areas under the auspices of our Ministry of
Youth and Sports and the Bahrain Olympic Committee,
which is part of the comprehensive efforts of Bahrain’s
Deputy Prime Minister. We have been able to deliver
on all of those ideals through active participation in
sporting competitions at the regional and international
levels, which includes the participation of women and
disabled individuals.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain wishes to
underscore the importance of sport and its important
role in achieving sustainable development, respect for
all, the empowerment of women and the promotion of
health, education and social integration and inclusion.
Mr. Louati (Tunisia): At the outset, I would like
to express my sincere thanks to the Permanent Mission
of the Republic of Korea for its commendable and
successful efforts aimed at facilitating draft resolution
A/72/L.5, entitled “Building a peaceful and better
world through sport and the Olympic ideal”. Tunisia
welcomes the forthcoming adoption of this important
draft resolution, which is a testament to the crucial
role of sport in achieving peace and development. My
delegation has been a sponsor of the draft resolution
since the beginning of the process.
I would liek to recall that Tunisia and Monaco, as
Chairs of the Group of Friends of Sport for Development
and Peace, are committed to promoting all initiatives
that support the role of sport in building a better word
for humankind. Furthermore, at the national level,
the promotion of sport is an important component of
Tunisian development policy.
As we struggle to implement the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, it is our strong belief
that sport is an effective way to help to realize the
Sustainable Development Goals, particularly regarding
the promotion of education, health, women and youth
empowerment, social inclusion and peace. In this
regard, let me recall that sport is recognized as an
important enabler for sustainable development in

17-3764013/28

A/72/PV.48

the 2030 Agenda, particularly through its growing
contribution to the realization of development and
peace, its promotion of tolerance and respect and the
contribution it makes to the empowerment of women
and young people, individuals and communities. It
also contributes to the 2030 Agenda’s objectives in
relation to health, education and social inclusion. We
are all aware of the power of sport as an important
enabler of tolerance and understanding among peoples
and nations.
Recognizing the essential nature of the Olympic
Truce ideal in fostering peace, Tunisia underscores the
importance of cooperation among Members States in
implementing the draft resolution so as to realize the
values of the Olympic Truce around the world. I would
also like to acknowledge the valuable contribution of the
International Olympic Committee and the International
Paralympic Committee to the promotion of peace and
human understanding through sport and the Olympic
ideal, which also contributes to the fulfilment of the
objectives of the United Nations. Finally, I take this
opportunity to wish the Republic of Korea every success
in organizing the upcoming Olympic and Paralympic
Winter Games in 2018.
The President: In accordance with resolution 64/3,
of 19 October 2009, I now call on the President of the
International Olympic Committee.
Mr. Bach (International Olympic Committee): I
am grateful for this opportunity to address the General
Assembly once again. Today is an important time to
reaffirm the values on which both the United Nations and
the International Olympic Committee (IOC) are built.
I would like to very warmly thank you, Mr. President,
for having emphasized these shared values in such an
impressive way earlier this morning.
I would also like to thank the Government of the
Republic of Korea for submitting the Olympic Truce
draft resolution (A/72/L.5) ahead of the 2018 Olympic
Winter Games to be held in Pyeongchang. I thank the
Chairs of the Group of Friends of Sport for Development
and Peace, Monaco and Tunisia, for all their efforts in
this process. My gratitude also extends to the many
Member States that have already shown their support
for the draft resolution as sponsors.
The shared goal of the United Nations and the IOC
is to make the world a better and more peaceful place.
For the IOC, this means putting sport at the service of
the peaceful development of humankind. The Olympic
14/28

13/11/2017

Truce draft resolution before the Assembly today is an
expression of the shared commitment to humankind of
both our organizations.
In ancient Greece, the tradition of ekecheiria
involved a sacred truce among Greek city-States. The
Olympic Truce ensured a halt of hostilities, allowing
for the safe passage and participation of athletes and
spectators to the Olympic Games. Then, as now, the
Olympic Games are a symbol of hope and peace. In our
troubled times today, we see that these Olympic values
of peace, solidarity and respect are eternal values.
The draft resolution entitled “Building a peaceful
and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”
builds on that 3000-year-old tradition. Paragraph 1 of
the draft resolution L.5 urges Member States
“to ensure the safe passage, access and participation
of athletes, officials and all other accredited
persons taking part in the Olympic Winter Games
and Paralympic Winter Games”.
This specific call is of particular importance, especially
with regard to the time and place of the Olympic Winter
Games. By adopting this draft resolution, the General
Assembly recognizes once more the relevance of the
Olympic Games to fostering peace and understanding
in our fragile world.
Pierre de Coubertin, the founder of the modern
Olympic movement, once said: “The Olympic Games are
a pilgrimage to the past and an act of faith in the future.”
In the same spirit, the support of States Members of the
United Nations for this draft resolution is an expression
of faith by the international community in a peaceful
future for our world. The power of the Olympic Games
is their universality and global appeal. Based on our
principle of political neutrality, the Olympic Games
stand above and beyond all the political differences that
divide us. In our fragile world, which is drifting apart,
the Olympic Games have the power to unite humankind
in all its diversity. In our fragile world, polarization and
mistrust are growing. In our fragile world, the Olympic
Games always build bridges. They never erect walls.
Sport plays a unique role in putting the values of
peace, solidarity and respect into action. The important
role of sport in society was confirmed by the General
Assembly when recognizing sport in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development as an important enabler,
in particular to foster peace and understanding.
17-37640

13/11/2017

The last time that I addressed the General Assembly
was ahead of the adoption of resolution 70/4, the
Olympic Truce resolution for the Olympic Games Rio
2016 (see A/70/PV.39). On that occasion, I announced
the creation of the first-ever refugee Olympic team.
Their participation at the Olympic Games sent a
message of hope to the millions of refugees around
the world. It was a demonstration of how sport is this
important enabler. To make this a reality, we enjoyed the
strong cooperation of the United Nations, in particular
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
whose Office I would like to thank once more for its
continuing support.
Knowing that the theme of this seventy-second
session of the General Assembly is “Focusing on
people: striving for peace and a decent life for all
on a sustainable planet”, I would like to address the
Assembly for a moment as an Olympic athlete myself. I
do so because, for Olympic athletes, this draft resolution
will carry a very special significance and a deeply
personal one. It is the dream of every athlete to compete
at the Olympic Games. For us athletes, it is a once-in-alifetime experience. It is our moment to shine.
With the Olympic Truce resolution, the General
Assembly is creating the conditions for all athletes
to compete in peace. Only the States Members of the
United Nations can guarantee athletes’ safe passage to
the Olympic Games. They make it possible for all the
Olympic athletes to realize their dream of a lifetime.
One may ask why this should matter to the international
community. The answer is simple: the Olympic athletes
show the whole world that it is possible to compete with
each other while living peacefully together under one
roof at the same time.
In the Olympic Village, where the athletes live
during the competitions, we see our values of tolerance
and respect come to life. Athletes from all National
Olympic Committees, from every corner of the world,
live together in harmony under one roof. The athletes
live side by side in what is literally a global village.
They share their meals, experiences and emotions.
They are competitors in sport, but they share their
respect for each other in victory and defeat. That is why
the athletes are our best ambassadors for our ideals and
values. The athletes lead by example. Our fragile world
needs such symbols of friendship and tolerance more
than ever before.

A/72/PV.48

My sincere thanks for their great work go to
the Government of the Republic of Korea and to the
Pyeongchang Organizing Committee for the 2018
Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games under the
able leadership of President Lee Hee-beom. They have
created the best venues and conditions for the best
winter-sport athletes in our world. When Pyeongchang
welcomes the world, just 87 days from today, it will
be an important reminder that the Olympic Games are
always a time when the international community comes
together to celebrate our shared humanity.
The IOC would like to reiterate our invitation to
everyone to join us at the 2018 Olympic Winter Games.
In sport, we are all equal. That is why everyone is invited
to celebrate our shared values, the best of the human
spirit and our unity in diversity. The 2018 Olympic
Winter Games in Pyeongchang will give us hope in our
troubled times for a better future. The Olympic Games
demonstrate that our values of a shared humanity are
stronger than all the forces that want to divide us. With
the support of the delegations here today, the Olympic
spirit will come alive right here among the nations of
the world gathered at the General Assembly. This is
another example of the fact that Olympic principles are
United Nations principles. On behalf of all the athletes
in the world, I thank the Assembly very much for
sharing this Olympic spirit.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/72/L.5, entitled “Building a peaceful and
better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that, since the submission of the
draft resolution A/72/L.5, and in addition to those
delegations listed in the document, the following
countries have also become sponsors: Afghanistan,
Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Colombia, Cuba, the
Czech Republic, Dominica, Denmark, Djibouti, the
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, the Gambia, Georgia,
Grenada, Guyana, Iraq, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kiribati,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,

17-3764015/28

A/72/PV.48

Maldives, Mali, the Marshall Islands, Mauritius, the
Federated States of Micronesia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand,
the Niger, Nigeria, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, the Philippines, Portugal, the Republic of
Moldova, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
South Sudan, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Tajikistan,
Timor-Leste, Uganda, the United Arab Emirates, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.5?
Draft resolution A/72/L.5 was adopted (resolution
72/6).
The President: I thank our guests for joining us
this morning and once again express my best wishes
to the Republic of Korea for the twenty-third Winter
Olympic Games.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 11.
Agenda items 120 and 121
Implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
The President: The agenda item for our meeting
today refers to the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly. In simple terms, we are here to
explore how to strengthen the role of this body, improve
the work we do and best address the interests of the
Governments and, more importantly, the people we are
all here to represent. This is therefore a discussion that
affects all of us.
I want to express my sincere thanks to Ambassadors
Drobnjak and Nusseibeh, of Croatia and the United
Arab Emirates, respectively, for their dedicated work
as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the General Assembly during the
seventy-first session. I am confident that all Member
States will offer their full support to Ambassador
Drobnjak, as well as to his newly appointed co-Chair,
Ambassador Mejía Vélez of Colombia, in the session
ahead. I want to make four main points today.
16/28

13/11/2017

The first is that this process does work. Over the
past few years, we have made achievements. A major
example is, of course, the selection and appointment of
the Secretary-General. For decades, this was a secret
process; however, Member States said no to business as
usual. That is why, in 2016, things were done differently.
For the first time, the world had an opportunity to
review and even interact with the candidates for the top
position at the United Nations. Member States have also
mandated me to continue this trend of transparency and
inclusiveness in the selection of my successor.
The introduction of an oath of office and code of
ethics for the President of the General Assembly were
further powerful achievements. Now, no President can
ever claim that he or she is ignorant of the standards
and responsibility attached to this Office. Another
tangible result was seen through the adoption of
resolutions that set clear time frames for elections.
These have helped Member States to better prepare for
their roles, including as members of the Economic and
Social Council and as non-permanent members of the
Security Council.
My second point is more personal. I am not here just
to call for action from Member States; action is needed
from me as well. I was the second president in history
to take the oath of office, and I follow this oath closely
as I work to uphold the high standards of transparency
and ethics set by my two predecessors. This work
has taken three main forms. The first is through full
disclosure related to the financing, staffing and travel
of my Office; all such information is available on my
website. I will soon become the first President of the
General Assembly to publish a summary of my financial
disclosure statement online, which I hope will serve as
a concrete measure for stepping up the commitment
of this Office to transparency. The second way relates
to the activities of my Office. I publish my agenda on
my website every day. My spokesperson also gives
daily briefings to the media. These efforts are not just
geared towards transparency, they are also intended to
promote awareness and interest in the activities of the
General Assembly.
The third way is through interaction with other parts
of the United Nations system. I intend to make full use
of the General Committee, as requested by resolution
71/323. I met informally with the Committee before the
start of the regular session to allow for a frank exchange
of views. Our third meeting of the session is scheduled
to take place in December. Additionally, I hold monthly
17-37640

13/11/2017

meetings with the Secretary-General and the presidents
of the Security Council and Economic and Social
Council to strengthen coherence throughout our work.
I want to use the opportunity presented by this meeting
to stress my commitment to the revitalization process.
My third point today is that we need to look
ahead. We will discuss many important issues during
the seventy-second session. Three issues that may be
considered include, first, conduct related to election
campaigns; secondly, the strengthening of interaction
between Permanent Missions and the Secretariat; and
thirdly, options for establishing a longer-term and
more transparent rotation of the Chairs of the Main
Committees. The issue of reform will also be high on
our agenda, which will provide us with an opportunity
to enhance the General Assembly’s engagement with
and role throughout the United Nations system.
When looking ahead, I want to point to the gap
between the level of mandated activities and events and
the capacity of the United Nations system to support
them. My Office is grappling with this challenge, and I
urge the Assembly to address it. On a related note, I want
to highlight the lack of institutional memory within
this Office. Investment in human capital is needed if
Member States wish to maintain standards of work and
ensure smooth transitions between presidencies.
As I have said before, action is needed from me as
well. I have launched a series of morning dialogues,
which will target all States Members of the United
Nations. These dialogues are intended to complement
the ongoing processes of the seventy-second
session, such as the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly.
Finally, I want to remind all of us of the
responsibility on our shoulders. The General Assembly
is the most representative body of the United Nations. It
gives all 193 Member States a voice and a vote. It deals
with all three pillars of the work of the United Nations:
peace and security, development and human rights. It
also draws in all actors and entities from across the
United Nations system. That is why the impact of the
work of the General Assembly extends far beyond this
Hall. In fact, what we do here affects the credibility and
outcomes of the United Nations as a whole. Improving
the way we work is therefore not only in the interest of
all of us here today — it is also in the interest of people
in their homes and communities, thousands of miles
away from here.

A/72/PV.48

I believe that this Hall should be a place for dialogue,
a place we should enter with ideas and proposals and
exit from with new perspectives and achievements.
This is a place where the interests of all 193 Member
States and the billions of people they represent can
be advanced.
The General Assembly cannot be a place to advance
our own interests. It cannot be a place we come to with
nothing but red lines and static positions, even if that
might be a tempting option, because it could lead to a
win for just one person or one State or one group. But
overall, we will all lose. I urge everyone to bear that
in mind as we discuss the revitalization of the work of
this body.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries (NAM), which is one of the largest crossregional groups, consisting of 120 member States.
Let me say that all ceremonial protocol, including
appreciation to the co-Chairs and to the President of
the General Assembly, is respected.
We reiterate that the revitalization of the work
of the General Assembly is a critical component of
a comprehensive reform of the United Nations. A
reinvigorated General Assembly would significantly
contribute to strengthening the wider United Nations
system, improving international governance and
enhancing multilateralism. A thorough evaluation of
the status of the implementation of General Assembly
resolutions and a clear identification of the underlying
causes behind any lack of implementation are vital.
We fully adhere to the letter and spirit of the
consensus resolutions 69/321, 70/305 and 71/323, which
are now the cornerstones for the evolution of the reform
of the United Nations. In this regard, the Movement
recalls the decision taken in paragraph 4 of resolutions
68/307, 69/321, 70/305 and 71/323 to continue the
process of the comprehensive review of the inventory
of the resolutions on the revitalization of the General
Assembly and the status of their implementation.
However, we also take note of the fact that the report of
the Secretary-General contained in document A/70/681
has not yet been implemented.
During the current session we wish to emphasize
the following. First, with respect to the process of
selecting and appointing the Secretary-General of
the United Nations, the appointment should continue
to be transparent, democratic and inclusive of all

17-3764017/28

A/72/PV.48

Member States, so as to enable the General Assembly
to participate effectively and efficiently in the selection
and appointment process. The Non-Aligned Movement
proudly recalls the role played by the General Assembly
under Article 97 of the Charter of the United Nations
and its consensual resolutions 69/321, 70/305 and
71/323. We should not forget that the Secretary-General
will be appointed and selected by the General Assembly
upon the recommendation of the Security Council.
We find the implementation of paragraph 42 of
resolution 69/321, paragraph 36 of resolution 70/305 and
paragraph 56 of resolution 71/323 on the organization
of informal dialogues to be encouraging. While
welcoming the signing of the joint letter by which the
Presidents of the General Assembly and the Security
Council formally launch the beginning of the process,
it is the clear understanding of the Non-Aligned
Movement that whatever the stage of the presentation
of the candidates, the new procedure, as outlined in the
joint letter of the President of the General Assembly
and President of the Security Council, will always be
followed. Furthermore, NAM calls on the Presidents
of the General Assembly and the Security Council
to continue to hold timely informal meetings for
an exchange of views with candidates presented by
Member States.
We also believe, as suggested in the 2011 report
(A/66/34) of the Joint Inspection Unit (JIU), that
prevailing practices in the election of executive heads
in other United Nations system organizations could
also be suitable for the appointment of the SecretaryGeneral. We therefore recommend considering existing
practices. Moreover, NAM would like to emphasize the
issue of promises made by candidates in exchange for
the support of the permanent members of the Security
Council, which is described in the 2011 JIU report.
In that regard, we welcomed the significant number
of women candidates, as stipulated in paragraph 44
of resolution 71/323. There was a discussion about
the desirability for the Security Council to consider
providing a plural number of candidates to the General
Assembly for the appointment of the Secretary-General
in future. We emphasize the need to re-examine the
idea. We reiterate that the process of appointment of
the Secretary-General by the General Assembly should
be carried out in full compliance with the General
Assembly’s mandate, which includes the timely
submission of the relevant draft resolution, which
should be preceded by wide and extensive consultations
18/28

13/11/2017

with all Member States, as well as ensuring the action
of the General Assembly on the recommendation of the
Security Council, including by secret ballot, in full and
strict conformity with rule 141 of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly.
We take note of the request made by the Secretariat to
all Member States encouraging nominating candidates
to supplement the Secretary-General’s search, in order
to ensure a wide pool of candidates for positions at the
level of Under-Secretary-General, and welcoming the
nomination of women candidates. Bearing in mind the
importance of the best practices and lessons learned
from the last selection and appointment process, the
Non-Aligned Movement is of the view that the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of
the General Assembly should consider developing a
compendium of those best practices for future reference.
Secondly, with regard to the strengthening of the
institutional memory of the Office of the President of
the General Assembly, NAM finds it encouraging that
an oath of office and a code of ethics for the President
of the General Assembly have been adopted for the
first time in the Assembly’s history. The expansion
of activities of the General Assembly has made the
President’s presence and active participation essential
all year long. NAM also reiterates the need to assign
additional posts to the Office of the President of the
General Assembly on a permanent basis. Furthermore,
we also appreciate the Member States that have
provided concrete support to the Office of the President
of the General Assembly by seconding staff members
from their respective missions.
NAM also attaches great importance to ensuring
successful annual transitions between the Presidents
of the General Assembly, and requests that outgoing
Presidents brief their successors on lessons learned and
best practices. NAM expresses its support for effectively
and genuinely strengthening the institutional memory
of the Office of the President of the General Assembly,
as well as for allocating sufficient human and financial
resources to the Office from the regular budget of the
United Nations.
Thirdly, with respect to the role and authority of
the General Assembly, NAM reaffirms that working
methods are only one step towards more substantive
improvements aimed at restoring and enhancing
the Assembly’s role and authority. We affirm the
importance of preserving the intergovernmental,
17-37640

13/11/2017

inclusive and democratic nature of the United Nations
and of consulting with Member States within the
Organization, as well as of ensuring strict respect
on the part of Member States for the Charter-based
prerogatives of the United Nations principal organs,
especially the General Assembly. We also support the
initiative aimed at ensuring proper implementation of
the Charter of the United Nations with respect to the
functional relationship between its main organs, in
particular the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council. At the Ad Hoc Working Group’s most
recent meeting, there was a discussion of the need to
establish, within its framework, a standing mechanism
for dialogue between the Permanent Missions and the
Secretariat, with a view to considering further required
steps. We look forward to continuing that discussion.
Fourthly, on the working methods of the General
Assembly, we welcomed paragraph 51 of resolution
71/323, which notes with appreciation the cost-neutral
proposals on the possible changes to the format,
production and editing of the Journal of the United
Nations. We also welcomed its paragraphs 47 and
48, on communicating the names of candidates for
election to the Secretariat 48 hours prior to an election
where possible, as well as printing names on the ballot
papers, and the decision that, on the day of elections,
the campaign materials in the General Assembly Hall
or the Committee meeting room should be limited to
a single page of information regarding the candidates.
NAM would like to recall here that the General
Assembly has encouraged its Main Committees to
continue considering and making proposals on their
working methods during the current session. In that
connection, we reiterate the importance of ensuring
the intergovernmental and inclusive nature of these
discussions on working methods, which must engage
all delegations. We believe that more time should be
dedicated to the negotiations on this draft resolution.
Resolution 71/323 was adopted by consensus. However,
we continue to insist that more flexibility should
be the rule for all Member States in the next round
of negotiations.
NAM calls for measures to enhance public
awareness of the role and activities of the General
Assembly and encourages improved media reporting of
its work. We welcome paragraph 15 of resolution 71/323,
which calls on the President of the General Assembly to
organize debates in close coordination with the General
Committee and Member States, including with regard

A/72/PV.48

to their frequency. We believe that meetings held at the
same time as the general debate of the General Assembly
must be kept to an absolute minimum of only the most
critical, in order to preserve and strengthen the sanctity
of the general debate, a view reflected in paragraph
34 of resolution 71/323. Similarly, where all the highlevel thematic debates convened by the President of the
General Assembly are concerned, we need to improve
the coordination of the revitalization process with the
work of the Committee on Conferences.
Mr. Djani
the Chair.

(Indonesia),

Vice-President,

took

We should also take a closer look at the process
of arrangements for holding debates in the General
Assembly and the Security Council and their follow-up,
in view of the number of participating representatives.
No oral statement should exceed the agreed-on number
of minutes, and full versions can be circulated in the
room or posted online. Organizers can make the record
of the proceedings available. Furthermore, we propose
holding briefings, as necessary, with the Chairs of
the Main Committees, as well as a meeting with the
Secretary-General. NAM also calls for improved
monitoring of the implementation of past resolutions.
In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement
reaffirms its commitment to contributing effectively
and constructively to the work of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly. We hope for the same approach from
other delegations and would like to humbly recall
that we speak in the name of 120 member States. In
addition, NAM stands ready to cooperate with you,
Mr. President, the co-Chairs and the Secretary-General
in strengthening the role of the General Assembly as the
chief deliberative policymaking organ. We will continue
to provide support aimed at achieving inclusiveness,
transparency and efficiency in the United Nations.
Mrs. Azucena (Philippines): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), which consists of 10 member
States — Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia,
Myanmar, Singapore, Thailand, Viet Nam and my own
country, the Philippines.
ASEAN would like to convey its deepest sympathies
and condolences to the families of the victims of the
earthquakes in Iran and Iraq and in Costa Rica.

17-3764019/28

A/72/PV.48

ASEAN also aligns itself with the statement just
delivered by the representative of Algeria on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
ASEAN would like to congratulate the Permanent
Representatives of the United Arab Emirates and
Croatia on their excellent work in the past year as
co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly,
as well as the Permanent Representative of Colombia,
the incoming co-Chair together with the Ambassador
of Croatia, and commends the progress they have made,
as reflected in resolution 71/323, adopted by consensus
on 8 September.
ASEAN would also like to reiterate its profound
appreciation to Mr. Peter Thomson, President of the
General Assembly at its seventy-first session, for
his steadfast commitment to moving the agenda on
revitalization forward and especially for his advocacy for
accountability, transparency and openness. We would
also like to once again congratulate the President of the
Assembly at its seventy-second session, Mr. Miroslav
Lajčák. We believe that under his leadership the process
of revitalization will yield more positive results.
ASEAN
believes
that
the
revitalization
process will make the Organization more effective,
transparent, inclusive and fit for purpose. In the words
of Secretary-General António Guterres, we have a
shared responsibility to make the United Nations more
effective and responsive to those we serve. We would
therefore like to make the following key points on the
four thematic clusters under the revitalization process.
With regard to the role and authority of the General
Assembly, ASEAN reiterates its call for all Member
States to work together to ensure that the General
Assembly is able to fulfil its proper role as the chief
deliberative, policymaking and representative organ of
the United Nations.
With respect to the Assembly’s working methods,
ASEAN joins Member States on the recommendation
to enhance synergies and coherence, reduce overlap
where it exists on the Assembly’s agenda, and introduce
appropriate measures to raise public awareness of the
Assembly’s role and activities.
Regarding the selection and appointment of the
Secretary-General and other executive heads, ASEAN is
of the view that resolution 71/323 must be implemented
faithfully to ensure that the selection process is
20/28

13/11/2017

transparent and inclusive and that the best possible
candidate is selected for the position of SecretaryGeneral. We also emphasize that the SecretaryGeneral must exercise independence in selecting senior
officials with adherence to the highest standards in
such appointments, while ensuring equal and fair
distribution based on gender and geographic balance.
With regard to strengthening the institutional
memory of the Office of the President of the General
Assembly, ASEAN stands ready to support the agenda
and calls for the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of resolution 71/323.
ASEAN welcomed resolution 71/323’s reaffirmation
of the importance and benefits of interaction between
the United Nations and international and regional
forums and organizations that deal with matters of
global concern to the international community. We
take note of the report to the President of the General
Assembly on the strategic alignment of future sessions
of the General Assembly with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. ASEAN also recognizes that
complementarities exist between the 2030 Agenda and
ASEAN’s Community Vision 2025. We continue to
recognize the importance of dialogue and cooperation
between ASEAN and the United Nations in taking
forward the work of enhancing such complementarities,
as reflected in the ASEAN-United Nations Plan of
Action for the period from 2016 to 2020.
ASEAN reaffirms its commitment to engaging
effectively and constructively with all Member States
in order to ensure success for the Ad Hoc Working
Group in its task of revitalizing the work of the General
Assembly. With the political will of all Member States,
not only will we be able to achieve concrete results,
we will also be able to promote greater efficiency,
transparency and accountability in the United Nations.
Revitalizing the work of the General Assembly under
the four thematic clusters will contribute to the strategic
evolution of the United Nations as an important platform
where the universal values of equality, tolerance and
human dignity prevail.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Ms. Adamson (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. The candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
17-37640

13/11/2017

Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
I would like to thank the President for convening
today’s plenary meeting. We look forward to working
with him on the negotiations on the draft resolution
on the subject during the coming weeks. I would like
to thank Mr. Peter Thomson, the President of the
Assembly at its seventy-first session, for his oversight
of and engagement in the revitalization process of the
General Assembly in the past year. I would also like to
extend my sincere gratitude to the previous co-Chairs
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization
of the Work of the General Assembly, Mr. Vladimir
Drobnjak and Mrs. Lana Zaki Nusseibeh, the
Permanent Representatives of Croatia and the United
Arab Emirates. We are sure their excellent work will
continue under Mr. Drobnjak’s ongoing leadership. We
wish him and the new co-Chair success for this year
and would like to express our support for the upcoming
work in the hope of continuing the significant progress
made in the previous session.
The recent resolutions on revitalizing the General
Assembly have been groundbreaking. New and
innovative ideas have been introduced, such as those
on the process for the selection and appointment of
the Secretary-General, the strengthening of the Office
of the President of the General Assembly, including
increasing its accountability, and most recently the
decision to improve the Assembly’s working methods.
Resolutions on revitalizing the Assembly represent a
success for all of us, the United Nations and Member
States alike, and serve as proof of how much can be
achieved through constructive, reform-oriented and
consensus-based work. It is a result of the willingness
of Member States to engage in a thorough, substantive
debate on the numerous issues that are vital to the
further improvement and enrichment of the work of the
General Assembly.
For the EU and its member States, effective
multilateralism, with the United Nations at its core,
remains key. We therefore continue to strongly
support the Secretary-General in his reform efforts.
Strengthening the Organization, and doing so based
on effective and sustainable funding, in line with real
capacities to pay and geared to increasing efficiency and
accountability, remains a top priority. In that context, we
remain committed to revitalization and to supporting

A/72/PV.48

efforts aimed at strengthening the role and authority
of the General Assembly, in line with the Charter of
the United Nations and the relevant resolutions. That is
especially needed in the context of the global challenges
that the world is facing today. An unceasing effort to
find new and creative ways to work is essential if we
are to achieve more effective delivery of mandates and
the sustainable use of resources. Revitalizing the work
of the General Assembly is clearly foundational for the
overall reform of the United Nations.
Focusing on the negotiations ahead of us, we
believe that the emphasis on the current session’s draft
resolution should be on consolidating the work achieved
so far. We remain committed to contributing to improve
the efficiency and effectiveness of the workings of the
General Assembly. I would like to assure the Assembly
that the EU and its member States will continue to
engage in a constructive manner in the proceedings of
the Ad Hoc Working Group.
Ms. Zahir (Maldives): I would first like to thank
Ambassadors Vladimir Drobnjak of Croatia and
María Emma Mejía Vélez of Colombia for agreeing
to serve as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group
on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly, and to thank Ms. Mejía Vélez’s predecessor,
Ambassador Nusseibeh of the United Arab Emirates,
for her leadership and valuable contribution, together
with Mr. Drobnjak, during the previous session of this
ongoing process.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report under this agenda item. I would once again
like to impress upon the Secretariat the importance of
circulating such reports to the membership in a timely
manner so as to allow Member States to be able to
review and discuss them in depth. That could be one
of the crucial adjustments that we can make to enhance
our working methods.
The Maldives applauds the small but significant
strides that this process has been able to achieve so
far. During the recently concluded elections held in the
General Assembly Hall, the campaign materials and
other items were restricted to one piece per candidate.
That was a welcome change that we believe restored
the atmosphere in this great Hall to one reflecting the
seriousness of the business and proper decorum.
We believe that the mandate of the Ad Hoc Working
Group for the seventy-second session goes a bit too
far. We support considering the potential concept and

17-3764021/28

A/72/PV.48

scope of conduct in guiding Member States’ conduct of
election campaigns with a view to improving standards
of transparency, accountability and equity. We believe
that not only would such considerations ensure the
election of the best person for the right job, they would
also ensure that we uphold the principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. We believe that current
traditions leave small countries at a disadvantage.
Every country, regardless of its size or might and
certainly of how much it spends on a campaign, should
have a fair chance to serve on the Charter bodies and
other entities of the United Nations. Every voice,
especially those in special situations, should be heard.
How can we claim to have their concerns answered
without their representation? We therefore believe
that the same standards of transparency, fairness, and
accountability that we expect in our domestic elections
should be observed here at the United Nations. We hope
that further work will be done on that issue during the
current session.
The whole selection and appointment process of
the Secretary-General, marked by unprecedented levels
of transparency and inclusiveness, was yet another
example of the small but critical changes that are
resulting from this revitalization process. We have also
begun to see more transparency and accountability on
the part of the President of the General Assembly and
the Office of the President. Such steps serve to enhance
the integrity of the General Assembly. We have also
seen an improvement in the conduct of meetings, with
better management of time and services.
We believe that we can improve things even more
by looking at the work we do. If we think about the real
impact of the resolutions we adopt, the sad reality is that
many are not properly implemented. We believe that
we should consider the reasons why resolutions with
actionable mandates are not executed, as well as the
fact that it is quality, not just quantity, that determines
success. That goes hand in hand with the bigger and
more complex area of the revitalization process that
we have only just begun to deal with — aligning
the work of the Assembly with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
The General Assembly can become more effective
if we enhance coherence among the Committees of
the General Assembly as well as between the work
of the Assembly itself and that of the Economic and
Social Council and the Security Council. While each
has its own mandates and specific agendas, we have
22/28

13/11/2017

recognized the linkages between issues and agreed on
the need for a holistic approach. That is the idea behind
the interlinkages within the Sustainable Development
Goals — that economic progress, social prosperity and
the protection of the environment are linked; peace
and development are linked; and the realization of
human rights is important for achieving meaningful
development. We must also ensure that the funds and
programmes under the Economic and Social Council,
the regional commissions and other subsidiary bodies
work towards common milestones and strategic goals.
We must continue the work already begun. We
must analyse the gaps, overlaps and duplications, if any,
and ensure that we not only have all aspects covered,
but that this is done in a manner that will benefit the
process the most. We cannot think of revitalization in
silos. In order for this to work, we must honestly review
every part of our Organization, because the fastchanging global context demands that we keep abreast
or be seen as no longer relevant.
In considering the improvement of our work here
in the General Assembly, we must ensure that every
Member State in this Hall has an equal opportunity to
contribute and be represented. The principle of equity
must be the cornerstone of our work. The Maldives
believes in the promise of the United Nations and in
the beauty of multilateralism. We are making strides,
but we can and should do more. We should do all we
can to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the
Organization, so that what we do here makes a real
impact at home, in our countries. We can and should
examine the various ways and means by which we, the
international community, can make a difference and
play a part in crafting shared solutions for our shared
common destiny.
Ms. Velichko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): All
protocol observed. That way of addressing such aspects
of protocol is one of the latest innovations in the list of
agreements that resulted from the most recent session
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of
the Work of the General Assembly, and Belarus would
like to see it entrenched.
Belarus aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of Algeria on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Belarus welcomes the appointment of Ms. María
Emma Mejía Vélez, Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations, as co-Chair of the
17-37640

13/11/2017

Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
Work of the General Assembly. We firmly believe
that Ms. Mejía Vélez, together with Mr. Vladimir
Drobnjak, Permanent Representative of Croatia, will
give new impetus to the Group’s work, and we wish
them every success.
At the end of the Assembly’s previous session,
we agreed to improve the mechanism for dialogue
between the Permanent Missions of Member States
and the Secretariat, and we look forward to seeing that
idea implemented in practice. We believe that regular
thematic events based on that process will help to
reduce the technical burden on Member States in their
interactions with the Secretariat and give them timely
information on the Secretariat’s planning of initiatives
designed to streamline its work. That will help build
a system of predictable and trustworthy interactions
that is convenient for Member States as well as the
Secretariat. We would like to note that some positive
moves have already been made in that process, with
the Secretariat beginning to consult with missions
when it is taking decisions that will affect them. We
also commend the efficient response of the Department
for General Assembly and Conference Management to
States’ requests and Under-Secretary-General Pollard’s
personal involvement in those efforts. The initiative of
the Department of Management in piloting a one-stopshopping option deserves special mention, and the
opportunity for States to comment on the mechanism
as it is being developed increases our optimism about
its potential success.
We are also eagerly awaiting the roll-out in 2018
of a new version of the Journal of the United Nations,
with reorganized content and a user-friendly digital
interface. Member States have been asking to see this
unique record of all the work that takes place within
the United Nations improved, made responsive to the
requirements of a modern digital society and published
in all six official languages of the United Nations for
a long time. We hope that the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management will follow
the example of the Department of Management and
give missions the opportunity to take part in the
work of developing this new product. We believe that
only by combining the efforts of Member States and
the Secretariat will we be able to create a truly userfriendly yet informative Journal of the United Nations.
Today, when we have finished considering this
agenda item, the impending election of five members

A/72/PV.48

of the International Court of Justice should be
another opportunity to demonstrate our successful
implementation of ways to improve United Nations
election campaigns, based on last year’s decision
to introduce a new format for ballots and limit the
distribution in the General Assembly Hall of campaign
materials about candidates, including souvenirs. These
changes will unquestionably help Member States to
stay within the bounds of protocol and avoid confusion
in filling out ballots, which should have a positive
effect on the outcome of elections. The next step in that
process, as provided for in resolution 71/323, is defining
the concept and scope of a code of conduct regulating
Member States’ conduct of election campaigns, with a
view to improving their transparency, accountability
and fairness.
In conclusion, we would like to note that the
effectiveness of the General Assembly’s decision-making
depends directly on its ability to respond promptly
to today’s challenges and threats. For that, we need
a competent, relevant agenda rather than the one we
actually possess, which was adopted more than 70 years
ago and has not been seriously revised since, while the
number of items on it has ballooned. The current agenda
includes items that have long ago lost their relevance
and are simply bumped automatically from session
to session with no discussion. In that regard, Belarus
would like to propose that at its next meeting, the Ad
Hoc Working Group consider streamlining the General
Assembly’s agenda by reducing the number of items on
it. That will save resources and time and improve the
effectiveness of the Assembly’s decision-making and
our confidence in it.
Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): Indonesia would
first like to convey its deepest sympathies and
condolences to the families of the victims of the
powerful earthquakes that struck the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Iraq and Costa Rica this weekend, as well as to
the Governments and peoples of those countries, and
wishes the injured a speedy recovery.
While observing all protocol and congratulating the
incoming co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
the Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly,
as well as assuring them of our full cooperation and
support, Indonesia reiterates that it will continue to
contribute actively to revitalizing the Assembly.
Indonesia associates itself with the statements
made earlier by the representatives of Algeria, on behalf

17-3764023/28

A/72/PV.48

of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, and the
Philippines, on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations.
Our shared global challenges require a comprehensive
and collaborative response. There is no better platform
for that than the General Assembly, which has the
necessary scope and is unique in representing all
Member States and in its ability to harness their
support. Given the deep connection between the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the concept
of sustaining peace, the Assembly has a critical role
in advancing those two agendas in a coherent and
effective manner. That is why we believe that the
work of the Ad Hoc Working Group should also be
linked to other reform efforts — such as reform of the
Security Council and the alignment exercise aimed at
enhancing synergy between the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council — in order to further
the 2030 Agenda, the restructuring of the peace and
security architecture and other United Nations reforms
in the area of management.
Global peace and stability will be best addressed
when the three pillars of peace and security, development
and human rights are acting in unison and are firmly
supported by everyone. Indonesia is pleased that the
trends in the Assembly’s functions have generally been
upward and positive, particularly since the adoption
of resolution 69/321. It is vital to ensure that this
momentum is sustained. Both inside and outside the
Ad Hoc Working Group, Member States should work
together to ensure that the provisions of resolution
69/321, and other resolutions on the issue of revitalizing
the Assembly, are implemented. Indonesia will present
its views on the four clusters in detail when the Ad Hoc
Working Group convenes specific thematic debates.
For now, we will mention a few additional points.
First, while we very much welcomed the
improvements to the selection and appointment
process for the ninth Secretary-General, we must
involve Member States more meaningfully in future.
In that context, it is important to ensure that the best
practices and lessons learned from that experience are
documented while they are fresh in our memories. That
will make a good reference point for the doubtless many
new diplomats who will have joined the United Nations
by the time the next selection process takes place.
Secondly, Indonesia fully supports the expansion
of constructive dialogue among countries to facilitate
24/28

13/11/2017

international peace and welfare. However, as was
alluded to in resolution 71/323, we should rationalize
the number of high-level events. The focus should be
more on genuinely meeting our commitments so as to
achieve concrete results on the ground. We also agree
that the Secretary-General should be requested to inform
the membership about any constraints that prevent the
Secretariat from implementing any provisions of the
resolutions on revitalization.
Thirdly, it is vital to improve the working methods
of the Main Committees, the Assembly and its
subsidiary bodies by instituting good practices such as
streamlining resolutions and meetings, communicating
the names of candidates for election in advance,
instituting a code of conduct for election campaigns
and ensuring timely handovers between outgoing and
incoming officials.
Fourthly, as the role of the Office of the President
of the General Assembly in dealing with international
issues is growing, it should be receiving corresponding
support, including through the ongoing practice of
seconding personnel from Permanent Missions. We
also see merit in beginning the President’s term one
week earlier so that the President can better prepare for
the high-level debates.
Finally, in the selection of United Nations
executive heads and the appointment of other senior
positions at Headquarters and in the field, we stress
the importance of fielding well-qualified, merit-based
candidates, ensuring a gender balance and broad
geographic distribution, particularly from countries
whose nationals are underrepresented, including small
islands and developing and least developed countries.
Countries that have a proven track record in contributing
to the United Nations, including police- and troopcontributing countries, should also be represented
in the Secretariat. No country or group of countries
should have a monopoly or disproportionate number of
nationals among the United Nations senior staff. Let us
together enable the General Assembly to perform its role
fully. For its part, Indonesia will work tirelessly in the
Ad Hoc Working Group and other forums to contribute
to and support steps that meaningfully strengthen the
Assembly and its mechanisms.
Mr. Teo (Singapore): I would first like to convey our
deepest sympathies to the Governments and peoples of
the Islamic Republic of Iran and the Republic of Iraq for
the earthquake that struck this weekend, sadly claiming
17-37640

13/11/2017

the lives of many and causing widespread destruction.
We would like to express our heartfelt condolences to
the survivors and their families, and wish the injured a
speedy recovery.
I would like to thank the President for convening
this debate early in his presidency and giving priority to
the issue of the revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly. I join previous speakers in congratulating
the Ambassadors of Croatia and Colombia on their
appointments as the new co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of
the General Assembly at its seventy-second session. We
are confident that they will continue to lead the work of
the Ad Hoc Working Group in an inclusive, transparent
and efficient manner, and that we will make further
progress under their leadership.
The revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly is an important issue for many States,
including my own. As a small State, Singapore has
been a strong supporter of a more efficient, effective
and accountable United Nations and General Assembly.
Our work here must reinforce the Assembly’s role and
authority, and we have consistently championed its
revitalization. Over the years, the work of the General
Assembly has undoubtedly increased, not simply in
volume, but also in scope and depth. Its revitalization
is therefore crucial to ensuring that it keeps abreast of
the challenges of the day and is able to discharge its
responsibilities as the main deliberative, policymaking
and representative organ of the United Nations.
In the midst of the slow and difficult negotiations
elsewhere in the United Nations, the work of the Ad
Hoc Working Group has stood out as a lodestar of
progress. Over the past three years, we have adopted by
consensus three milestone resolutions that collectively
serve to strengthen the authority and credibility of the
General Assembly and the Office of the President of
the General Assembly. We have made further progress
this year under the able leadership of the Permanent
Representatives of Croatia and the United Arab Emirates,
and I take this opportunity to congratulate them. The
decisions taken this year have led to quick and practical
improvements on the ground. For example, we now
have clearly printed ballot papers with new guidelines
on the distribution of campaign materials on election
day, improving the election process in the General
Assembly. Thanks to those improved procedures, none
of the votes cast in the recent Human Rights Council
elections were invalid. For my delegation, that was a

A/72/PV.48

visible demonstration of how the work of the Ad Hoc
Working Group can make a positive impact on our work
here in the General Assembly. We also welcome the
other improvements that have resulted from decisions
adopted in resolution 71/323, including many of our
proposals, such as the instituting of handover meetings
between the outgoing and incoming teams of the
Chairs of the Main Committees. Such decisions will
help to improve the efficiency, complementarity and
transparency of the work of the General Assembly for
the benefit of all, particularly small States.
While the progress achieved over the past few years
is commendable, we must not rest on our laurels. It is
important for us to build on that positive momentum,
and continue our efforts to improve the work of the
General Assembly and its processes on a basis of
consensus. First, we must build on the improvements
that we have made in the working methods of the
Assembly, notably the election process. In that regard,
we look forward to formulating a code of conduct to
guide the conduct of Member States during election
campaigns. Our overriding goal is to ensure that current
election campaign practices at the United Nations do not
inadvertently lead to spiraling costs as each competing
delegation tries to outdo other campaigns, which
puts smaller developing countries at a disadvantage.
Campaigns should ideally focus on the quality of the
candidates and their ability to contribute to the work of
the body in which they are seeking membership, not on
gifts or lavish receptions.
Secondly, improvements in the selection and
appointment process of United Nations officials must
not stop with the appointment of the Secretary-General
but should extend to all other senior appointments
within the Organization. We call on the SecretaryGeneral to make appointments based on merit, while
taking into account gender and geographical balance
and also ensuring the highest standards of efficiency,
competence and integrity. There should no monopoly on
senior posts in the United Nations system by nationals
of any State or group of countries.
Thirdly, we must continue our efforts to ensure
that the work of the General Assembly is fit for
purpose. Our priority is to ensure that the agendas of
the General Assembly and its Main Committees, and
of the Economic and Social Council, work coherently
to support the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, which is important for many
developing countries. We therefore look forward to

17-3764025/28

A/72/PV.48

working with the President, as a member both of the
General Committee and an interested delegation, in
developing practical proposals aimed at addressing
gaps and duplication in the agenda of the General
Assembly as they relate to the 2030 Agenda.
We have made some suggestions aimed at
increasing the progress already being made in the Ad
Hoc Working Group. My delegation will work with
the President, as well as the new co-Chairs and other
delegations, in our joint endeavour to further enhance
the transparency, accountability, efficiency and
legitimacy of the General Assembly.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): At the outset, I want to
say that our delegation is deeply grieved by the news
of the earthquake that struck the region bordering the
Islamic Republic of Iran and the Republic of Iraq. We
would like to offer our deepest condolences to the
bereaved and to express our heartfelt sympathies to all
of the people who have been affected.
I would like to begin by thanking the President
of the General Assembly for convening today’s
meeting. I would also like to express my appreciation
for the President’s statement at the opening of the
seventy-second session of the General Assembly (see
A/72/PV.3), in which he clearly defined the importance
of the revitalization process and showed his intention to
further promote that process in the context of reform of
the United Nations.
Concerning the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly, Japan welcomed the adoption of
resolution 71/323. Our delegation would like to express
its sincere gratitude to Ambassadors Drobnjak of
Croatia and Nusseibeh of the United Arab Emirates
for their hard work and skilful chairship of the Ad
Hoc Working Group. We welcome the reappointment
of Ambassador Drobnjak and the appointment of
Ambassador Mejía Vélez as co-Chairs of the Working
Group during the current session, and are looking
forward to collaborating closely with them.
With regard to the implementation of United
Nations resolutions, our delegation would like to
emphasize that the implementation of General Assembly
resolutions, including those related to revitalization,
is critical to enhancing the Assembly’s efficiency and
effectiveness, and we also underline that it is Member
States’ responsibility to implement them. We have been
pleased to see several examples of the implementation
of resolution 71/323 already. Rule 92 of the Assembly’s
26/28

13/11/2017

rules of procedure was amended in accordance with
paragraph 46 of the resolution. On 16 October, the
first election — of candidates for the Human Rights
Council — was conducted with the new method of
filling out ballot papers. On election day in the Hall,
a single page of information about the candidates
was distributed to the desk of every delegation, in
accordance with the resolution. Each of those instances
represents an important step in the implementation of
resolution 71/323.
Our delegation believes that in promoting
the revitalization of the General Assembly and
strengthening its constituent roles, the Office of the
President of the General Assembly plays a critical part.
We should continue to encourage the Office to maintain
its transparency and effectiveness. Given the fact that
the activities of the President of the General Assembly
have increased substantially in recent years, adequate
resources should be allocated to the Office to provide the
support that it needs to carry them out successfully. In
that regard, Japan will provide a voluntary contribution
to the United Nations Trust Fund in support of the
Office. The President of the Assembly at its seventysecond session, Mr. Miroslav Lajčák, clearly expressed
his intention to include peace, prevention and the
avoidance of conflict, the Sustainable Development
Goals and climate change as his priorities. Japan shares
those priorities, and is willing to assist the President
in exercising his leadership to address those difficult
issues throughout the world.
In the course of the seventy-second session, it will
be important to continue the discussions on revitalizing
the Assembly. In particular, working methods will be
another essential part of those discussions. Japan has
been very active in improving working methods within
the United Nations. For example, resolution 68/307
moved the election dates for the Security Council and
the Economic and Social Council from October to
June. In order to take full advantage of that change,
which is intended to give new members more time
to prepare for their membership, Japan, as Chair of
the Security Council’s Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
proposed that the Informal Working Group revisit the
transitional arrangements for newly elected members
of the Council. In July 2016, following intensive
consultations, the Security Council adopted a new
presidential note, contained in document S/2016/619.
With that new agreement, the newly elected members
17-37640

13/11/2017

are now invited to observe Council meetings starting
on 1 October. The note also includes improvements to
transparency and inclusivity in the selection process for
the Chairs of subsidiary organs, as well as measures to
facilitate early preparation by the Chairs.
Following up on the open debate on the working
methods of the Security Council (see S/PV.7740) that
was held during our presidency of the Security Council
in July 2016, Japan has initiated discussions in the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions to identify areas for further
improvements to the Council’s working methods,
including increasing the Council’s interaction with the
wider membership of the United Nations. On 30 August,
the Security Council agreed on a comprehensive new
presidential note on its working methods (S/2017/507),
which consolidates and streamlines all the existing
presidential notes and lays out some new measures.
Japan is eager to continue contributing to improving
the working methods of the United Nations, including
the Security Council.
The issue of the revitalization of the work of
the General Assembly is also an urgent challenge.
The current consideration of the possibility of the
biennialization or triennialization of agenda items
should continue, as has been done in the past few years,
and we again look forward to working with Member
States on that issue during the current session.
Just as we moved the elections to the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council to
earlier dates through our adoption of resolution 68/307,
we might also consider holding the elections for the
presidency of the General Assembly earlier, so that
the President-elect is afforded sufficient time to set
up his or her team and prepare for the handover. Our
delegation proposed that point at a meeting of the Ad
Hoc Working Group last year. We believe that this
idea is in line with suggestions that have been made by
several Chairs of the Main Committees, stressing the
importance of holding elections earlier in the interest
of ensuring smooth transitions.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming that
Japan stands ready to support the President of the
General Assembly and contribute constructively to
the discussions on the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly, with the aim of further enhancing the
effectiveness and transparency of the United Nations.

A/72/PV.48

Mr. Prasad (India): India would first like to
express its sympathies to the families of the victims of
the earthquakes that took place over the weekend. We
sincerely regret the loss of life.
At the outset, I align myself with the statement
made earlier by the representative of Algeria on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
I would like to thank the President for convening
today’s important meeting. I congratulate the
Permanent Representatives of Croatia and Colombia on
their appointment as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly and wish them success in their endeavours.
The co-Chairs for the seventy-first session also deserve
our thanks for their excellent work.
Any institution’s effectiveness, relevance and
longevity depend on its dynamic character and its
ability to adapt to changing times so that it not only
upholds timeless values but also addresses the emerging
problems and challenges of the present day. The General
Assembly is the most representative global body that
the collective enterprise and wisdom of humankind
has established to date. Its primacy flows from the
universality of its membership and the principle of
the sovereign equality of all of its members. It cannot
be compared to any other organization or institution
within or outside the United Nations system, owing to
its sheer representativeness and the moral weight of its
decisions and opinions. However, there is a widespread
feeling that the Assembly has been prevented from
living up to its unique role, as set out in Article 10 of
the Charter of the United Nations. In addition, over the
past years, it has lost touch with its core responsibilities
and is increasingly involved solely with processes.
The role and authority of the General Assembly
have been gradually undermined by the expansive role
and activism of the Security Council. We must admit
that part of the blame lies with the General Assembly
itself, which has allowed itself to be undermined and
encroached on, despite representing the collective voice
of humankind. That is counterproductive for the overall
effectiveness and relevance of the United Nations.
We firmly believe that the position of the General
Assembly as the chief deliberative policymaking and
representative organ of the United Nations, as mandated
by the Charter, must be restored and respected in
letter and in spirit. The Assembly must lead in setting
the global agenda and restoring the centrality of the

17-3764027/28

A/72/PV.48

United Nations in formulating multilateral approaches
to addressing emerging challenges and resolving
transnational issues. The leading role played by the
General Assembly at the Sustainable Development
Summit in 2015, followed by the adoption of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the success
of this year’s Ocean Conference, are shining recent
examples of how the Assembly can set the global
agenda and lead the way in addressing issues and
concerns of a global nature. It is therefore incumbent
on us, the Member States, to ensure that it maintains its
leadership role on issues of transnational importance.
The process of revitalizing the General Assembly
is an urgent task. In the past few years it has brought
about significant improvements aimed at meeting the
increasingly complex demands of our rapidly changing
world. Some of the positive outcomes that have been
widely acknowledged were evident during the 2016
selection of the Secretary-General and in the recent
efforts to strengthen the Office of the President of the
General Assembly. My delegation engaged actively in
the debate on improving the process and conduct of
elections that led to the adoption of resolution 71/323.
Among other things, we have also furthered the cause
of multilingualism at the United Nations and helped to
facilitate better cooperation between Member States
and the Secretariat. Although the progress we are
making is encouraging, we have a long way to go. My
delegation will continue to make additional concrete
proposals on further revitalizing the General Assembly

28/28

13/11/2017

and to work actively for that broader purpose with
other delegations.
The revitalization of the General Assembly must
also be seen in the wider context of the overall reform
of the United Nations. Since its inception in 1945, the
United Nations has come a long way. However, its
continued relevance and effectiveness in addressing
emerging global challenges will depend largely on its
ability to stay abreast of changing times and realities.
The winds of change are blowing. The issue of United
Nations reform, including the revitalization of the
Assembly and reform of the Security Council, is
assuming increasing significance. We must heed the
call for United Nations reform made by many world
leaders during the general debate at the beginning
of the Assembly’s seventy-second session. It is our
firm belief that urgent and comprehensive reform
is needed if we are to ensure that the Organization
reflects current geopolitical realities and to enhance
its capability to meet the increasingly complex and
pressing transnational challenges of our times.
The time for change has come. Let us make genuine
efforts to strengthen the role of the General Assembly
in setting the global agenda, policymaking and finding
solutions to global challenges and problems, which
will help to strengthen the legitimacy of the United
Nations and of multilateralism as a whole. The General
Assembly can count on my delegation’s constructive
support and participation in those efforts.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

17-37640
