General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

138

-------------

no one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatmcnt or punishment,
Recalling also the Declaration on the Protection of
All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
unanimously adopted by its resolution 3452 (XXX) of
9 Deccmbcr 1975, as wcll as its resolution 31/85 of
13 December 1976,
Recognizing the necessity far further international
action in the form of a convention far thc elimination
of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishmcnt,
Recognizing also the importance of action by Member
States to develop and utilize their national machinery
to climinate torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading trcatment or punishment,
l. Calls upon all Membcr States to reinforce their
support of the Declaration on the Protcction of All
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
by making unilateral declarations against torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, along the lines of the text which is annexed to
the present resolution, and depositing them with the
Secretary-Gcneral;
2. Urges all Member States to give maximum publicity to their unilateral dcclarations against torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading trcatment or punishment;
3. Requests the Secretary-Gcneral to inform the
General Assembly, in annual reports. of such unilateral
declarations against torture and other cruel, inhuman
or dcgrading treatment or punishment as may be deposited by Member Statcs.
98th plenary meetini
8 December 1977
ANNEX
Model unilateral declaration against torture aud other
cruel, inhuman or degradin~~ treat1nent or punishment

The Government of ........ hereby declares its intention:
(a) To comply with the Declaration on the Protection of
Ali Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (General
Assembly resolution 3452 (XXX), annex);

( b) To implement, through legislation and other effectivc
measures, the provisions of the said Declaration.

32/65.

Torture of political prisoners and detainees in southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 30 in particular its articlc 5,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Protection of
All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, contained in the annex to its resolution 3452
(XXX) of 9 Deccmber 1975,
30Resolution 217 A (III).

Taking note of the report of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of Experts on Southern Africa, 31 established pursuant to resolution 2 (XXIII) of thc Commission on
Human Rights, conccrning thc dcaths of dctainees and
policc brutality in South Africa sincc the Sowcto mas~acre of 16 Junc 1976,
Grave/y concerned about the reports regarding thc
torture of political prisoncrs and thc deaths of a number of dctainccs and about the growing wavc of acts
of reprcssion against individuals, organizatinns and information media in South Africa,
Deeply shocked by thc cowardly and dastardly murder in detcntion of Stephen Biko,
1. Condemns the South African régime far its continuing violation of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and thc Dcclaration on thc Protection of Ali
Persons from Bcing Sl!lbjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
2. Reiterates its deep aversion to the practice
whcrcby the South African régime persistently subjects
ali opponcnts of apartheid to summary banning, detention, imprisonment and somctimes murder;
3. Stronily condemns the practice of subjecting
political detainccs and other victims of apartheid in
South Africa to torture and other cruel, inhuman or
dcgrading trcatment or punishment;
4. Strongly condemns, in particular, the arbitrary
arrest, detention and torture which led to the murder
of Stcphen Biko by agents of the racist minority régime
of South Africa;
5. Demands that thc minority apartheid régime of
South Africa:
(a)
Releas e all política! prisoncrs without precondition;
( b) Lift ali banning and housc arrcst orders imposed on opponents of apartheid;
(e) Put an immediate cnd to the indiscriminate use
of ~iolencc against peaceful demonstrators against apartheid and to thc persistcnt rccourse to torture of política!
detainces;
6. ExpressC's its conviction that the martyrdom of
Stephcn Biko and ali othcr nationalists murdercd in
~outh A~rican J?risons and_ thc ideals for which they
fought w11l con~muc to ennch thc faith of the peoplcs
of southcrn Afnca and other parts of the world in thcir
struggle against apartheid and for racial cquality and
the dignity of thc human person.
98th plenary meeting
8 Deccmber 1977
32/66.

Status of the lnternational Covenant on
Et•onomic, Social and Cultural Rights the
International Covenant on Civil ancl' Politin1l Rii!hts and the Optional Protocol
to the lnternational Covenant on Civil
ami Political Rights

The General Assembly,
Convinced that thc International Covenants on
Human Rights~ 2 constitutc the first all-embracing and
:n A/32/226, annex.
3 2 Resolution 2200 (XXI), annex.
