General Assemhly-Thirty-third Session,

14

Recalling also the contents of the relevant paragraphs of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, 10
1. Invites all States to continue to consider the
convening, at an appropriate stage, of an international
conference or conferences, under the auspices of the
United Nations system, aimed at promoting international co-operation in the peaceful use of nuclear
energy in accordance with the objectives of General
Assembly resolution 32/50;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to urge all
States to communicate to him their views, observations
and suggestions on such a conference and requests
him to submit a report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session.
42nd plenary meeting
2 November 1978
33/9.

Credentials of representatives to the thirtythird session of the General Assemhly

A

The General Assembly
Approves the first report of the Credentials Committee.11
43rd plenary meeting
3 November 1978

B
The General Assembly
Approves the second report of the Credentials Committee.12
99th plenary meeting
24 May 1979
33/15.

Question of Cyprus 13

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Cyprus,
Recalling its resolution 3212 (XXIX) of 1 November 1974 and its subsequent resolutions,
Greatly concerned over the prolongation of the
Cyprus crisis, which continues to constitute a serious
threat to international peace and security,
Deeply regretting that the resolutions of the United
Nations on Cyprus have not yet been implemented,
. Exp~essing deep concern over the lack of progress
m the mtercommunal talks,
Deploring the continued presence of foreign armed
forces and foreign military personnel on the territory
of the Republic of Cyprus and the fact that part of
its territory is still occupied by foreign forces,
Deploring also all unilateral actions that change the
demographic structure of Cyprus,
10 Resolution

S-10/2.

11 Officia/ Records of the General Assembly Thirty-third
Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, document A/33/350.
12 lbid., document A/33/350/ Add.1.
18 See also sect. I, foot-note 4, and sect. X.B.3 decision
33/402.
'

Mindful of the need to settle the question of Cyprus
without further delay by peaceful means in accordance
with the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations,
1. Reiterates its full support for the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and non-alignment
of the Republic of Cyprus and calls once again for
the cessation of all foreign interference in its affairs;
2. Demands the immediate and effective implementation of resolution 3212 (XXIX), unanimously
adopted by the General Assembly and endorsed by
the Security Council in its resolution 365 (1974) of
13 December 1974, and of the subsequent resolutions
of the Assembly and the Council on Cyprus, which
provide the valid basis for the solution of the problem
of Cyprus;
3. Demands the immediate withdrawal of all foreign armed forces and foreign military presence from
the Republic of Cyprus;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide his good offices for the negotiations between
the representatives of the two communities;
5. Calls for respect of the human rights of all
Cypriots and the instituting of urgent measures for
the voluntary return of the refugees to their homes
in safety;
6. Calls for the urgent resumption in a meaningful
and constructive manner of the negotiations under the
auspices of the Secretary-General between the representatives of the two communities, to be conducted
freely on an equal footing on the basis of comprehensive and constructive proposals of the parties concerned with a view to reaching as early as possible
a mutually acceptable agreement based on their fundamental and legitimate rights;
7. Calls upon the parties concerned to refrain from
any unilateral action which might adversely affect the
prospects of a just and lasting solution of the problem
of Cyprus by peaceful means and to co-operate fully
with the Secretary-General in the performance of his
task under the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council as well as with
the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus;
8. Recommends that the Security Council should
examine the question of the implementation, within
a time-frame, of its relevant resolutions and consider
and adopt thereafter, if necessary, all appropriate and
practica! measures under the Charter of the United
Nations for ensuring the implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations on Cyprus;
9. Decides to include the item entitled "Question
of Cyprus" in the provisional agenda of its thirty-fourth
sessi~m and requ~sts the Secretary-General to follow up
the 1mplementat1on of the present resolution and to
report on all its aspects to the General Assembly at
that session.
49th plenary meeting
9 November 1978
33/17.

Third United Nations Confereiwe on the
Law of the Sea14

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3067 (XXVIII) of 16 November 1973, 3334 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974,
14 See also

sect. X.B.7, decision 33/405.
