S/PV.8435

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8435th meeting

Thursday, 20 December 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ipo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Côte d’Ivoire)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Woldeyes
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Tenya
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, an integrated response to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace in the Sahel

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-45436 (E)
*1845436*

S/PV.8435

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

authority of States is being challenged. The justice
system is being questioned, while the traditional means
of conflict prevention and resolution have been made
somewhat redundant by modern States.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel, an integrated response to peacebuilding
and sustaining peace in the Sahel
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw, Special Adviser
of the Secretary-General for the Sahel; His Excellency
Mr. Ion Jinga, Permanent Representative of Romania
to the United Nations and Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission; Mr. Hafez Ghanem, Vice President of the
World Bank for Africa; and Mr. Rémy Rioux, on behalf
of the Sahel Alliance.
Mr. Ghanem and Mr. Rioux are joining the meeting
via video-teleconference from Washington, D.C., and
Paris, respectively.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr Thiaw.
Mr. Thiaw (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for having invited me to brief the
Security Council in my capacity as Special Adviser
of the Secretary-General for the Sahel. I commend
the presidency of Côte d’Ivoire for having taken the
initiative to convene this meeting.
Given the geographical and geopolitical position of
the Sahel, it is clear that peace, security, stability and
development in the region have a direct impact not only
on neighbouring African countries, but also on Europe
and the rest of the world.
(spoke in English)
The Sahel is one of the least developed regions in
the world. It faces simultaneous challenges of extreme
poverty, the dire effects of climate change, frequent
food crises, rapid population growth, fragile governance
and terrorist-linked security threats. The world-famous
trade and migration routes across the Sahel and the
Sahara are being taken over by transnational organized
crime organizations and large-scale traffickers. The
2/22

20/12/2018

Conflicts over land, water and other resources are
increasing at an alarming rate. The growing number and
severity of the conflicts between farmers and herders
are largely due to competition, driven by fast-growing
populations and access to resources that are dwindling
due to land degradation and climate change. Criminal
activities, both on land and at sea, along with terrorist
networks, have reached levels that may threaten the
very stability of States as well as the social fabric of
societies. The profits generated from human, drugs and
arms trafficking can only serve to make the precarious
situation even less tenable. A small proportion of the
criminal or illegal proceeds is instead used to feed
extremism and exacerbate instability.
(spoke in French)
While the humanitarian situation has improved
slightly in 2018, owing mainly to a relatively good
rainy season, there are still significant needs in the
region. More than 8 million people are at risk of food
insecurity in 2019. This year, around 10 million people
have experienced food insecurity in the Sahel, of
whom around 5.8 million are in Burkina Faso, Mali,
Mauritania, the Niger, Senegal and Chad — countries
that have experienced severe droughts since the end of
2017. Acute malnutrition has reached unprecedented
levels in those six countries and is likely to continue.
In 2013, the Council adopted the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, which was a visionary
decision and a clear sign of our recognition of a shared
destiny in confronting the transboundary nature of the
threats in the Sahel. The Council therefore adopted a
long-term approach, integrating humanitarian, security
and development aspects. In 2018, the SecretaryGeneral gave new impetus to the Integrated Strategy
by adopting the United Nations Support Plan for the
Sahel — an inclusive document that was drawn up under
the leadership of the Deputy Secretary-General, based
predominantly on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and Agenda 2063 of the African Union.
The Support Plan is part of a preventive, integrated
and concerted approach to strengthening governance,
security and development in the Sahel region. As such,
if the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel
is to remain our sole frame of reference, the Support
18-45436

20/12/2018

Peace and security in Africa

Plan must form the basis of our collective action in the
10 countries of the Sahel. The Support Plan requires the
agreement and mobilization of all.
One of the aims of the plan is to strengthen
coordination and cooperation between the actors
involved in the Sahel. The Support Plan was designed
not only to strengthen the response of the United
Nations and the quality of support offered to the
Member States in the region, but also to provide a
standard for our partners. That is why, ever since I
assumed office as Special Adviser of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sahel, I have consistently facilitated
dialogue and forged partnerships. That has enabled me
to have many discussions with the leaders of African
countries and institutions that are the most involved in
the process. I have also sought to engage in dialogue
with different segments of society, including women,
youth and traditional leaders.
Today, we are at a critical juncture for the stability of
the entire Sahel region. On the basis of my discussions,
I would like to make three observations regarding the
implementation of the United Nations Support Plan for
the Sahel.
First, in order to ensure lasting peace and stability
in the Sahel, the root causes of its instability must be
addressed. An exclusively security-based approach
alone will not be enough to stabilize the Sahel. In order
to achieve lasting peace, we must launch in parallel a
vast development programme that will make it possible
to positively transform the economies of the region,
improve the living conditions of the populations and
restore hope to young people. Our efforts in the Sahel
give us the tremendous opportunity to move from words
to action and to apply, in one of the most disadvantaged
regions in the world, both the principles and the spirit
of the Sustainable Development Goals, namely, the
commitment to leaving no one behind. Our challenge
here is to ensure the effective operationalization of
the link between development and sustainable peace.
We must not only see an increase in development aid
and cooperation with Governments, but also establish
conditions conducive to mobilizing significant
private investment.
Secondly, solutions to the challenges that the Sahel
faces must be provided by local, national and regional
actors, and enjoy the support of external partners,
where necessary. The United Nations will continue
to cooperate with bilateral and multilateral actors and

S/PV. 8435

leverage the initiatives already in place in order to
provide coherent and coordinated international support.
The countries of the region have made sustained
efforts and their actions are beginning to bear fruit,
as demonstrated by the relaunch of the Nouakchott
process, the revision of the African Union strategy
for the Sahel and the success of the Group of Five for
the Sahel donor and partner coordination conference,
held on 6 December in Nouakchott. In that context,
I commend the efforts of the regional bodies of the
United Nations with which we work closely, including
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel,
the United Nations Development Group for Western and
Central Africa and the United Nations country offices
in the 10 target countries. I also highlight the excellent
relations with the cooperation partners, many of whom
have connected within the Sahel Alliance.
On 17 December, I had the honour of addressing the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union at a
meeting devoted to international and regional initiatives
in the Sahel region. I drew the attention of members in
particular to the urgent need to find adequate solutions
to the growing and increasingly deadly conflicts
between farmers and herders in the Sahel. It is important
to prevent disputes related to competition for access to
natural resources from turning into ethnic, religious
or cross-border conflicts. In that regard, the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union made it clear
that coordination and integration are not a choice but a
necessity. It was therefore agreed to further harmonize
our approaches and adapt our common responses based
on our comparative advantages, in particular through
the Ministerial Coordination Platform for Sahel
strategies, which needs to be strengthened so as to
realize its full potential as a political tool.
Thirdly, we must change the perception of the
region by highlighting its many assets and its potential.
The Sahel is in a unique position to boost its economy
through renewable energies, particularly solar and
wind energy. Those new technologies can also make
the primary sector — on which the vast majority of
Sahelians depend — less vulnerable and more adapted
to climate change. The success of those efforts will
depend largely on progress in good governance,
resource mobilization and the integration capacity of
the actors involved.
For its part, the United Nations is tasked with
rethinking its mode of operation in the Sahel in order
to include joint programming, further integration and

18-454363/22

S/PV.8435

Peace and security in Africa

more effective action. To that end, we are setting up
a mechanism for the Sahel within the Sustainable
Development Goals Fund. The mechanism aims to
reduce fragmentation and make United Nations action
in the Sahel more effective. A flexible and transparent
mechanism of that nature will also make it possible
to respond more quickly and better to the often
unpredictable long-term needs that arise in the Sahel.
Let me conclude by welcoming the international
community’s renewed focus on the Sahel region. We
have a strategy, a shared vision and an operational
support plan. Sahelians rightly believe that the
time has now come to turn our plans and words into
concrete action.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Thiaw
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jinga.
Mr. Jinga: I would to thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to brief the Council today in my capacity
as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
during this very important and timely meeting on peace
and security in Africa, the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel and an integrated response to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace in the Sahel.
On 18 December, the Security Council
adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2018/20
on peacebuilding and sustaining peace. That is
further testimony to the Council’s recognition of and
support for the important role that the Peacebuilding
Commission is playing in fostering coordination and
coherence in international peacebuilding efforts. The
engagement of the Peacebuilding Commission on the
situation in the Sahel began with presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/2, adopted on 20 January 2017, which
emphasized the convening role of the Commission
in mobilizing international support, in collaboration
with the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel, towards the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
Since then, the Commission has convened a
series of meetings on the situation in the Sahel, with
the participation of the countries of the region, the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), the African
Union, the European Union, different parts of the
United Nations system and other national and regional
actors. The Commission has been focused primarily on
deepening partnerships and ensuring the cooperation,
4/22

20/12/2018

coordination and coherence of the United Nations
and the international community in support of the
Sahel. On 30 January, the Council adopted another
presidential
statement
(S/PRST/2018/3),
which
reiterated the importance of the convening role of the
PBC in peacebuilding and sustaining peace efforts in
the Sahel.
In March 2018, in support of the Sahel countries’
efforts to foster coherence and ensure coordination,
I attended the sixth meeting of the Ministerial
Coordination Platform for the Sahel held in
N’Djamena, together with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for West Africa and the Sahel,
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas; the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacebuilding Support, Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco; and the Permanent Representative
of Chad to the United Nations, Ambassador Ali
Alifei Moustapha. On the margins, we met with the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chad, His Excellency
Mr. Mahamat Zene Cherif, and the Minister of Economy
and Development Planning of Chad, His Excellency
Mr. Issa Doubragne. I also had the opportunity to visit
a project, supported by the Peacebuilding Fund, at the
border of Chad and Cameroon, where I interacted with
the local population, community leaders, civil society
and the United Nations country team.
From 15 to 19 October, I once again joined Special
Representative Chambas and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Fernandez-Taranco on a regional visit to West
Africa and the Sahel. In Ouagadougou, we met with
the President of Burkina Faso, His Excellency Mr. Roch
Marc Christian Kaboré; the Minister of Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation, His Excellency Mr. Alpha Barry; the
Ministry of Economic Planning and Development, Her
Excellency Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly; and the Minister
of the Civil Service, Labour and Social Security, His
Excellency Mr. Clément Sawadogo. We also met and
exchanged views with the diplomatic community,
representatives of civil society and the United Nations
country team.
In Dakar, we attended the launch of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel study on
pastoralism and security in the region. We also met with
the United Nations regional directors team, who are
playing a key role in United Nations efforts in the Sahel
region. My engagements with Government officials,
civil society, United Nations regional directors and
country teams in Chad, Burkina Faso and Senegal
18-45436

20/12/2018

Peace and security in Africa

provided me with useful insights into the multifaceted
challenges facing the Sahel region.
In Abidjan, we met with the Vice-President for
Regional Development, Integration and Business
Delivery of the African Development Bank, Mr. Khaled
Sherif, as part of our continued efforts to enhance
the strategic partnership with international financial
institutions in support of peacebuilding and sustaining
peace. Our discussions focused mainly on ways to
reinforce coordination and coherence in support of
the countries of the Sahel region. The Vice-President
of the African Development Bank assured us that the
Sahel is also one of the bank’s major priorities, and we
emphasized the potential for enhanced coordination
with the United Nations in support of countries in the
region, including through the Peacebuilding Fund and
the Bank’s 10,000 Communities in 1,000 Days initiative.
Council members will also recall that in July, at
the meeting between the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and the African Union Peace and Security
Council here in New York, we explored ways to deepen
the strategic partnership with the African Union in
support of the Sahel region. Overall, my visits to the
Sahel and interactions with national authorities, civil
society, the diplomatic community and United Nations
regional directors and country teams allowed me to
gain a better understanding of the important role the
Peacebuilding Commission can continue to play in
support of the Sahel.
On 12 November, the Commission held its annual
session on the situation in the Sahel. The meeting was
attended by the Deputy Secretary-General, the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General for the Sahel, the
High Representative of the African Union for Mali and
the Sahel, the Permanent Secretary of the G-5 Sahel,
local elected officials, and representatives of women
and civil society organizations from the Sahel region.
The annual session provided a unique opportunity to
deliberate on the political, security, social, economic
and environmental challenges faced by the countries in
the Sahel.
Furthermore, the annual session allowed
Member States to explore opportunities to strengthen
partnerships and to bring coherence to international
support for the Sahel region. On 13 November, the
PBC and the Economic and Social Council dedicated
their joint annual meeting to the linkages between
climate change, peacebuilding and sustaining peace in

S/PV. 8435

the Sahel. Both meetings underscored the importance
that the Commission continue using its platform to
sustain international attention and advance a more
coherent, coordinated and action-oriented approach to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace in the Sahel region.
Over the past couple of years, in close collaboration
with the countries of the region and United Nations
leadership both at Headquarters and in the field, the
Peacebuilding Commission has used every opportunity
to sustain international attention and support in
addressing the multifaceted challenges of the Sahel.
The Commission will continue to prioritize the Sahel
region with the support of the Council. I wish everyone
happy holidays.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Jinga
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ghanem.
Mr. Ghanem: I am most grateful for this
opportunity to brief the Council today on what the
World Bank is doing in the Sahel. I would like to express
my special thanks to Mr. Thiaw, Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General for the Sahel, with whom we have
been working very closely.
Our engagement in the Sahel takes place at a time
when sub-Saharan Africa is experiencing a growing
number of people living in poverty. Tragically, this is
partly driven by fragility and insecurity. Indeed, violent
conflicts have spiked dramatically since 2010 and the
fragile landscape in which we all operate is becoming
ever more complex. Peace and stability are necessary
for economic development, but the inverse is also
true; there can be no lasting peace without economic
development, without opportunities for young people
and without hope for a better future. There is a need to
address the economic and social drivers of conflict in
the Sahel.
That is why we at the World Bank have committed
more than $9 billion to the development and resilience
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
countries — Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and
the Niger — over the past five years. We have been
able to do this thanks to the support of the international
community through the International Development
Association — the Bank’s fund for the poorest. This
financing, along with policy advice and technical
assistance, tries to address the social and economic
drivers of fragility and conflict faced by the Sahel.

18-454365/22

S/PV.8435

Peace and security in Africa

The most notable among these drivers are low State
legitimacy and presence in certain areas where we see a
lack of many basic services, high youth unemployment
and limited opportunities. Beyond the numbers, we
are also changing our way of working to reflect the
challenges posed by such fragility. We are putting more
emphasis on a special approach for rapid results that
concentrates activities in defined locations selected
to support and unlock opportunities created by the
stability brought by security forces. We have tried to
follow the security forces and stabilize the areas that
are being liberated.
Secondly, we are putting more of our people on the
front line through a stronger presence on the ground
in our country offices. Thirdly, we are improving
supervision of our operations, including through
satellite-imaging and mobile-based monitoring. Our
new approach concentrates the activities of several
existing projects led by the World Bank and other
donors in the locations most at risk. This approach has
been tested in the town of Konna, in the centre of Mali.
Here, rehabilitation of the fishing port — which is the
key hub of economic activity in the area — is being
supplemented by additional investments that range from
the installation of solar panels and the construction and
rehabilitation of rural roads to the introduction of cash
transfers for those most in need and the development of
income-generating activities.
I take this opportunity to thank the United
Nations; France, through the Agence Française de
Développement; and Germany, among others, which
have been key partners in the application of this model.
This new approach holds promise and will be replicated
beyond Mali.
In July 2017, the Sahel Alliance was launched by
France, Germany, the European Union, the African
Development Bank, the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Bank. Italy, Spain, the
United Kingdom and Luxembourg have now joined this
important initiative, strengthening our already close
partnership. A memorandum of understanding between
the Sahel Alliance and the G-5 Sahel, which was
signed in October, is laying the groundwork for better
synergies between security and development. Together
we are developing multisectoral and rapid response
interventions in selected areas, as I have just highlighted.
I am pleased that the World Bank commitments today
account for more than half of the projects monitored by
the Sahel Alliance. We have pledged $1.2 billion to the
6/22

20/12/2018

G-5-supported Priority Investment Programme, which
was agreed upon last month in Nouakchott.
In conclusion, I am more convinced than ever that,
together, we can support the Governments and people
of the Sahel to build a pathway to peace, stability and
economic development. With the support of the Council,
the World Bank is committed to sustaining such efforts
for the months and years to come.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Ghanem for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Rioux.
Mr. Rioux (spoke in French): I am deeply honoured
to address the Security Council. I thank Ibrahim Thiaw
for having invited me to speak to the Council on
behalf of the Sahel Alliance. The Coordination Unit of
the Sahel Alliance is currently hosted by the Agence
Française de Développement, which I am head.
The Sahel Alliance was jointly launched on 13 July
2017 in Paris by the German Chancellor, the President
of the French Republic and the High Representative
of the European Union. The initiative immediately
garnered the resounding support of the World Bank,
which I commend; the African Development Bank
and the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP). In 2018, the Alliance grew to include Spain,
Italy, the United Kingdom, Luxembourg, Denmark and
the Netherlands. Observer members have also joined
the Alliance.
The goal of the Alliance is to contribute to
the development of the Sahel and to reduce its
social, economic, environmental and institutional
vulnerability. The battle against violent extremism can
be won only if development is pursued at the same time
and with the same rigour. The Alliance is fully aligned
with the priorities of the United Nations SecretaryGeneral, namely, conflict prevention and strengthening
the resilience of the most vulnerable societies. It stands
in full harmony with the framework established by the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
To tackle the deep-rooted or immediate causes
of crises, the Alliance prioritizes in all its activities
economic, social, political and cultural inclusion and
respect for rights to strengthen social bonds, which are
eroded by mistrust and exclusion. It seeks to include
young people, women and marginalized populations
and to implement a participatory approach at all levels.
18-45436

20/12/2018

Peace and security in Africa

The Sahel Alliance coordinates the endeavours
of its 12 members to expedite the implementation of
development projects in the Sahel countries that are in
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), namely,
Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania, the Niger and Chad. A
partnership agreement was signed with its permanent
secretariat on 30 October.
The members of the Sahel Alliance have decided
to focus on and enhance their action in six priority
areas, which do not include all their respective action
in the Sahel area: education and youth employment,
agriculture and food security, energy and climate
change, local infrastructure and decentralization,
governance and domestic security. While working on
these six areas, the Sahel Alliance has brought all the
projects of its members under one common umbrella.
This portfolio currently amounts to over €9 billion,
which will be disbursed across more than 600 projects
between 2019 and 2023. Some projects amounting to
€4 billion have just been launched and a great many
new projects totalling €5 billion have been identified.
All of these programmes have been designed in line
with existing national or regional strategies. In 2018
alone, a total of €1 billion has been disbursed in the
Sahel region.
In order to make the assistance provided to
the Sahel more effective and in harmony with the
approaches championed in the 2005 Paris Declaration,
the members of the Sahel Alliance pool their resources
and their modes of operation. The countries of the G-5
Sahel and the Alliance work, inter alia, on facilities
dedicated to crisis regions, using adapted procedures;
the allocation of budgetary support resources to
address security shocks; multisectoral approaches in
hotbeds of tensions; strengthening local stakeholders
and recruiting the best actors to work on the ground.
At the request of Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel,
focus has been placed in recent months on projects in the
most vulnerable areas. The G-5 permanent secretariat
decided to launch, as a matter of urgency, rapid-impact
projects as part of the emergency programme for the
stabilization of the G-5 Sahel in the three border areas
in the west, centre and east where the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force intervenes. These priority projects meet the
following three criteria. They are located in sensitive
cross-border areas, as identified by the G-5; they address
specific sectoral issues, including water, the resilience
of populations affected by crises and the rebuilding
of social fabric; and they seek to record genuine

S/PV. 8435

achievements by the end of 2018. The European Union
and its member States have played a driving role in
conducting the emergency development programmes.
At the Nouakchott conference, on 6 December, the
members of the Sahel Alliance contributed €266 million
to these emergency development projects.
In sum and in conclusion, the Sahel Alliance plays
a powerful, operational and integrated role by fostering
synergies between its each of its members in the
framework of a close partnership with the G-5 Sahel
permanent secretariat. We are seeking to demonstrate
our collective capacity by implementing projects with
tangible results that are achieved quickly in areas that
are very unstable with the aim of benefiting the most
vulnerable populations.
We are especially proud to have worked with the
UNDP since the launching of the Alliance, which
steers the sectoral governance group, which is key
to the success of all of our work in the Sahel. More
recently, the Alliance was honoured to host the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General for the Sahel. The
members of the Sahel Alliance have worked closely
with the G-5 Sahel countries to actively contribute to
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. The links with peacebuilding
and the work of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the
Department of Political Affairs of the United Nations
are crucial to the Alliance. Our goals are closely linked
and dialogue has been established at the highest possible
level. We must work together on the priority interests of
the Sahel, its security and its development.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Rioux
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members
wishing to make statements.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Côte d’Ivoire for having
made the Sahel a priority of its Security Council
presidency. We strongly support that choice because
we are convinced that the challenges facing the Sahel
region call for an ambitious and coordinated response
by the international community within the framework
of the priorities set by the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel.
I thank the Special Adviser of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sahel, Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw; the Chair

18-454367/22

S/PV.8435

Peace and security in Africa

of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Ion
Jinga; the Vice President of the World Bank for Africa,
Mr. Hafez Ghanem; and the representative of the Sahel
Alliance, the Director General of the Agence Française
de Développement, Mr. Rémy Rioux, for their briefings,
which illustrate the extent of international mobilization
in support of the Sahel that exists today. They also show
how complementary and coordinated the respective
actions of the various stakeholders on the ground are.
France is convinced that our collective commitment
to the stabilization of the Sahel must necessarily be
based on joint action on the political, security and
development pillars.
First and foremost is the political pillar, for there
can be no lasting stabilization in the Sahel without the
full implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, which is becoming increasingly
urgent. The Security Council has established a robust
framework to support the Malian parties in that
regard, in accordance with the terms of the Peace
Agreement itself. Recent progress, including the
effective launch of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process, is encouraging but must be
further consolidated. We believe that the international
community must use all those levers by the March
deadline set by resolution 2432 (2018). The sanctions
adopted a few minutes ago against three individuals
obstructing the implementation of the Peace Agreement
are a case in point. They mark an important moment in
time — the international community is taking concrete
action against those who seek to prevent peace in order
to continue to prosper at the expense of the general
population. Those measures will be complemented by
other such measures in the future, if necessary.
Secondly, we must consider the security
pillar — because there can be no stability in the Sahel
without a merciless fight against the terrorist groups
that threaten the populations and the stability of the
States of the region. In that regard, we must continue
to enhance the partnerships among the various security
forces deployed in Mali and the Sahel — national
armies, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) Joint Force, Operation Barkhane
and the European missions — each of which has its
own added value and all of which pursue the same
strategic objective.
It is also our responsibility to strengthen
multilateral support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force,
8/22

20/12/2018

which is an innovative and sustainable response by
the G-5 States against a threat to international peace
and security whose causes and implications extend
beyond their subregion. As the Council recalled in its
press statement of 15 November (SC/13584), the Joint
Force must now continue its operations while building
on the funding already disbursed, which will allow
the Council to review its international support in the
near future.
Finally, with regard to the development pillar, there
can be no stability in the Sahel without the creation of
sustainable prospects for the people of the Sahel, and
in particular for its youth. We all must act within the
framework established in the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, which is intended to serve as a
compass in order to avoid any dilution or duplication of
effort. In that regard, we welcome the work carried out
in recent months to update and revitalize that Strategy,
particularly under the leadership of the Deputy
Secretary-General.
The Sahel Alliance is fully in line with the
guidelines set by that shared framework. It is a space
for coordination among major donors that aims to
deliver aid in a faster, better coordinated and more
targeted way to the most vulnerable populations,
including in areas that have proven difficult to access
for development. That effort can be successful only in
close coordination with the Sahel countries, because
a development strategy devised exclusively in the
northern capitals will not succeed. That is why, in early
December in Nouakchott, the Sahel Alliance announced
that it would provide €1.3 billion in funding for the
G-5 Sahel Priority Investment Programme, which was
created and designed by experts on the Sahel. Of that
sum, €266 million has been set aside for projects set to
begin right away in the Joint Force’s most vulnerable
regions of operation.
The United Nations has a central role to play on
each of those elements by ensuring the coherence
and effectiveness of everyone’s engagement. That
includes coordinated action by all actors in the United
Nations system in efforts ranging from prevention to
peacebuilding and peacekeeping. The Peacebuilding
Commission has a major role to play in strengthening
that integrated approach. It can help to strengthen
coordination among the different pillars of the United
Nations system, but also among the United Nations,
the region, Governments and societies in the Sahel. We
hope that the Commission will continue to mobilize on
18-45436

20/12/2018

Peace and security in Africa

the Sahel issue, as it did a few weeks ago at its annual
session. I would also like to welcome the increasing
and especially relevant and useful involvement of the
Peacebuilding Fund in the countries of the Sahel.
France will continue to raise the various aspects of
the issue of the stabilization of the Sahel in the Security
Council. The permanent link between our political,
security and development efforts is essential in that
regard. The Council can count on our determination to
provide responses to the challenges facing the region.
That responsibility falls on us all.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): We thank
all of the briefers today for their presentations and
for their work to advance peace and development in
the Sahel.
We share the Special Adviser’s assessment that the
Sahel is an important and culturally diverse region filled
with potential, but that its people today face a daunting
set of challenges. We also agree that competition
over natural resources in the region, exacerbated by
natural disasters including desertification and drought,
contribute to the instability that we see today. We are
particularly concerned by the increasing unrest in the
central Sahel, driven by the scarcity of resources. Those
communities are increasingly seeing those disputes
through an ethnic lens, and each side brands the other
as the enemy.
In the face of all of those challenges, the United
States continues its multisectoral partnerships with the
Governments and societies of the countries of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to bolster stability
and security by providing them humanitarian, health,
agriculture, governance and development assistance.
The United States provided more than $460 million in
the 2017 fiscal year in development and humanitarian
assistance to programmes in the G-5 Sahel countries.
All of our support seeks to complement the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the
creative partnerships envisioned in its Support Plan.
We particularly appreciate the emphasis on unlocking
the potential of the private sector in the Sahel as an
additional way to harness the power of youth in a
positive way.
The efforts of the United Nations to attract and
align international support for priority challenges in
the Sahel is crucial. In particular, we should continue to
support priorities and activities that are Africa-driven.
We therefore commend the recent success of the G-5

S/PV. 8435

Sahel donor and partner coordination conference in
Nouakchott on 6 December, with its focus on each of the
four pillars of the G-5 Sahel — security, governance,
resilience and infrastructure — and towards the projects
of highest priority, greatest cross-border impact and
maximum chance of success.
A key component of American efforts to support
resilience in the Sahel is to provide women and youth
with access to economic and civic empowerment.
Women are the world’s safest borrowers, as they pay
back microloans at a rate of 97 per cent. In addition,
women business owners create a multiplier effect
in their communities. They are more likely to hire
other women and to reinvest in their communities
and their families. Women and youth often face high
barriers to accessing commercial activities, including
finance — such as legal and regulatory environments,
educational gaps and social and cultural norms.
The United States is actively engaged in addressing
those issues in the Sahel. For instance, the United
States Agency for International Development (USAID)
is working to build stronger connections in the Sahel
between the programmes it funds in food security,
health, micro-enterprise and community development.
By way of example, in the Niger, USAID is engaging
women and young people in community dialogues and
local decision-making to prevent violent extremism
from taking root in vulnerable communities. By
engaging women across their many roles as mothers,
teachers, civil society actors and business leaders we
can focus resources more constructively to address the
drivers of violent extremism, combat radicalization and
keep our communities safe.
On security, the United States commends the G-5
Sahel member States for operationalizing the G-5
Sahel Joint Force to combat terrorism and transnational
organized crime — a primary contributor to regional
instability. The United States strongly supports the Joint
Force in its efforts to establish lasting security. We will
continue to work closely with all partners to coordinate
our contributions of much-needed equipment, training
and technical advice to G-5 Sahel member States to fill
the prioritized capability gaps of the Joint Force.
Nevertheless, security responses alone will
not solve the problem if there is no progress in
addressing the political, environmental, development
and humanitarian challenges in the region. Only by
promoting good governance, addressing the root

18-454369/22

S/PV.8435

Peace and security in Africa

causes of instability, creating economic opportunity,
respecting human rights and enhancing security can the
States in the region make sustainable progress towards
addressing those challenges. Their progress, combined
with the support efforts of bilateral and multilateral
partners — all working in a complementary fashion
with the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel — will be critical to realizing the vast potential
of the region and its peoples.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands) (spoke
in French): Allow me at the outset to thank Côte d’Ivoire
for having organized this briefing in a timely fashion. I
also wish to thank all speakers for their briefings.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands wishes to
emphasize the following three points: first, the need
for an integrated and coordinated approach to the issue
of the Sahel; secondly, the need to combat climate
change, water stress and other root causes of conflict,
in keeping with the United Nations Support Plan for the
Sahel; and, thirdly, the need to build a lasting peace in
the region through an approach that includes women
and young people.
First, regarding the need for an integrated and
coordinated approach in the context of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, I would like
to recall that the shock waves of the instability in the
Sahel reach far beyond the region, even to the shores of
Europe. Real, long-term solutions are crucial in order
to respond to this issue. That is why the Kingdom of
the Netherlands truly appreciates the positive approach
of the Support Plan, which focuses on opportunities
more than difficulties. Consistency and coordination
are crucial to acting in the six priority areas of the Plan.
We support the efforts of the Special Adviser,
Ibrahim Thiaw, and his team to ensure the consistent
implementation of the Strategy and the Support Plan.
It is particularly important to bolster coordination
and consistency among development and security
stakeholders. The Kingdom of the Netherlands therefore
welcomes the recent Group of Five for the Sahel
conference in Niamey, as well as the donor conference
in Nouakchott, focusing on the development pillars of
the Group of Five for the Sahel.
During those meetings, local and international
stakeholders underscored the importance of taking
into consideration the link between security and
development in building a lasting peace in the Sahel.
Gaining the confidence of local populations, fully
10/22

20/12/2018

respecting human rights and strengthening national
judicial systems in this regard are absolutely crucial
undertakings. We would also underscore that an
integrated approach is necessary not only at the
regional level but also at the national and local levels.
In that context, we would particularly encourage the
Secretary-General to continue work on the drafting of
an integrated strategic framework for Mali, as stipulated
in the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
My second point is on combating climate change,
water stress and other root causes of conflicts. It
is right that the Support Plan focuses as a priority
on strengthening resilience and the management of
climate-related security risks. The Sahel is one of the
regions in the world worst affected by the pernicious
effects of climate change and water stress. Climate
change knows no borders, and, to counter it, we need to
also take that approach. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
has always been in favour of a joint approach in terms
of risk assessment and risk management strategies, as
can be seen in the statements made by the President of
the Council on, inter alia, the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel and the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, and the mandate
of MINUSMA.
During the Arria Formula meeting on water, peace
and security held in October, the instrument that was
presented was aimed at using such risk assessments to
develop responses that take into consideration conflicts
and climate in Mali and elsewhere. A key role has
been accorded the Special Adviser, Mr. Thiaw, and his
team, in translating such assessments into programmes
that take account of conflicts and climate in order to
strengthen resilience in the region.
Thirdly, we commend the inclusive approach of
the support plan vis-à-vis women and young people.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the close
link between the Support Plan and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. As we have already
underscored, the programme is a prevention tool par
excellence. Ensuring lasting means of subsistence is
crucial to build a lasting peace.
It is often women and children who pay the heaviest
price during conflict, and this is particularly true in the
Sahel, which has the youngest population in the world.
Women and young people therefore must be effectively
18-45436

20/12/2018

Peace and security in Africa

involved in the implementation of the Support Plan and
have a voice in the decisions taken regarding them.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
expresses its support for the Special Adviser,
Mr. Thiaw, in the implementation of the Support Plan
and its six priorities. We urge the Council to continue
to support these efforts in order to make possible the
full implementation of the Plan through a consistent
and inclusive approach that is focused on the root cause
of the problem.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, Equatorial Guinea wishes to
thank Côte d’Ivoire for having convened this meeting,
which is being held exactly one day after we marked
the fourth anniversary of the creation of the Group
of Five for the Sahel. There can be no doubt that,
since the creation of that institutional framework for
coordination and follow-up of regional cooperation, the
Sahelo-Saharan countries have done important work in
pooling efforts in the areas of development and security
in order to expeditiously usher in an area of overall
progress and shared prosperity.
We also wish to take this opportunity to express our
gratitude for the presence of, and the detailed briefings
provided by, the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral for the Sahel, Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw; the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Ion Jinga;
the World Bank Vice-President for Africa, Mr. Hafez
Ghanem; and Mr. Rioux of the Sahel Alliance.
In recent years, the countries of the Sahel region
have found themselves in the midst of a security crisis
following an influx of terrorists and criminal forces of
all stripes, and the peoples of the region are finding
their very existence under threat. To eradicate that
phenomenon, the States of the region, supported by
various partners, have waged a battle that has essentially
focused on the military aspect. However, we have
gradually realized that there is a need to ensure that
focus is not only on security but also on development,
so as to address the root causes of the instability in
the Sahel.
The Sahel region has a strategy that is based on
development and security, as is made clear in the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and
the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel. The
political and security arenas cannot be dissociated from
the humanitarian dimensions of development if we wish
to build and sustain peace in the region.

S/PV. 8435

In this connection, the Government of Equatorial
Guinea welcomes the concerted efforts of the United
Nations system as a whole aimed at recalibrating the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and
further promoting its implementation through a more
integrated and cross-cutting approach. Such endeavours
will undoubtedly contribute to mobilizing additional
resources for the Sahel and ensure that the assistance
provided by the international community is properly
coordinated and complementary to the efforts already
under way in the countries of the region.
For that reason, the countries of the region, in
particular those of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel), have elaborated and adopted a programme
called the Priority Investment Program, which includes
some 40 projects directly related to living conditions
in the Sahel. We deem the Program very relevant, as,
for obvious reasons, much more has been done in the
area of security owing to the need to combat violent
extremism and negative forces that sow the seeds of
despair. However, we believe that the development
dimension must be bolstered so that the peoples of the
Sahel can feel truly protected. It is clear that on any
of the Sahel borders, specific achievements need to be
recorded in terms of bolstering social welfare. That is
what the Program must focus on.
In this connection, the region’s partners must
respect their financing commitments. We underscore
the importance of the support provided by the European
Investment Bank, which, at the G-5 Sahel partners and
donors coordination conference held on 6 December in
Nouakchott, confirmed its support for the following two
areas of action in particular: infrastructure projects and
projects related to resilience and human development.
Such a large-scale strategic approach clearly reflects
the region’s partners in the Program’s ability to
significantly change the socioeconomic situation in
the region.
In conclusion, we reiterate that the development
dimension should not be forgotten in the Sahel because
it will serve to sustainably address terrorist threats.
We hope that tangible achievements will be made
in the coming years and that they will bring about a
positive transformation in the Sahel and offer a better
future to all of its peoples, without exclusion. It should
be underscored that achieving stability and peace
in the Sahel will have a positive impact on the entire
African continent.

18-4543611/22

S/PV.8435

Peace and security in Africa

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s meeting, which builds
upon yesterday’s discussions on drug trafficking,
governance, organized crime and the rule of law in
West Africa (see S/PV.8433). I would also like to thank
all of the briefers who spoke today: Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw,
Mr. Hafez Ghanem and Mr. Rémy Rioux, as well as
our dear colleague Ambassador Ion Jinga, Permanent
Representative of Romania.
The date of 30 June 2017 was a historic day for
the country of the current presidency of the Security
Council because it witnessed the closure of the United
Nations peacekeeping mission in Côte d’Ivoire. That
allowed the country to start a new chapter in its history.
Since then, Côte d’Ivoire has made considerable
progress towards sustainable peace, stability and
economic prosperity.
The closure of any peacekeeping mission does
not mean the end of the conflict. Instead, it means
the beginning of action towards achieving long-term
sustainable development, which is an important element
in preventing a relapse into conflict. We therefore stress
the importance of implementing the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, under the supervision
of Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed. The
Strategy is a comprehensive approach in support of
regional development and aims to achieve peace and
prosperity as well as the 2030 Sustainable Development
Goals. The Strategy also supports capacity-building. In
that regard, we urge Mr. Thiaw and Mr. Mohamed Ibn
Chambas, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for West Africa and the Sahel, to make every
effort to ensure that the goals of the Strategy are met. We
look forward to reviewing the outcome of their efforts
in the upcoming reports of the Secretary-General.
The State of Kuwait believes in the importance
of development as a way to prevent conflict, and we
work bilaterally with several African countries to
fund their development projects. We also enjoy close
relations with West African countries, especially in the
context of developing their infrastructure. Through the
Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development, Kuwait
has funded several African projects in the amount of
approximately $439 million since 2015. The projects
were conducted in various areas, including improving
health-care facilities, roads and airports as well as
developing water supply systems.
12/22

20/12/2018

We welcome the steps taken by regional
organizations in Africa. We appreciate their efforts to
develop strategies that target sustainable development.
They include Agenda 2063 of the African Union, as
well as the priority investment plan of the Group of Five
for the Sahel. Regional cooperation is a fundamental
element in attracting the support of the international
community. I take this opportunity to welcome the
efforts of the Peacebuilding Commission, whose
annual session, held on 12 November, focused on
peacebuilding in the Sahel. There is a need to enhance
coordination among the various stakeholders that offer
development support in the region in order to guarantee
success in all the efforts being made.
In conclusion, I would like to commend the efforts
being made by all of the countries in the region, as well
as by United Nations agencies, especially since they
work in an unstable environment that has witnessed a
tangible increase in the level of instability and insecurity.
There is an urgent need to combat emerging terrorist
threats in West Africa while at the same time focusing
on intensifying efforts to establish peacebuilding. A
holistic approach is the best way to address the various
challenges posing a threat to the region.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We would like
to thank you, Sir, for convening today’s meeting and for
the useful briefings by Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw, Ambassador
Ion Jinga, Mr. Hafez Ghanem and Mr. Rémy Rioux.
Peru remains concerned about the ongoing
deterioration in the level of security and the fragile
humanitarian situation in the Sahel, in particular
on the borders of Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger.
We deplore the spread of violent extremism and
transnational organized crime and condemn ongoing
terrorist attacks. We believe that it is imperative to
address the manifold and complex challenges that
lie in the root causes. Political crises, inequality, the
lack of access to basic services, the effects of climate
change, lack of opportunities, population growth and
the presence of criminal organizations have all created
a breeding ground for conflict in the region.
In that context, we wish to highlight the important
role played by the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) in the fight against terrorism
and transnational organized crime, with the support
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and other committed
actors, as well as the need for the international
18-45436

20/12/2018

Peace and security in Africa

community to provide predictable and sustainable
funding. In addition, and within the framework of a
multidimensional and integrated strategy, we believe
that it is essential to build and strengthen capacity
and the institutions required to defend human rights
and promote the rule of law and sustained economic
growth, which is all consistent with the sustaining peace
approach, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and Agenda 2063 of the African Union. The various
efforts, initiatives and mechanisms deployed on the
ground must remain consistent at the political and
operational levels. To that end, we highlight the role
played by the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel as the comprehensive framework for promoting
greater coherent and integrated international support to
meet national and regional needs and priorities, in line
with resolution 2391 (2017).
We also underscore the establishment of the United
Nations Support Plan for the Sahel as an instrument
fostering greater efficiency and results under the
Integrated Strategy. It is encouraging that the Plan is
designed on the basis of six priority areas that cover the
root causes of conflict in the region in greater detail.
We would like to stress the importance of promoting
gender equality and the empowerment of women and
of creating greater employment opportunities, in
particular for young people. Women and young people
are called upon to play a central role in building a better
future for their societies.
We welcome the efforts of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel in implementing
the Strategy, in close coordination with the countries of
the Sahel, the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the G-5 Sahel and financial
institutions. such as the World Bank and the African
Development Bank. We also highlight the role of the
Peacebuilding Fund in implementing projects aimed
at achieving sustainable peace in the Sahel within the
framework of the United Nations Integrated Strategy.
I would like to conclude by stressing the need for
the international community to continue to support the
Integrated Strategy and its Support Plan in order to
address the critical situation in the Sahel.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Adviser Thiaw, Ambassador
Jinga, Mr. Ghanem, Vice-President of the World Bank
for Africa, and Mr. Rioux for their respective briefings.

S/PV. 8435

The Sahel is generally stable and has seen
continued economic growth. Meanwhile, terrorism,
transnational organized crime, poverty and imbalances
in development and other issues threaten peace and
development in the region. Addressing such problems
will require greater input and a holistic approach from
the international community. The United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the United Nations
Support Plan are important documents for building
peace and achieving development in the region. With
regard to peacebuilding in the Sahel, I would like to
elaborate on the following points.
First, it is important to seek a political settlement
to regional hotspot issues so as to achieve regional
stability and create the conditions for peacebuilding
and long-term development. While upholding the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and respecting the sovereignty of the countries
concerned, the international community should
actively support countries in the Sahel in their efforts to
promote peace and national reconciliation. We should
continue to support the Malian parties concerned in
expediting the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and pay attention to
the spillover effect on the Sahel of issues outside the
region, such as the Libyan crisis, so as to minimize
their negative impact.
Secondly, we need to help countries in the region
accelerate development and address the root causes of
conflict. The international community needs to honour its
aid commitments, respect the leadership and ownership
of countries in the Sahel, help them implement the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and Agenda 2063
of the African Union, formulate development strategies
suited to their own national conditions and improve
their own capabilities for self-reliant development. The
Peacebuilding Commission can play a coordinating role
to that end, while relevant international development
agencies should continue their efforts to help countries
in the region.
Thirdly, we should assist countries in the region
in upgrading their security capabilities to ensure the
implementation of peacebuilding efforts. The countries
of the region have been actively engaged in security
cooperation and, through the formation of the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel),
they have taken the initiative to counter regional
security threats, such as terrorism and transnational
organized crime. China commends all such efforts. We

18-4543613/22

S/PV.8435

Peace and security in Africa

hope that the international community and the United
Nations will respect the ownership and leadership of
African countries in seeking their own solutions to
African issues and actively support and help countries
of the region build security capabilities and collectively
address regional security threats.
Fourthly, priority should be given to cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, including
the African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States and the G-5 Sahel, as well as to
improved coordination with relevant Sahel initiatives.
The international community should strengthen
communication and coordination with the countries
of the Sahel and the relevant regional and subregional
organizations, so that country-specific and regional
strategies, the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel and the United Nations Support Plan are
organically combined to showcase their respective
strengths and form synergies.
China has always been supportive of African
countries, including those in the Sahel, in their pursuit
of peace and development. In September this year,
the Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation defined peace, security and economic
development as the focus of future China-Africa
cooperation. China supports Africa’s implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and Agenda 2063. Together with the international
community and the countries of the region, China will
continue to support the Sahel to achieve lasting peace
and common prosperity and contribute its share to the
cause of peace and development in Africa.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me start by thanking
Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw, Special Adviser of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sahel, for his briefing. I would
also like to thank his team for its outstanding work.
Allow me to also thank Ambassador Ion Jinga,
Permanent Representative of Romania and Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission, Mr. Hafez Ghanem,
Vice-President of the World Bank for Africa, and
Mr. Rémy Rioux, Chief Executive Officer of the French
Development Agency, for their valuable contributions
to today’s debate.
The root causes of conflicts in many countries of the
region are similar and interdependent. The challenges
they face are cross-border in nature. In that context,
cooperation among neighbouring countries and regional
organizations is crucial. Cross-border threats in the
14/22

20/12/2018

Sahel require transnational responses. We commend the
ever-greater role of regional organizations in improving
effective cooperation among Sahel countries. We
welcome the adoption of a regional strategy and
continue to work on subregional strategies. However,
much remains to be done and the obstacles that need to
be overcome are diverse and complex. The Sahel is also
a high priority for the European Union. It has mobilized
support in the amount of €4 billion over the period from
2014 to 2018 in order to address the various challenges
faced by the region, including with regard to resilience,
access to basic social services, climate change, social
cohesion, stability and conflict prevention.
We welcome the positive developments in Côte
d’Ivoire, a member of the Security Council. Thanks to
its return to peace, security and stability, it has gained
more importance in the subregion and in the community
of nations. We hope that Côte d’Ivoire will seize that
opportunity to maintain and even reinforce its active
role in the challenging process of restoring peace and
stability in the Sahel region.
We remain deeply concerned about the multifaceted
challenges in the Sahel. The spread of insecurity and
terrorism to other parts of the region, including into
eastern Burkina Faso, is particularly worrisome.
Terrorism continues to have devastating effects on lives
and livelihoods, thereby depriving entire communities
of access to basic social services, as well as to longterm opportunities and prospects. Winning the hearts
and minds of a population is crucial in the fight
against terrorism. Addressing violent extremism and
terrorism with security measures is essential but must
be supported by a broader political and institutional
framework that can guide operations, be aligned with
the regional strategy and help to translate strategic
decisions into operations and tactical measures.
In that context, the United Nations Support Plan
for the Sahel should promote the comprehensiveness or
adequacy of regional and subregional initiatives. The
opportunity must also be seized to create a platform
of cooperation aimed at ensuring wider respect for
international law and standards, including human
rights law and international humanitarian law because,
as our leaders acknowledged in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document, peace and security, development
and human rights are the three interconnected and
mutually reinforcing pillars of the United Nations. We
must address all three pillars if we want to address
stability and peace over the long-term.
18-45436

20/12/2018

Peace and security in Africa

The lack of good governance, neglect by States,
underdevelopment, socioeconomic exclusion and
inequalities, exacerbated by climate change and
population growth, remain at the core of instability
in the region. It goes without saying that a military
solution alone is not enough to maintain lasting peace
and stability. In that regard, a successful outcome for
the Malian peace process remains the cornerstone of
stabilization efforts in the region. Moreover, scaling up
access to basic services and job opportunities in Mali, as
well as in other countries in the region, is necessary for
reducing the dependence on humanitarian assistance,
as outlined in the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel and its Support Plan.
In conclusion, we must strengthen the nexus
between security, development and human rights actions
to ensure long-term stability in the Sahel. Doing so
would require unity of purpose and adequate resources.
The United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel
(UNISS) and its Support Plan for the Sahel provide
a comprehensive framework to strengthen good
governance, security, development and respect for
human rights in the Sahel region.
Finally, let me express our full support for the
Special Representative for West Africa and the
Special Adviser for the Sahel for their efforts aimed
at spearheading the implementation of UNISS and its
Support Plan so as to ensure continued United Nations
support for the Sahel region.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank the Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General on the Sahel, Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw;
the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, our
colleague the Permanent Representative of Romania,
Mr. Ion Jinga; and all the other briefers for their
interesting presentations.
We cannot fail to agree with the briefers that in
recent years the Sahel countries have continued to face
increased challenges to their stability and security,
which have obviously had an impact on their ability
to overcome the numerous socioeconomic and other
difficulties they face. We note that despite the efforts
made, extremism and terrorism are unfortunately
now affecting new countries there. Combating these
dangerous phenomena is a top priority for the region.
Accordingly, we deem it extremely timely that efforts
have been made by Sahel States to counter growing

S/PV. 8435

threats. We support the regional initiative to establish
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel.
These threats of course undermine political
stabilization and progress in solving socioeconomic
problems. Therefore, efforts to foster security
and stability must be made in the framework of a
comprehensive approach combining military and
counter-terrorism measures, strengthening State
institutions and systemic economic and social
development, enhancing efforts to spread of a culture
of respect for human rights and the rule of law, and
promoting job creation for young people.
We highly commended the work of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and the
United Nations specialized agencies in providing broad
assistance to countries on the African continent. It is
crucial that these efforts be made in close coordination
with regional organizations, such as the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States
and others.
A positive role in mobilizing support for the
Sahel region is also being played by the Peacebuilding
Commission. We consider it important to enhance the
effectiveness of the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel. In our opinion, its potential has not yet
been fully exploited. In implementing the Strategy,
the opinion of those countries for which it has been
developed is very important.
We agree with those who have convened today’s
meeting that the numerous assistance programmes for
the region need to be duly coordinated. The effectiveness
of this coordination will depend on whether the
structures already in place — first and foremost, those
of the United Nations system — are adhering to their
remit and upholding the principle of division of labour.
In our opinion, it is only through collective, targeted
efforts that are undertaken in the appropriate format
and do not create a conflict of competences that we can
achieve the desired result.
The most important thing for us is that external
assistance not turn into an imposition of blanket
prescriptions using medicine that is alien to African
States. All external interference should be excluded.
We are all well aware that had there not been a violent
coup d’état in Libya in 2011, organized from the outside,
perhaps we would not have to take up the difficult
processes that are occurring in the region to a large
extent because of it.

18-4543615/22

S/PV.8435

Peace and security in Africa

Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me also thank
Special Adviser Thiaw, Ambassador Jinga, Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), and Mr. Ghanem
and Mr. Rioux for sharing their valuable perspectives
with the Security Council this afternoon.
We fully recognize the immense security challenges
that the countries of the Sahel are facing, including the
security situation in Mali and its implications for the
region, as well as organized crime and terrorism. We
commend regional initiatives to address the situation,
including through the G5 Sahel joint force and the
Multinational Joint Task Force. Let me underline in
this regard the importance of Mali moving forward on
implementing the Peace Agreement and for the Council
to actively support these efforts. I am therefore glad to
announce that the first listing of spoilers of the Peace
Agreement was adopted just over an hour ago in the
Sanctions Committee.
But this is not only about narrowly defined security
concerns. The countries in the Sahel face many
interconnected challenges, including inequalities,
poverty, lack of basic services, weak institutions,
gender-based violence, climate change and increasing
conflict between farmers and herders. A comprehensive
approach is needed to address this broad set of challenges
and the root causes of conflict. We therefore welcome
the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, as
well as the adoption of a United Nations Support Plan,
as a vital step to deliver on this strategy. It offers an
opportunity to now gather partners and operationalize,
as well as coordinate, across frameworks that are
already in place.
We commend the Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed, the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel (UNOWAS), and Special Adviser Thiaw
for their leadership and continued commitment to this
important effort. Given the important role of regional,
local and national actors, we further welcome steps taken
by the African Union (AU) to revise its own strategy
for the region, and, in this regard, we also reiterate our
strong support for the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). It is important that regional
efforts, as well as efforts of other important partners,
are well coordinated within the framework of the new
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.
Despite the immense challenges, we agree with
the Special Adviser that it is important to focus on the
strong potential and the many opportunities that the
16/22

20/12/2018

region offers. This was also evident during the recent
visit by our Special Envoy for the Sahel, together with
Special Adviser Thiaw, to the Liptako-Gourma region.
For example, young people are energetic, dynamic and
an asset for the promotion of development. Efforts
should therefore be made to build and capitalize on
these and other opportunities.
Accordingly, we welcome the Support Plan’s focus
on climate-smart agriculture and renewable energy,
as well as on inclusive growth and empowerment of
women and young people. It is also very important to
strengthen the social contract between States and people
of the Sahel countries, which includes improving trust
in security actors, investing in the provision of basic
social services and fully respecting human rights.
In July, our Foreign Minister took part in the joint
AU-United Nations mission to the region, with a focus
on women, peace and security, followed by a briefing
to the Council (see S/PV.8306). The debate organized
on climate-related security risks that same month (see
S/PV.8307) also placed a particular emphasis on the
challenges in the Sahel.
Throughout our Council tenure, we have advocated
a comprehensive, regional approach to the Sahel and
the Lake Chad basin regions, encompassing security,
development and full respect for human rights. We
are also contributing on the ground, in line with the
priorities of the integrated strategy. In June, we
increased our support for climate- and security-related
efforts in the Sahel, with approximately €40 million,
for the period from 2018 to 2021, in addition to already
existing bilateral and humanitarian support, as well
as support provided through the European Union.
Within the strategy, Sweden’s substantive multi-year,
unearmarked contributions to the Central Emergency
Response Fund of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the World Food
Programme and United Nations Fund for Population
Activities are creating flexibility and sustainability in
this support.
Sustainable peace is best pursued in broad
partnership, including with Governments, regional
organizations, international financial institutions,
civil society and the private sector. It is crucial that
all efforts undertaken by partners seek to align with
the integrated strategy and to enhance inclusive local,
national and regional ownership. Efforts should also
18-45436

20/12/2018

Peace and security in Africa

encompass all segments of society, including removing
obstacles to women’s inclusion. Continued political
dialogue with Governments on long-term sustainable
development models is also crucial.
Having the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
participate in this meeting is, in our view, very useful.
The PBC, with its convening power, plays a pivotal
role in a coordinated and coherent approach to the
implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy and its Support Plan for the Sahel, as
recognized by the Council through presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/3, on UNOWAS. We hope that
that practice can be further built upon.
Finally, going forward, we would welcome regular
written updates by the Special Adviser or UNOWAS
on the implementation process of the United Nations
Support Plan. Updates on project timelines, proposed
trust funds and coordination efforts would be
important to include in such reporting. The successful
implementation of the Sahel Strategy would be an
important step towards stabilizing a rather volatile
region. The Strategy and the Support Plan must have
continued, strong, unified, international and United
Nations support, including from the Council.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We commend the
presidency for putting the spotlight on a comprehensive
approach to building and sustaining peace in the
Sahel region. The delegation of Kazakhstan would
also like to thank Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw, Special Adviser
of the Secretary-General for the Sahel; Mr. Ion
Jinga, Permanent Representative of Romania, in his
capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission;
Mr. Hafez Ghanem; and Mr. Rémy Rioux for their
insightful briefings.
We would like to commend the Government of
Côte d’Ivoire, other countries of the region and regional
and subregional actors, as well as the World Bank and
international donors, for their efforts to strengthen
peace and security throughout the region. We also praise
Mr. Thiaw and Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Chambas for advancing the recalibration of the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
We support strengthened regional and subregional
cooperation, which is extremely vital in order to have
an effective impact. Such collaborative efforts have
yielded the latest positive political and economic
developments that we have witnessed in Sahel countries.
At the same time, several challenges continue to affect

S/PV. 8435

stability in the region. The security situation continues
to deteriorate owing to the further spread of terrorist
and extremist groups. That insecurity is further
aggravated by the alliance of those groups with actors
involved in transnational organized crime and drug and
human trafficking, as well as arms proliferation in the
region. The effects of climate change, food insecurity,
forced displacement, rapid population growth and weak
governance also add to the complexity of the situation.
Kazakhstan is a strong proponent of the
three-pronged strategy to achieve regional peace and
stability through: first, strengthening the securitydevelopment nexus; secondly, adopting a regional
approach; and, thirdly, streamlining the United Nations
system to deliver as one. While we welcome the United
Nations reform on repositioning the development
system with greater coordination among the various
relevant United Nations agencies at the country level,
we now have to go further and increase coordination
at the regional level to advance peace and development
on a comprehensive and efficient basis. Such a
comprehensive overall strategy would prove to be a
most effective and sustainable tool to address common
threats facing the Sahel and neighbouring countries.
In our view, the recently calibrated United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, the United Nations
Support Plan for the Sahel and the reviewed African
Union Strategy for the Sahel Region will form a robust
and comprehensive framework that will embrace all the
measures needed to achieve peace and prosperity in the
Sahel. We call on all stakeholders to make every effort
to implement those strategies. Let me focus on some
issues that we believe are important for the overall
success of those strategies.
The first concerns the joint regional counterterrorism efforts through the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). We welcome increased
national and regional ownership in addressing the
threat posed by terrorism and extremism, and support
the full operationalization of the Joint Force of the
G-5 Sahel. In order to succeed, there is a need for the
unanimous political support of the Security Council,
increased technical assistance from Member States and
predictable and long-term sustainable funding. In turn,
the G5-Sahel States should strengthen coordination
and complementarity between the Joint Force and other
security forces in the region, including the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization

18-4543617/22

S/PV.8435

Peace and security in Africa

20/12/2018

Mission in Mali, and ensure that operations are better
aligned with broader regional initiatives.

Rioux, on behalf of the Alliance for the Sahel, for their
respective briefings.

Secondly, we share the assessment of Special
Adviser Thiaw that, in order to effectively address
instability in the region, any military approach
and humanitarian assistance should go hand in
hand in addressing the root causes of conflict and
development efforts in an integrated, complex and
well-coordinated manner, reinforced by long-term
sustainable funding. Our efforts need to focus on the
structural drivers of instability by decreasing poverty,
providing basic services, creating better opportunities
for education and employment, strengthening local
governance and mitigating the impact of climate
change. We therefore strongly support United Nations
peacebuilding programmes, as well as all the regional
and international efforts aimed at building resilience
in human and environmental systems and increasing
peace and prosperity in the region. We commend in
particular the Alliance for the Sahel initiative for
launching development and rapid-impact projects
aimed at creating new jobs and supporting rural areas
with improved infrastructure and services.

This meeting is taking place after the African
Union Peace and Security Council held an open meeting
on international and regional initiatives in the Sahel
region a few days ago. We hope that our discussion
here today will reinforce the important meeting that
took place at the level of the African Union. We share
the view that there is no shortage of strategies for the
Sahel region. Numerous initiatives have been taken
with the objective of overcoming peace, security and
socioeconomic development challenges in the region.
What emerged loud and clear during the African Union
Peace and Security Council meeting was the need to
ensure better coherence and political ownership by
countries of the region and Africa in the stabilization
efforts of the Sahel.

Finally, we underscore the importance of
preventing the radicalization of young women and
men by investing in education and employment and
promoting the meaningful inclusion of women and
youth in political and development processes. In that
regard, we welcome the convening of the first annual
Youth Regional Forum for Peace and Security, held
in Ouagadougou this month, and call on all parties to
redouble their efforts to strengthen the role of young
people in the consolidation of peace and security in
the Sahel.
In joining multilateral action, Kazakhstan therefore
remains committed to assisting the Sahel countries to
fulfil their vision for peace, progress and prosperity.
We will continue to work together with the Council and
key actors to find a solution for achieving lasting peace
in the region.
Mr. Woldeyes (Ethiopia): We thank Côte d’Ivoire
for putting this important item on the agenda of the
Security Council. We also wish thank Mr. Ibrahim
Thiaw, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General
for the Sahel; Ambassador Ion Jinga, Permanent
Representative of Romania, in his capacity as Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission; Mr. Hafez Ghanem, the
World Bank’s Vice-President for Africa; and Mr. Rémy
18/22

The United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel is a widely accepted and comprehensive strategy
for the promotion of long-lasting peace and security,
reinforced by development for the people of the Sahel
region. We therefore believe that the commitment by
the international community within the framework of
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel should be fulfilled.
The need to strengthen support for achieving peace and
development in the Sahel region remains a priority. We
strongly believe that renewing the call for sustaining
the flow of resources is important.
There is a worrisome trend that the problem of
peace and security in the Sahel is expanding to the Lake
Chad basin, which in turn is affected by multiple other
challenges. Accordingly, a coordinated response to the
problems of security and development of the Sahel will
have a positive impact on mitigating that risk. In that
regard, there is a need to build synergies at the national,
regional and international levels, including with
regard to the ongoing implementation of the United
Nations Support Plan for the Sahel, the review of the
African Union Strategy for the Sahel Region and the
implementation of the Priority Investment Programme
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).
The restoration and expansion of State authority in
northern Mali and remote areas of Sahelian countries,
especially the G-5 Sahel countries, is absolutely
critical. The absence of viable State structures has
been a major obstacle to stability and development in
the region. The threat and frequent attacks in recent
months against security forces and other personnel
18-45436

20/12/2018

Peace and security in Africa

serving in State institutions, including the destruction
of public facilities, must be addressed with the
requisite seriousness.
The recent series of terrorist attacks are clear
indications of the growing threat of terrorism and
violent extremism, including those on the LibyanChadian border. Operationalizing the Joint Force of
the G-5 Sahel is part of addressing that tremendous
challenge. However, without sustainable and stronger
support to the Joint Force, and without strengthening
the national security forces of countries of the region,
not much progress can be made in defeating terrorism
and organized crime. In that connection, reviving
the Nouakchott process was underscored during
the recent meeting of the African Union Peace and
Security Council.
We appreciate the commitments of the African
Union, the European Union and bilateral partners in
the context of addressing structural and operational
gaps for implementation of the Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel. Continuing partnerships on development
aspects, especially in the implementation of the
Priority Investment Plan for countries like Mali,
remains strategic.
Finally, coordination among the United Nations
agencies operating in the region, the Economic
Community of West African States and the African
Union will be vital for the improvement of the
humanitarian situation in the Sahel and the long-term
development trajectory in the region. In that regard,
it is important that access to basic services and job
opportunities in the border areas be scaled up in the
context of implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and its Support Plan.
The private sector should also have a role to play in
ensuring tangible progress in the socioeconomic
development endeavours of the region.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. Thiaw,
Special Adviser of the Secretary-General for the
Sahel, for briefing us today. We are pleased to hear
of the progress made to operationalize and deliver the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. He
and his team deserve real credit for the 2018 Support
Plan, which has rightly prioritized getting better
coordination between agencies and improved buy-in
from the Governments and peoples of the Sahel region.
As I think Mr. Thiaw’s briefing has established, the
Integrated Strategy has been through an important and

S/PV. 8435

formative year. The Support Plan has helped highlight
the need to realistic and targeted in our ambitions and
serves as a reminder that, despite some very difficult
challenges, the Sahel is also full of opportunities.
The more that can be done to unlock the potential of
the Sahel, particularly through support to education,
jobs and family planning, the more we will see young
entrepreneurs and young leaders finding local solutions
to the challenges they face, including the challenges of
climate change.
We are therefore delighted to see the international
community and the United Nations system redoubling
our efforts through the Integrated Strategy for the Sahel,
while seeking to learn from the challenges of the past
five years and taking a more deliberative partnership
approach with the countries and peoples of the region.
The Security Council has previously discussed the
risk of the Integrated Strategy for the Sahel seeming
distant or disconnected from the realities of the region.
We therefore welcome the increased focus on local
engagement, particularly with girls and women.
Similarly, the past few years have shown the need
to be realistic, patient and ensure that major pledges
and announcements are matched with sufficient people,
resources and capabilities to actually deliver in the
region. That has not always been the case, and there
is much more that could be done centrally from New
York to ensure existing resources are fully mobilized
and that coordination mechanisms in-country are
working as effectively as possible. In particular, we
would highlight the need to deploy the best people to
the toughest problems in the region itself.
We also need to ensure that the development
agenda is working closely with the other institutions
and sectors, particularly those focused on defence
and security. It is trite but true that there can be no
development without stability, or vice versa. We would
encourage more frequent and honest conversations
between the development and security sectors in the
Sahel. It is notable that West Africa, and the Sahel region
in particular, is attracting ever-more international
solidarity and support, which is absolutely right and
arguably overdue. Nonetheless, we need to ensure that
organizational mandates are clear and that strong lines
of communication are set up between them.
The United Kingdom is in the process of expanding
our diplomatic, defence and development assistance
to the Sahel region. We believe that will enable us to

18-4543619/22

S/PV.8435

Peace and security in Africa

fully explore the links and opportunities and build up
an approach that knits together our security, diplomatic
development and humanitarian work. We are opening
new Embassies in the Niger and Chad, increasing our
presence in Mali and have already deployed three
Chinook helicopters to provide logistical support to the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel through
Operation Barkhane.
We will also be significantly increasing our
development assistance to the region in the coming
years. We see an approach that joins up the immediate
and life-saving aid to long-term development and
security outcomes as critical to changing the Sahel’s
current trajectory. That demands United Nations
leadership, and I am pleased to hear that the Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel will be entering 2019 in a better
state to deliver that.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we should
like to express our thanks to Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw for
his briefing. We should also like to thank Ambassador
Jinga, Mr. Ghanem and Mr. Rioux for their statements.
It is clear that the situation in the Sahel region is
alarming and presents great challenges in the security,
governance and development sectors. The region
continues to face a volatile and complex environment
that includes asymmetrical threats carried out by
armed and terrorist groups and transnational crime that
in turn includes trafficking in drugs, human beings
and weapons, among other things. Those three factors
put at risk not only the stability of the countries of
the region, but also represent a threat to the political
peace processes. As such, they represent a threat to the
civilian population.
Bolivia has reiterated strongly the need to analyse,
but above all identify, the structural causes of conflicts.
In the specific case of the Sahel, those causes have
had a profound impact on the current context of the
region. We have mentioned it before, and we shall do
so again: the consequences of interventionism and
regime-change policies following the 2011 conflict in
Libya unleashed the side effect of destabilization in the
Sahel and brought about chaos, the disastrous results of
which continue to be experienced to this day.
Unfortunately, in addition to the precarious
security situation, the Sahel poses other great
challenges. The humanitarian situation is the one
that we should focus on more closely. According to
20/22

20/12/2018

data provided by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, eight countries in the region
are at risk of a humanitarian crisis, since, out of the
150 million inhabitants, approximately 24 million
require humanitarian assistance and 10 million are at
risk of food insecurity. In addition, there are more than
3 million refugees and forced displaced persons, not to
mention the adverse effects of climate change, which
further exacerbate the crisis in the region.
In turn, Mali and the Lake Chad basin represent
the most significant hotspots in the region. In Mali,
insecurity has intensified and clashes between
armed groups, asymmetric attacks, cross-border
influences and intercommunal violence have led
to massive displacement, further undermining the
humanitarian situation.
Despite the bleak outlook in the Sahel, we would
like to emphasize the significant efforts of regional
and subregional organizations, led by the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union. We welcome
and commend the efforts and the considerable political
will of Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and the
Niger in terms of cooperation and operationalization
of their forces on the ground. The Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) is a great and
exemplary demonstration of the coordinated efforts
of the African Union and the United Nations, as well
as showing a high level of solidarity among member
States and the international community in general.
We consider it essential that the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force, as part of the concept of operations approved
under resolution 2359 (2017) and previously endorsed
by the Peace and Security Council of the African Union,
generate once and for all the necessary capabilities
for the full deployment of the military, police and
civilian components. To that end, it is crucial that the
countries that make up the Joint Force receive technical
cooperation and predictable and sustainable funding.
Moreover, the commitments made at the conference
held by the European Union and other countries in
Brussels on 23 February are an encouraging sign for
the capacity-building of the contingents of the Joint
Force. All initiatives towards achieving stability
and lasting peace in the region are critical. However,
we are concerned that those funding pledges have
not yet been fully fulfilled. We believe economic
cooperation to be a responsibility towards the region
due to the intrinsic links between the current context
18-45436

20/12/2018

Peace and security in Africa

and the interventionist policies to which we referred.
It is therefore an unavoidable obligation that must be
fully met.
On the other hand, it is essential to strengthen
the programmes under the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, which provide an overall
framework aimed at strengthening governance,
resilience and security in the countries of the region. The
strengthening of those capacities in the countries of the
region, and above all their ownership and decisiveness
on the ground, is fundamental. The six priority areas of
the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel, which
focus on cross-border and regional cooperation to
ensure complementarity and coordination among the
countries of the region, should enable the joint efforts
to mobilize expertise and financial resources. In that
context, significant coordination among the United
Nations, the Economic Community of West African
States, the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel and the African Union is crucial.
Finally, we draw attention to the critical and
necessary humanitarian action in the Sahel. It has saved
many lives, but millions of people still urgently need
it. We call on and strongly encourage the international
community to continue to support, through technical
support and economic and humanitarian cooperation,
all initiatives for the people in the interest of achieving
stability and sustainable peace in the region.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Côte d’Ivoire.
I would like to thank Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw, Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General for the Sahel, for his
briefing on developments in the Sahel and the current
initiatives to promote peace, stability and development.
I also thank Mr. Rémy Rioux, Director-General of the
French Development Agency, and Mr. Hafez Ghanem,
Vice President of the World Bank for Africa, for their
informative presentations on the need for enhanced
cooperation among all actors in order to meet the
multiple challenges facing the Sahel. I also thank
Ambassador Ion Jinga for his briefing.
The Sahel today acts as a summary of the many
challenges facing the West African subregion. The
region has vast natural resources and significant
human capital, comprising 65 per cent of young people,
which should logically allow it to achieve sustainable
economic and social development as a guarantee of

S/PV. 8435

peace and stability. Unfortunately, security clashes,
climate change, structural vulnerabilities and the lack
of basic social services hamper development efforts in
the region. The Sahel therefore reflects the false image
of a vast arid and poor area, where State authority is
barely evident, thereby fostering the proliferation of
networks of drug traffickers and armed terrorist groups.
At the high-level debate on 5 December (see
S/PV.8413), it was underlined that peace and security are
inextricably linked to economic and social development.
That challenge therefore reinforces the need to find
lasting solutions to the current situation of instability
in the Sahel and the entire West African region.
In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the
recalibrated United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel with a view to ensuring coordinated and coherent
efforts to address the underlying causes of instability in
the Sahel. We would also like to express our support for
the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel for the
period 2018-2030. The Plan seeks to strengthen efforts
to accelerate shared prosperity and sustainable peace in
the region through the implementation of the priorities
identified to achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and Agenda 2063 of the African Union.
My country welcomes the fact that the Sahel Support
Plan is an instrument to promote coherence and
coordination for greater effectiveness and to achieve
results in the context of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel.
My country believes that it is necessary for
the United Nations to improve its coordination and
strengthen its collaboration with all partners in the
region, in particular national and regional institutions,
bilateral and multilateral organizations such as the
World Bank and the Sahel Alliance, and civil society
organizations. That is an essential condition for the
implementation of the Security Council resolutions on
the Sahel.
As the challenges in the Sahel are numerous and
multifaceted, the security initiatives undertaken by
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and
the other forces present in the region do not represent
sufficient and sustainable responses. They should
necessarily be supported by the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the Sahel Support
Plan. In that regard, it is important to highlight the
crucial role of the World Bank and the Sahel Alliance,
as well as other development partners, in funding

18-4543621/22

S/PV.8435

Peace and security in Africa

development projects that generate employment and
opportunities for the empowerment of women, who
play a key role in promoting and strengthening peace
in the region.
In addition, the impacts of climate change on
resource and land management, conflicts, population
displacement and migration flows are considerable and
require a concerted approach on our part to address the
root causes of the instability in the Sahel. Given the
numerous challenges, Côte d’Ivoire calls for a paradigm
shift in the region. We must make our actions part of a
long-term forward-looking vision, based on a relevant
analysis of the aspirations of the populations concerned
and development strategies, taking into account the
socioeconomic environment of the countries of the
Sahel region.

22/22

20/12/2018

My country would like to commend the international
community’s concern over the Sahel. We call on the
States of the region to take ownership of their collective
security and economic and social development by
implementing the United Nations Support Plan for
the Sahel.
In conclusion, my country believes that the
implementation of the Sahel Support Plan, which
is based on the principle of mutual accountability,
deserves the utmost attention of the Council and all
development partners.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

18-45436
