VI l.

mentation ofthe Declaration contained in General Asscmbly resolution 1514 (XV). which fully applies to American
Samoa;
4. Calls upon the (iovcrnmcnt of thc U nited Sta tes of
America, as the administcring Power, to take ali nccessary
steps, taking into account the frcely expressed wishes of
the people of American Samoa, to expedite the process of
decolonization ofthe Territory in accordance with the rclevant provisions ofthe Charter ofthe United Nations and
the Declaration;
5. Reafjirms that it is the responsibility of the administering Power to ensure that the people of American Samoa
are kept fully informed of their inalienable right to sclfdetcrmination and independcnce, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
6. Reitera/es its rccmnmendation that, in accordance
with the expressed wishcs of the peoplc of American
Samoa, as reflected in thc report of thc second Political
Status Commission, the Chief Justiee and Associate Justices be appointed by the Governor and approved by the
Legislature, a proeedure which could be facilitated by the
fact that a growing number of American Samoans are
qualified lawyers;
7. Reaffirms thc responsibility of the administcring
Powcr, under the Charter, for thc- cconomic and social
devclopment of the Territory;
8. Ca/Is upon the administering Power, in co-operation
with the territorial Government and within thc- framework
of the five-year economic devc-lopment plan covering the
period 1979-1984, to continue to help to strengthen and
diversify the economy of American Samoa in thc interests
of the people of the Territory;
9. Urges the administering Power to continuc to facilitate close relations and co-operation between the peoplc of
the Territory and their neighbours and between the territorial Government and the regional institutions to enhance
further thc cconomic welfare of the pcoplc of American
Samoa;
1O. Urges the administering Powcr, in co-operation
with the freely elected representatives of American Samoa,
to safeguard the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment of their natural resources by taking
effective measures to ensure their right to own and dispose
of those resources and to establish and maintain control of
their future development;
11. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to American Samoa at an appropriate
time should be kept undcr review;
12. Requcsts thc Special Committee to continue the
consideration of this question at its next scssion, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to American Samoa at an appropriate time and in consultation
with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session.
X6th pfenary meeting
7 Dcccmlwr /983

38/42.

Question of Guam

The General AS\'emhlr.
llaving cnnsidered the question of Guam.
Having examined the relcvant chapters of the report of

the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countnc~ and Peoples, 7
7 lhid., chaps. IIL IV and '\ VII

ZB

Resolutions adoptcd on the reports of the Fourth C'ommítk<·

Rccalling its resolu11011 1) 14 (X V) ,)r 14 1kcember
1960, containing the Dcclarat1on on thc (ira11ti11g of 111dcpendence to Colonial Countrics and Pcoplcs. ami ali other
resolutions and deeisions of thc 1 lnitcd Nations rclat1ng to
(iuam.
llarmg hcard thc statement of the I cprescntat I H' <'I the
administering Power,'
Notlllg 11·ith apprcna/1011 thc rnntinucd active partKipation of the administering Power in the work of tlw Spccial
Comm11tee in regard to (iuam. therchy enabling it to conducta more informed and meaningful cxammation of thL'
situation in thc Tcrritory with a view to accclerating the
process of dccoloni;,ation towards the f'ull and spccdy
1mplementation of thc Dcdaration,
,Vot111g that a referendum on politirnl status was organ1zcd in the Territory, thc l1nal phasc of which was hcld on
4 Septembcr 1982,
Recafling ali relcvant rcsolutions of thc l lnited Nat1,ms
relating to mílitary bases and 111stallat1ons in eolo111al ami
Non-Self-( ioverning T erritorics,
Not111g the grcat potential for di, er~1fyi11g and dn dop
111g thc cconomy of Guam olli::rcd h} romnwr.-ial lishmg.
agriculture and thc dcvclopmcnt ol tlw transportation
industry,
Bcar111s: 111 mind that an ohstaclc to the econom1c devt>lopment ofthe Territon has heen thc uncertainty concernmg land held by the federal authorit1es.
-l1mrc of the spccial nrcumstanccs or thc geograph1eal
location and cconomie conditions of(iuam and the Tll'LTS·
sity of diversifying the ccnnomy of thc Tcrri11iry as a malter ofpriority and noting thc great potcntial for d1vl'fsilication offered by commcrcial fishing, agriculture and the
devclopment of the transportation industry,
M111dfúl that United Nat1ons vi!>iting missions providc
an effective means or asccrtaining the situatinn in the
small Territories and exprcs~ing its ~atisfaction at the w11lingness ofthe administering Power to rcceivc visiting missions in the Terntories under its administration,
l. Arprovcs the chapter or thc report or the Special
Committee on the Situation with rcgard to tlw lmplementation of the Dcclaration ,m the ( ,ranting of I ndcpcndcnre
to Colonial Countries and Pcoplcs rclating to ( ,uam: s
1
Rcaftinm the inalienable right of thc peopk of
Ciuam to self-dctermination and indepcrHknce in ,·,mformity with the Dedaration on thc <,ranting of lndq,cndence to Colonial Countrics and Pcopks, contained in
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV):
.t Rcaf!inns it.1· co11rict1011 that surh foctors as terntorial si;,e, geographiral location, size of population and lim ited natural resourccs should in no way delay tlw 1mplemcntation of the Declarat1011 contained in Grncral
Assembly rcsolution IS 14 (XV). which fully applies to
Guam:
4. lakl's note of thc fact that 111 thc rl'fcrendum on
political status, hcld on 4 Scptember 1982, 75 pcr cent of
thc voters voted in favour of Commonwealth status in
association with the lJnited States of America and. in that
connection. mindful of the principies contained in the
Charter of the ll nited Nations and in tht' Declaration. ca lis
upon the administering Power, in co-operation with the
territorial Governmenl, to cxpcdite the proccss of
decoloni;ration in accordance with tht' expre\sed wishl's of
the people of thc Territnry:
5. Reaf/irms its strong e, 1/l'll'//011 t hat thc admmistering Power must ensure th.it 1111litary bases and installations
do not hinder the population ,,f tlw Tl'fri1,11 \ from ,·x,·1ris1

x //,11/ ,·hap \ \ 11

General Assembly - Thirty-eighth Session

224

ing its right to sclf-dctermination and indcpcndcncc in
conformity with thc purposcs and principies of thc Charter
and urges the administ<.'ring Powcr to takc ali neccssary
measures to comply fully with thc rclcvant rcsolutions:
6. Reajfirm.1 thc rl.'spons1bility of thc admini~tering
Power, undcr the Chartcr. frir the economic and social
devclopment of Guam and calls upon thc administering
Powcr to take ali necessary stcps to strengthen and divcrsify the economy of the Tcrritory. with a view to reducing
thc Territory's cconomic dcpendence on the administering
Power:
7. Rt'iterates it.1 cal/ upon the administcring Power. in
co-operation with the territorial Govcrnmcnt. to rcmovc
the constraints which limit growth in the rconomic development of the Terntory, part1cularly with rcgard to commercial fishing. agriculturc and thc transportation industry:
8. Cal/s upo11 thc adrninistcring Powcr. in co-operation
with the local authoritics. to accclcratc the transfer of land
to thc people of the Tcrritory.
9. Urges thc adrninistning Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Governmcnt. to continuc to takc effcctivc
measures to safeguard and guarantee the right of the people ofGuarn to thcir natural rcsources and to establish and
maintain control ovcr their future dcvclopment and
requests the administering Power to take ali necessarv
steps to protect the propcrty rights of the pcoplc of thc
Territory;
1O. Takes no/e of thc steps taken by the administering
Power to strengthen its efforts to develop and promote thc
language and culture of the ( 'hamorro people. who cornprise more than hatr of thc population of the Territory.
and reaffirms the importance of further efforts in that ficld:
11. Considers that thc possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to Guam atan appropriate time should he
kept under rcview:
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue thc
consideration of this question at its next session. including
the possihle dispatch of a fu11her visiting mission to Guam
at an appropriate time aml in consultation with thc
administcring Power, and to report thereon to the ( ieneral
Assembly at its thirty-ninth ~ession.
86th p/cnar_r 111cctinx
7 /)ecembcr J983

38/43. Question of Bermuda
Thc Ueneral A.ssemh/1·.
Jlaving considcrcd the qucstion of Bermuda,
fiaving examined the relevan! chapters of the report or
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to thc
lmplementation or the Declaration on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,"
Recalling its rcsolut1on 1514 (XV) of 14 Decemhcr
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoplcs, and ali other
resolutions and decisions of the lJnitcd Nations relating to
Bermuda,
Taking into account the statement of the representative
of the administering Powcr rclating to the Territory, 111 in
which he said that his Government would fully respect the
wishes ofthe people of Bermuda in determining the future
constitutional status of thc Territory.
9 i!nd, chaps. 111-V and ;\J"\
!O lhtd., Th1rtr-,·1.l!.hth .)'es.\1011
lh.

Conscious of the nerd to ensure the ful! and speedy
implcmentation nf the Declaration in rcspect of the Territory.
Noling with appreciallon the continued active participation of the adm inistering Power in the work of the Special
( ·ommittee in rcgard to Bermuda. which contrihutes to
informed consideration of conditions in the Territory.
with a view to accclerating the process of decolonization
for the purpose of the full implementation of the Dedarallon,

Rccalling ali rclevant resolutions of the United Nations
rclating to military bases and installations in colonial and
Non-Self-Governmg Territories,
Noting that the economy ofthe Territory continues to he
based on revenue generated from tourism and the registration of foreign companies. which creatcs a heavy depcndence on those activities.
. l u·arc of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the Territory and
hearing in mind the nccessity of diversifying and strengthcning further its cconomy as a matter of priority in order
to promote economic stahility.
Mindfúl that l 111tcd Nations visiting missions pro vide
an cffective mcans of asccrtaining the situation in the
small Territorie~.
1. .4pprores the chapter of the report of the Special
l'ommittee on the Situation with regard to the lmplemcntation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependencc
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Bermuda: 11
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of Bermuda to sclf-detcrmination and indepcndence in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, containcd in General
Assemhly resolution 1514 (XV):
3. Rci1cratc., the view that such factors as territorial
s1ze. geographical location. size of population and limited
natural resource~ should in no way dclay the speedy exercise by the people of thc Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and indepcndence. in conformit~
with the Declaration contained in General Asscmbly resolution 15 14 (XV). which fully applies to Bermuda;
4. Urges the administering Power. taking into account
the frecly expresscd will and desire of thc peoplc of Bermuda, to continue to take ali necessary steps to ensure thc
ful! and speedy 1mplementation ofGeneral Assembly resolution l514(XV):
5. Reitera/e, that it is the obligation ofthc administering Power to crcate such conditions in the Territory as will
cnahle the people of Bermuda to exercise frecly and without interference their inalienable right to sclfdetermination and independence in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and. in that connection. reaffirms thc importance of fostering an awareness
among the peoplc of Bermuda of thc possihilitics open to
them in the exercise of that right:
6. Reatfirms that, in accordance with the relevant provisions ofthe Chartcr ofthe United Nations and the Dcclaration contained in General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV). it is ultimately for the people of Bermuda themselves to decide on thl'ir futurc political status:
7. No/es that general elcctions wcre held in the Tcrritorv in Februarv 1983 and also notes with interest that the
Go~ernment o( the Territory has expressed its intention to
revive discussion of the 1979 White Paper on lndepenr

- -- - -

11 11>,d. //11r11·-,·1c:l11/¡ Se111,,,, . .\11¡1¡1/m11111 \',, l3 (A .18 21). chap. XIX
h,11111, (

1111ru1tfl('1',

11th mccltng para-..

l/
