A/S-27/PV.6

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Twenty-seventh special session

6th meeting
Friday, 10 May 2002, 3.00 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Han Seung-soo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda items 8 and 9 (continued)
Review of the achievements in the implementation
and results of the World Declaration on the Survival,
Protection and Development of Children and Plan of
Action for Implementing the World Declaration on
the Survival, Protection and Development of
Children in the 1990s
Renewal of commitment and future action for
children in the next decade
Draft resolution (A/S-27/L.1)
The President: The Assembly will first hear a
statement by His Excellency Mr. Robert G. Mugabe,
President of the Republic of Zimbabwe.
President Mugabe: It is with great pleasure that I
address this important gathering. At the World Summit
for Children, held in September 1990, we issued a
Declaration and Plan of Action that was endorsed by
181 countries. Subsequently, 155 of those countries
have prepared national plans of action for children.
That conference set forth a vision or a first call for
children by establishing seven major and 20 supporting
goals that were considered implementable by the year
2000. It is for that reason that, as we meet here for
three days, we are reviewing progress so far made
towards fulfilling the commitments made 12 years ago.

(Republic of Korea)

Children are every nation’s tomorrow, and the
nature and quality of that future is dependent on how
they are nurtured by their families, by the schools they
attend and by society in general. In a world that has
seen tremendous technological advances, posterity will
indict the present generation if it is unable to give food
to its children and uphold all their other rights.
In 1990 Zimbabwe was among the first group of
nations to ratify the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of the Child, and since then it has rigorously
done its best to implement its provisions. However, like
many other developing countries, Zimbabwe — even
before the 1990 Summit — has always recognized that
poverty, hunger, disease, neglect, discrimination, abuse
and illiteracy hinder families and States from fulfilling
and upholding the rights of the child. For Zimbabwe,
poverty and disease, now compounded by the
HIV/AIDS pandemic, remain major obstacles to
upholding the rights of the child. We are therefore
pleased to note that at the recent International
Conference on Financing for Development, held in
Mexico, the international community affirmed that
sustainable development is essential to poverty
eradication. Let me hasten to add that sustainable
development can be assured only if investment in it has
children’s development as the main target.
The racially imbalanced distribution of resources
in my country has, over years, also impacted negatively
on the ability of children to fully enjoy their rights.
Zimbabwe, as the Assembly is aware, inherited a
society divided along the lines of race, with the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

02-37682 (E)

*0237682*

A/S-27/PV.6

minority white settler community enjoying the
ownership of most of the fertile land and other wealthcreating resources. The majority of the poor indigenous
population of about 14 million was forced to reside in
the rural areas known in the colonial era as “native
reserves”, where the soils, rainfall and general
infrastructure are poor. It is in those backward rural
areas that my Government has been struggling to
eliminate such diseases as schistosomiasis, malaria,
cholera and others.
Over the years, and in pursuance of our policy of
health for all by the year 2000, we have taken vigorous
measures to increase access to health amenities — such
as the building of provincial and district hospitals and
corresponding clinics. Zimbabwe is indeed proud to be
among developing countries that have, through
immunizing most children, successfully fought for the
eradication of such diseases as polio, neo-natal tetanus,
diphtheria and measles. We have also successfully
fought iodine deficiency. Since 1996, when donors
withdrew their aid, we have purchased all vaccines
from our own fiscus.
Our education-for-all programme, adopted at
independence in 1980, has been second to none: the
average child in Zimbabwe now has access to
education for 11 years. The decade-end review of the
1990 World Summit indicators shows that primary
school enrolment in Zimbabwe had increased to 89 per
cent by the year 2000, with a completion rate of 80 per
cent. Our literacy rate has also now risen to 87 per
cent.
The land programme currently under way seeks to
assure the future of our nation, and especially that of
our children, as it now makes them owners of their land
and masters of their destiny. The programme has
already demonstrated, contrary to conventional
wisdom, that the young and professional classes can
successfully engage in agriculture. This phenomenon
will ensure that agriculture will be no longer just a
means of subsistence, but a major source of wealth as it
stimulates industrial development and thus acts as an
important factor in poverty alleviation, a sine qua non
for the creation of a world fit for children.
To protect children from abuse, the Criminal
Procedure and Evidence Act has been amended to
enable the operation of a victim-friendly courts system
that ensures that perpetrators of child sexual abuse get
maximum punishment. In addition, children’s

2

participation in different forums focusing on their
rights has richly informed society and policy makers
alike.
However, for Zimbabwe, and indeed the entire
region of the Southern Africa Development
Community, the fight against HIV/AIDS, a major child
killer, is bound to be a protracted battle. To fight the
poverty which worsens the effects of the pandemic, the
Government has instituted a poverty alleviation action
programme that assists with the education and health
care of poor children, while the public assistance
programme helps with housing and other needs of poor
families.
Despite imperialist and neo-colonialist efforts to
subject my country to intolerable and unjustified
sanctions, we remain resolved to defend the
sovereignty of our nation and to ensure the future of
our children. Hence, Zimbabwe will never be a colony
again, in the interests of our nation and, especially, of
our children.
In conclusion, allow me to reaffirm my country’s
commitment to the global effort to create a world
environment fit for children. This summit should take
all necessary measures in the resulting plan of action
and move towards fulfilling the 1990 Summit’s vision
of a first call for children. Let us work to put food in
every child’s mouth.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by His Excellency Mathieu Kérékou,
President of the Republic of Benin.
President Kérékou (spoke in French): Let me
begin, in speaking from this universal rostrum and
amid this array of eminent participants from every
continent of the world, by warmly hailing the felicitous
initiative of Secretary-General Kofi Annan in calling
on us to pause so as to undertake a comprehensive
review of the past 11 years of intensive activity at the
national and international levels to promote the
survival, protection and harmonious development of
children.
My country, Benin, welcomes the holding of this
special session devoted exclusively to children and
hopes that our meetings will produce tangible results
able to provide a better future for all the children of our
respective countries.
In Benin, the problems of children hold a
significant place in the concerns of the State and in the

A/S-27/PV.6

social policy of the Government’s programme of
action. Thus, a number of measures well known to the
representatives of the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) in Benin, have been undertaken in order to
ensure the methodical implementation of a new
concept, based on the commitments undertaken at the
1990 World Summit for Children, that attaches special
importance to children and adolescents.
All of these actions, which are founded in
institutional arrangements and involve an increasing
contribution from the State in the education and health
care of children, seek primarily to reduce infant, child
and maternal mortality; to meet the basic needs of the
family and to promote its role in ensuring the wellbeing and development of children; to exempt girls
from school fees in rural areas and to create residential
centres for them in every department; and to promote
the basic education of girls in rural and urban areas. In
this context, an initiative known as “girl for girl” has
been developed that places young girls under the
guidance of older schoolgirls in the school
environment.
We should also mention the patient and unified
struggle being waged against female sexual mutilation,
sexual exploitation and the worst forms of child labour.
Thanks to the assistance of non-governmental
organizations
and
international
institutions,
encouraging results have been achieved in this regard,
but they remain inadequate and limited, given the
magnitude, acuteness and complexity of the problems
besetting the least developed countries.
Such social problems associated with the
phenomenon of poverty largely arise from and are
explained by the crushing burden of debt, the iniquity
of the international trading system and the ongoing
decrease in official development assistance. Given this
picture of contrasting light and shadows, it is clear that
much remains to be done in order to ensure that
children in the least developed countries enjoy the bare
minimum necessary for a decent and fulfilling life.
Nowadays, the international community agrees to
recognize that the protection of children, the fight
against internal and cross-border trafficking of children
and action to reduce poverty are the major challenges
ahead. I would recall that my country was egregiously
and cynically singled out a few months ago by certain
international media as a hub of the vile phenomenon of
child trafficking. In that regard, intellectual and moral

honesty compels us to identify the true nature and
context of this question.
As everyone knows, it is a reality in Africa that
one of the oldest and most current forms of social
mutual assistance and community spirit is the care of
children from disadvantaged backgrounds by families
or friends who enjoy better living and working
conditions. Unfortunately, the rapid deterioration of the
socio-economic situation on our continent and the
frenetic profiteering of many unscrupulous individuals
have perverted this once commendable practice into an
inhuman traffic in children.
The only positive conclusion that the
international community should draw from this is that
the fight against poverty has been and remains the
cornerstone of every noble action intended to eradicate
the abject phenomenon of child trafficking. That is the
resolve of the Government of Benin, which has taken
bold steps to eradicate this scourge of our times by
creating local committees to combat child trafficking,
with the participation of the people, non-governmental
organizations and United Nations agencies, including
UNICEF. I take this opportunity to express my
country’s gratitude to all those partners that have
involved themselves and are assisting us in all our
tireless efforts to protect the rights of children.
I am convinced that, by building on the
achievements of the past 11 years; by continuing to
prioritize the needs and rights of children; by
mitigating the ravages of endemic diseases and the
HIV/AIDS pandemic; and by putting an end to the
Machiavellian manipulation of young minds, together
we shall be able to win our battle to ensure a better
future for our children.
The strong and united political resolve of all
States members of the international community and
large-scale action through the effective mobilization of
resources devoted to children are required if we are to
meet the many challenges facing our peoples and States
today. I wish our work every success.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by His Excellency Mr. Fradique Bandeira
Melo de Menezes, President of Sao Tome and Principe.
President Melo de Menezes (spoke in
Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation):
In addressing this forum, I would like first to greet
everyone present and to express the hope that this

3

A/S-27/PV.6

meeting will lead us to take sensible decisions with a
view to preparing a better future for our children.
In 1990, when Governments adopted the
Declaration on the Survival, Protection and
Development of Children and a Plan of Action to
implement it, we were given an opportunity to launch a
process that could lead to a true change in the lives of
those who, as one poet has said, are “the best of the
world”. Back then, the way in which a large sector of
humanity, our children, lived on the margins compelled
us to take a firm stand with a view to making changes
to prioritize our children.
More than a decade has passed since that Summit
took place in 1990. Today, we are meeting together
once again, this time to take stock and, more
importantly, to confront the present situation of
children at the beginning of this new century. From
1990 to the present, the world has seen unprecedented
progress in terms of mankind’s capacity for
accomplishment and of the affirmation of human
potential.
Because of new information and communication
technology, we are almost instantly aware of
everything that happens in the world. As a result, we
are much closer to one another, and there is a tendency
for other people’s causes to become our own.
Glaring images that evoke our incapacity to fulfil
completely the Plan of Action adopted at the 1990
World Summit for Children multiply daily before our
eyes. Despite many countries’ efforts to fulfil the
objectives established then, much undoubtedly remains
to be done so that one day we can be proud of having
contributed to a better life for children, ensuring
acceptable conditions for their survival and sufficient
protection to ensure their full development.
The persistence of armed conflict and instability
in many places — especially in poor countries with
fragile economies — and the grave humanitarian
situation resulting from the great numbers of refugees
have created a great obstacle to the success of social
action aimed at improving children’s well-being. There
is a need for more peacekeeping missions and for more
dialogue to ensure the well-being, security and
protection of children. It is time to eliminate forever all
acts of violence, exploitation and abuse of children.
We welcome the end of the armed conflict in
Angola. Surely the environment of peace, together with

4

the country’s resources, will bring opportunities for
economic growth and for human development.
Moreover, we support all initiatives of the United
Nations and of other international organizations to
establish peace and stability in the world.
Over the years, Sao Tome and Principe has been
working on behalf of children, but we are aware that
we have a long way to go in order to meet the goals of
the World Summit and of other forums where
children’s issues have been discussed, in particular the
World Conference on Education for All, held at
Jomtien in 1990. Some actions taken in our country by
Government agencies and by traditional partners such
as the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
non-governmental organizations, as well as by
churches and civil society, have contributed to our
children’s survival, as, we are proud to say, recent data
have shown. Although it is small, some improvement
has been recorded in the indicators of infant and
maternal mortality thanks to the positive effects of
endeavours to fight malaria and of national
immunization programmes. The educational system has
implemented a number of measures — such as literacy
programmes for youth, especially teenage girls — to
bring back into the system children who have dropped
out of school to become street children.
The structural adjustment programme imposed on
the country has had negative social effects. Despite
external
financial
assistance,
satisfying
the
population’s basic needs remains difficult. An analysis
of the population’s living conditions confirms that 46
per cent live in poverty, of whom 35 per cent live in
extreme poverty. It is important to note that one of the
most vulnerable groups is women, particularly those
who are the heads of families. Generally, they are very
poor and must still support their children and elderly
people. In Sao Tome and Principe, one third of families
are supported by women. In the light of that situation,
we are challenging ourselves to take a more dynamic
and decisive stance to purge our society of these
problems.
Issues related to food security, public health,
clean water, electricity, endemic diseases such as
sexually transmitted diseases and HIV/AIDS,
children’s access to education school retention,
illiteracy and all other aspects considered in the Plan of
Action deserve our strongest commitment. This must
be demonstrated not only in words but also by taking

A/S-27/PV.6

specific action. Concerted action to establish a
comprehensive programme for children’s development
cannot be successful if the needs of the family and of
the community are not taken into consideration; it will
require, at a minimum, the conditions necessary for the
family’s survival and well-being.
Under these circumstances, the Government
cannot simply rely on its own institutional capacity to
create and implement programmes to cope with
children’s problems; it must secure the cooperation of a
variety of sectors, with investment not only at the
national level, but also at the regional and international
levels. On the other hand, it is also important to
strengthen existing partnerships and to establish new
ones.
In conclusion, I should like to assure all
participants that Sao Tome and Principe will continue
to strengthen its efforts to improve the situation of our
children and to fulfil our commitment to implement all
aspects of the Plan of Action.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by His Excellency Mr. Kumba Yalá,
President of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau.
President
Yalá
(spoke
in
Portuguese;
interpretation from French text provided by the
delegation): I have the honour, on behalf of GuineaBissau and its people, to address this special Assembly
session devoted to the children of the entire world. I
shall stress in particular problems and the challenges
that concern my country’s children, although we share
the same concerns as those of the majority of United
Nations Member States.
The fact that the subject of children and youth has
justified a special session cannot be separated from the
universal truth that children and youth, on the one
hand, are the reasons that all States should strive for
progress and social welfare and, on the other, provide
the driving intellectual and moral force to ensure a
better future for our peoples. In that regard, our
immortal leader Amilcar Cabral said, “Children are the
flowers of our struggle and the reason for our fight”.
For Guinea-Bissau’s political leaders, Cabral’s idea
represents an enduring heritage that is the foundation
of values such as dialogue, tolerance, non-violence and
reconciliation.
Guinea-Bissau is aware of that, and thus it has
undertaken and will always undertake concrete policies

and actions to create favourable conditions for the
balanced, healthy and progressive development of
children at all levels. To that end, our authorities have
ratified
practically
all
international
juridical
instruments relative to children. In particular, we have
ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
adopted by the General Assembly on 20 November
1989, and have taken all institutional and legislative
measures for its implementation.
The creation of the Institute for Women and
Children is one of the political measures the authorities
have taken to give special consideration to children.
Other important decisions include the adoption of a law
mandating free, compulsory primary education,
causing school attendance to rise from 41 per cent in
1999 to 61 per cent currently.
Improvements have been achieved in the
indicators for access to safe drinking water, child
malnutrition, infant mortality, education and health as
reported in the Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey for
Guinea-Bissau, thanks to the invaluable support of
international organizations and development partners,
including the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), Rädda Barnen, the Children’s Villages of
SOS Kinderdorf International and Plan International.
As I have said, the political measures taken by the
authorities have had the crucial support of international
organizations, development partners, UNICEF and Plan
International, with tangible results for the health and
education of our children, notwithstanding the
tremendous financial difficulties and the scarcity of
resources that we are experiencing.
Given the continued high rate of infant mortality
despite the aforementioned progress — as well as the
fact that malaria, measles, malnutrition and other
childhood illnesses such as diarrhoea and respiratory
infections are still a cause of great concern — we
consider that the national efforts of the authorities are
not sufficient. It is fundamental that there must be
coordination not just of the ideas but, especially, of the
resources of a global partnership in order to create a
framework for equality and opportunities, bringing
well-being to all corners of the global village.
Lastly, a correct understanding of globalization
must never be one that in its assertions shies from
seeking solutions for the repercussions of events
occurring in the developed countries. We believe that
globalization involves the mixture of the good and evil

5

A/S-27/PV.6

that at all times characterizes the peoples and countries
of all countries and continents, all longitudes and
latitudes. There is no one who does not strive to ensure
that good may overcome evil. It is therefore certain that
the well-being of all peoples, particularly children,
depends on a prosperous and truly global village.
We believe that values such as democracy, respect
for fundamental human rights and good governance,
which are required as benchmarks of bilateral and
multilateral relations, especially between the North and
the South, can be effectively fostered only if the
international community agrees to treat the children of
our countries as the focal point of investment and of
assistance by the people and for the people.
Guinea-Bissau is convinced that the ongoing
efforts to improve education and diagnostic and
preventive health care, to combat poverty and to
strengthen democracy, peace, stability and security will
reflect positively in the human development indicators,
lifting our country up from the 169th position it
currently occupies.
As we have said before, we have made gigantic
efforts, with the constant support of our bilateral and
multilateral development partners, to adopt and to carry
out all the programmes we have pledged to undertake
under the various international agreements and
conventions on children, as well as according to our
own domestic policies. But owing to the precarious
economic, financial and structural conditions our
country suffers, we often lack the resources.
Accordingly, we take this opportunity to appeal to the
international community to mobilize significant
financial and infrastructure resources of support so that
we can deal with our social and economic concerns,
particularly in the area of the development of our
children and young people.
I am grateful for this opportunity. I would like to
call on all to renounce the use of violence in resolving
conflicts. Many of us here were 7 or 8 years old in the
1960s. We must fight to defend human rights and to put
an end to suffering. Now we are grown people. We
have knowledge because we have studied history, have
seen the experiences of many countries around the
world and have observed our colleagues live their
lives. We therefore believe that fathers and mothers
should join their efforts to avoid widespread human
tragedy.

6

The terrorist attacks of 11 September in New
York sought to justify a tragedy in the name of a
political cause. Today’s young people must strive to
avert such tragedies. The world is eternal. We are
merely transients passing through it. We must ensure
that the Earth survives. Otherwise, future generations
will find themselves in the same situation. We must
leave behind a clear and well-defined legacy by
overcoming the difficulties that we face in this life.
That is the kind of legacy that the current generation
must leave. We must renounce violence and concert our
efforts. The wealth of humankind is inexhaustible. We
have knowledge. We know where there are deposits of
oil and of diamonds. Vast wealth exists on the Earth.
We must make use of it because we do not know when
our generation will end.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by His Excellency Mr. Teburoro Tito,
President of the Republic of Kiribati.
President Tito: I bring very warm greetings from
the Government, the children and the people of the
Republic of Kiribati, in the central Pacific. In Kiribati,
we say “Kam na bane ni mauri”.
Allow me, on behalf of my delegation, to
congratulate you, Sir, on your election to preside over
the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session, as well
as over this special session, and to assure you of our
utmost support. I would also like to take this
opportunity to extend our best wishes to the SecretaryGeneral, Kofi Annan, to all Secretariat staff, and, in
particular, to the Executive Director of the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), Carol Bellamy,
together with our renewed assurance of support and
gratitude for their excellent stewardship of the United
Nations and its various organs, including UNICEF.
Allow me also to express my sincere gratitude to
the President, the Government and the people of the
United States — our gracious host — for their
hospitality and efficiency in providing us with the
required protocol and security services. I would like to
take this opportunity to once again convey our
sympathy and condolences to the innocent victims of
the events of 11 September. I salute the United States
and, in particular, the citizens of New York, for their
show of courage, tolerance and perseverance during
such difficult times, which bears testimony to the
unyielding strength of the noble values that United

A/S-27/PV.6

States democracy upholds and defends, even at its
darkest moment.
We are gathered here today to take stock of the
progress that has been made towards achieving the
objectives of the Convention on the Rights of Child
and to reflect together, in response to the call of
children, so that we can all help to make a world fit for
children. This is also a time to revisit some of the
fundamentals of the Convention in order to foster
greater appreciation and understanding of the broad
spectrum of traditions and cultures, as duly
acknowledged by the various articles of the
Convention, within which children are born, loved,
cared for and educated in preparation for adulthood.
Children represent the best, the purest and the
loveliest part of humanity in every family, village and
society. Guided and influenced by our traditional
beliefs blended with religious values, we in Kiribati
celebrate every stage of child’s development as a
significant event and an essential part of the child’s
preparation for initiation into the adult world. The
needs of the child always take precedence over all
other needs.

their pleas. As good parents, we must fight for them
and let them enjoy the fruit of our hard work so that
they, in turn, will be able to do greater things for their
children.
Making a world fit for children is, indeed, a very
challenging theme for this session, given the many
serious challenges being posed by international
terrorism, globalization, HIV/AIDS, the highly
unpredictable and untameable forces of world financial
and commodity markets, the rapid evolution of
communication technology and the environmental
degradation and global warming that have misshaped
the world to make it somewhat less secure and less
conducive to the survival and development of children,
particularly in the developing countries.
In Kiribati, the Government, working in
partnership with parents, families, the island councils,
the churches, various community-based and nongovernmental organizations, development partners and,
of course, UNICEF, is doing its very best, within its
available resources, to improve the well-being of
children as an essential part of its policy to improve the
quality of life.

Our attendance at this session therefore reflects
the very high priority that we in Kiribati accord to
children and our genuine commitment to the noble
principles enshrined in the Convention. I am therefore
grateful for this opportunity to gain so much
inspiration from the wisdom of many who are here and
also to interact and to share our stories of success and
failure in our efforts to improve the well-being of
children. While there is still a long way ahead of us, it
is indeed very encouraging to learn from the various
statements made at this session that, during its first
decade of operation, the Convention has made a
difference to the lives of millions of children around
the globe.

As part of the attempt to improve the social,
physical and economic environment for children in
Kiribati, the Government is fostering the revival of
very important family and cultural values and investing
more and more of its resources and money in health,
education, sports and other child-related activities. But
the Government’s attempt to provide the best for its
children is sometimes frustrated when the price of
overseas goods and services needed for the health,
education and well-being of children greatly increases,
or when the income of farming and fishing families in
the rural and subsistence sectors — where the majority
of children live — is seriously affected because of
highly volatile external markets.

It is also pleasing that the Convention has had a
positive impact on the minds of national leaders, to the
extent that many countries have made the necessary
legislative, administrative and budgetary changes for
the betterment of children. It is also very moving and
very touching to hear the gentle voices of children
foretelling the end of many of the miseries that have
plagued the lives of children for decades. But it is
rather sad — for me, at least — to hear that they are
going to fight to bring an end to these evils if the
leaders and the grown-ups do nothing to respond to

To address this problem, Kiribati is working hard
with other countries in the Pacific and Asia that are
facing similar problems to develop a regional and
international strategy to deal with such situations and
to minimize the impact on our national children’s
programmes of these international trading and market
forces. In that connection, Kiribati fully supports the
proposal put forward last year by President Rene Harris
of Nauru, as Chairman of the Pacific Islands Forum,
that the Pacific should now be recognized by the
United Nations as a distinct region so as to enable

7

A/S-27/PV.6

Pacific States to contribute a unique Pacific strand to
the global fabric of ideas and understanding.
All of this has implications for the structure of
the global economy and trading systems and for the
way in which they work; there is a need for those
centuries-old structures and systems to be reformed and
democratized in order to create a world fit for children.
If these global structures and systems are not reformed,
I personally believe that the Convention objectives will
be difficult to achieve and that attaining the goals set
out at the Millennium Summit will take a very long
time, particularly in the context of developing
countries.
Similarly, we believe it will be very difficult to
achieve the targets set by the Convention to make a
world fit for children if a culture of peace is not
cultivated to combat the emerging culture of hate and
evil; if countries are not prepared for the adverse
impact of globalization and are unable to compete in
the global marketplace; if HIV/AIDS is not brought
under control; if land is not made available to the many
landless families who live as squatters in towns and
cities; if the future of many small low-lying atolls like
Kiribati over the next 50 years or so depends on
whether developed countries and other large emitters of
greenhouse gases take the Kyoto Protocol seriously; if
marine and other natural resources face the risk of
being overexploited or contaminated, leaving little or
nothing for people’s livelihoods; and if past wrongs are
not acknowledged and reconciled in friendly ways.
These are essential prerequisites for lasting friendship
and peace in the world.
Despite those challenges, I am pleased to brief
this session on some of the progress that we in Kiribati
have made in implementing the Convention’s
principles and objectives since we became a party to it
in 1995. A long list of activities that my Government
has undertaken in pursuance of the provisions of the
Convention will be found in the printed text available
in the General Assembly Hall. I should like to state
briefly that we have complied fully with the articles
relating to education and that we are in nearcompliance with those relating to health. With regard
to public awareness of and legislative work on
children’s rights, I am happy to report that Kiribati is
making reasonable progress.
quite

8

Indeed, our progress thus far in these areas is
encouraging, despite the constraints and

handicaps mentioned earlier. Our gratitude goes to the
United Nations Children’s Fund, to other United
Nations agencies and to our many development
partners for their support and assistance. We look
forward to their continuing assistance in the unfinished
tasks over the next decade in the important areas of
health and nutrition, public awareness, education, sport
and legal rights, among others.
As I said earlier, Kiribati is a nation where
community roots and traditions are still strong. It is a
country where children grow up in an environment of
love and where the values of respect, responsibility and
caring for and sharing with others are developed in
children from a very young age. Parental control,
guidance and discipline are very much an integral part
of raising our children: we believe that they are
essential to the interests of children, who may fall into
bad habits if not guided or disciplined in appropriate
ways. Upon reaching adulthood, children are also
expected by custom to care for their parents and elders.
There are no institutions for the elderly in Kiribati,
because such institutions are alien to the culture of our
people.
For that reason, Kiribati wishes to maintain a
moderate and cautious approach in undertaking certain
obligations spelled out in the Convention that would
undermine our important cultural values, in particular
with regard to the rights of the child, as defined in
articles 12 to 16 and article 26 of the Convention. In
relation to articles 24 and 28, I am pleased to advise
members that, in view of the educational developments
mentioned earlier, we are now confident of our
financial capability and are considering withdrawing
our reservations concerning them. As for article 26 —
which relates the right of every child to benefit from
social security, including social insurance — its
implementation is beyond our means, and it would
have a potentially divisive effect on the family, which
we regard as the most natural niche for the child. We
acknowledge that article 26 is a reflection of the
culture of more affluent societies, and I feel it should
not be imposed on countries that have cultures different
from theirs.
The world has changed dramatically during the
past few decades: it now seems less humane, less
secure and more challenging for children than it was 50
or 60 years ago. The world has become very
unbalanced in its development. On the one hand, it has
accumulated an immeasurable amount of economic

A/S-27/PV.6

wealth, while on the other, its social wealth in terms of
moral goods and human values is almost exhausted,
exemplifying what the President of Sri Lanka referred
to in her statement as an age of extremes (see
A/S.27/PV.1). I believe that the economically wealthy
and socially poor world has tilted the balance a bit too
far towards the physical and money side of the natural
equilibrium, neglecting the human side. That
imbalance — manifested in the lack of distribution of
wealth and the lack of peace of mind — puts the world
and all of humanity in a very precarious position.
Indeed, a balancing counterweight is critically needed.
To that end, Kiribati decided to celebrate and
welcome, on behalf of all humanity, the first dawn of
the new millennium with traditional singing and
dancing performed mainly by children. We deliberately
chose the celebration’s theme, world peace in harmony
with nature, as a reminder that peace in the world must
begin in the humble heart of every person who is
prepared to recognize the existence of a greater nature
with which a balance and harmony must constantly be
sought.
Even as we speak, military conflicts and civil
strife continue in various parts of the world. The
merciless acts of terrorism and war that we witness
with tear-filled eyes have brought home the message
that a culture of hate and evil is in the making to
replace the culture of love and peace that the great
religions of the world have been promoting for
hundreds or thousands of years, for which the United
Nations was created 56 years ago and for which other
noble institutions have been created. We may now ask:
have those great religions and noble institutions failed,
or have parents and families, present and past,
neglected their good children? Have we, as political
leaders, failed to cultivate the elements needed for a
peaceful world?
Whatever the answer and whatever the cause, I
believe the most important thing to do now is to act.
We must arise and unite our wisdom and our forces.
Strong political leadership is needed to break the circle
of hate, upon which politicians like me are sometimes
accused of capitalizing for personal gain or in order to
win elections. That is what I call harmful politics, and
we should do all we can to exclude it from our political
life, for it does our societies and the world in which we
live more harm than good.

I call on my political colleagues to join hands to
make a world fit for children. That is our children’s
vision. Let us make it our commitment and our
collective mission, and let us together build a better
world for our children and for all humanity. May God
bless the United Nations and the children of the world.
The President: We still have 55 speakers
remaining on the list. So far this afternoon it has taken
one hour and 10 minutes to hear five speakers. I should
like to remind all speakers to observe strictly the fiveminute time limit for their statements.
The Assembly will now hear a statement by His
Excellency Mr. Dominador Kaiser Bazán, VicePresident of the Republic of Panama.
Mr. Kaiser Bazán (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Since the 1990 World Summit for Children, Panama
has made progress in developing significant social
programmes such as those for providing sanitation and
safe drinking water, increasing the scope of health
programmes, reducing mother and infant mortality
rates, providing greater access to basic education and
reducing illiteracy.
However, the fragile, uncertain global economy
and the oppressive weight of the foreign debt of
developing countries threaten to limit significantly any
possibility of further progress in this area. Equally
serious, they make it difficult even to maintain what
has already been achieved. This state of affairs obliges
rich countries to pay more attention to those crying out
for an adequate level of well-being and dignity.
The challenge that the new economic order
imposes on Latin American countries requires a
concerted regional and global effort to make progress
systematically and effectively in employing the
resources available for development.
As well, the technological gap between rich and
poor countries is growing. It is therefore our task to
narrow it. There is no doubt that difficult access to
technological advances and to financing for innovative
education systems limits young people’s possibilities in
entering the job market. Publicly available statistics
indicate that the contribution of rich nations to
universal education is approximately 2 per cent of their
total contributions in all fields.
Despite this situation, in Panama, in responding
to the great inspiration of our President Mireya
Moscoso and in carrying out her governmental

9

A/S-27/PV.6

programme, we are dedicating 40 per cent of social
spending to human development. In this area, we have
made significant progress in recent years. However,
indicators of child and adolescent welfare still reflect
considerable inequalities. This situation is a principal
cause of early school-leaving in developing countries
and tends to contribute to child labour, to increase the
exposure of children and adolescents to abuse and to
lead to the breakdown of their social values.
The Secretary-General, in his report of 4 May
2001 (A/S-27/3), with his acute sensitivity, called our
attention to the fact that the growth of the global
economy, new political freedoms and technological
marvels have not stopped the perpetuation of
humankind’s ills, which are deadly to children: “the ills
of unconquered poverty, unchecked disease, violence
with impunity and increasingly obscene disparities in
access to services and wealth” (para. 48).
The great deficiencies in the areas of justice for
minors, social rehabilitation programmes, programmes
for the disabled, the promotion of a child’s right to an
identity through birth registration, abuses such as the
worst forms of child labour, the use of child soldiers
and the existence of child refugees and, especially,
sexually exploited children all demand our attention
and our fulfilment of obligations under international
conventions and national legislation.
In November 2000, Latin American Presidents
held in Panama a successful day dedicated to the
analysis of the situation of children and adolescents in
our countries, exchanging very useful ideas allowing us
to move from speeches to concrete proposals to
strengthen our commitment to the region’s children and
adolescents. Previous to the summit, the Governments
of Latin America, Spain and Portugal analysed each of
the problems related to the well-being of children,
enabling them to define policies and strategies to
pursue. The result of the summit was the document
entitled “Building equity from childhood and
adolescence in Latin America”.
Today my country possesses a system of process
and impact indicators enabling us to identify, evaluate
and monitor the progress made in complying with the
commitments made at the World Summit for Children
and at the tenth Ibero-American Summit. The
indicators cover the areas of education, culture, science
and technology, health and nutrition, housing, poverty,
families, agriculture and the environment, the rights of

10

children and adolescents, women, the economy,
transportation, public administration and Government
reform, among others.
The United Nations Children’s Fund, Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, in
collaboration with the Secretariat for Ibero-American
Cooperation, presented an evaluation of the situation of
children and adolescents in Latin America. This was a
highly valuable tool for planning long-term
programmes for our children.
The work that lies ahead of us is enormously
arduous and complex. A commitment to share
responsibilities and the interdependency of the
international community are therefore indispensable
and, I would say, cannot be ignored. After almost 15
years of the process of structural changes that have
shaped the development of our nations, we have seen
that the individual capacity of a developing State is not
sufficient to achieve sustained results.
The international community needs to reform its
strategy and instruments to address poverty, hunger and
unemployment so that a synergy can be created among
dynamic productivity, social welfare and democratic
institutions.
Addressing children’s issues is urgent and cannot
be postponed. I therefore call on the heads of State and
the representatives of civil society gathered here to
continue to strengthen our ties and our actions on the
basis of social solidarity and the common good. Only
this way will we be able to alleviate the desperation
that leads to terrorism and to eliminate human
suffering, while consolidating democracy, freedom and
justice in our nations. Our development and future
progress depend on our commitment to our children.
Panama says “yes” for children.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Valerian Cristea, Deputy Prime
Minister of the Republic of Moldova.
Mr. Cristea (Moldova) (spoke in Russian): It is a
great honour for me to address the Assembly and to
convey to you, Mr. President, the best wishes of the
President of the Republic of Moldova, and hopes for
peace throughout the world. I would also like to thank
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, Ms. Carol Bellamy, the
Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF), and Ambassador Patricia Durrant, for

A/S-27/PV.6

their contributions to the convening of this noble
forum.
For three days, we have been gathering together
to discuss an issue of overriding importance: the
protection of our children. This problem is of particular
significance for my country because, during the past 10
years, certain problems have emerged there that were
hitherto unknown. These include the fact that some
children are not receiving a complete education and
that some are involved in drug abuse. Most
significantly, for the first time, we are now seeing our
children contract illnesses linked to the Chernobyl
disaster — illnesses that have not been fully researched
and studied.
These and other problems that we have been
discussing for the past three days — problems such as
those to which other countries have referred — are
being given personal attention by the President of our
Republic. His commitment is reflected in the fact that
one fifth of our delegation to this forum consists of
children.
The 1990 World Summit for Children provided an
important impetus for the development and
implementation of a wide-ranging policy aimed at the
protection of children, and enabled positive results to
be achieved in improving the lot of children.
Unfortunately, however, as was noted both by the
Secretary-General in his end-decade review (A/S-27/3)
and by previous speakers, all the great expectations
that were generated by that forum have not been
completely fulfilled.
We should note here that many of the Summit
goals concerning the survival and development of
children, particular in the area of health care, nutrition
and education, remain unrealized. The Republic of
Moldova is paying particular attention to this special
session, as we are confident that, in summarizing the
results of efforts over the past 10 years, the
international community will help to define not only
the objectives in this area but also specific ways to
resolve the problems.
Our delegation would like the draft plan of action
to balance the interests of all groups of States,
including countries with economies in transition — a
group to which the Republic of Moldova belongs. We
are also counting on the fact that the outcome
document will support the initiative to expand
international assistance to countries with economies in

transition. The most recent programmes in that respect
are aimed at improving the living conditions of
children.
Our country, through consistent application of the
provisions of the Declaration and Plan of Action of the
1990 World Summit, has been able to achieve a certain
level of progress by implementing a number of
programmes and projects aimed at improving the
situation of children. Over the past few years, high
standards in the immunization of children have been
maintained; new medical norms have been introduced;
and the secondary education system is now more
effective than ever in helping to foster the creative
abilities of children and adolescents.
The highest legislative body in my country is the
parliament. Society is becoming increasingly aware of
programmes aimed at children, and the Republic of
Moldova has established a youth parliament and local
children’s councils, which are enabling young people
to actively participate in the life of society.
Acknowledging children’s rights as an inalienable
component of human rights is the objective of our
national approach to the protection of the child and
family and of our phased programme designed to
protect the interests of the child. During our
preparations for the special session, the Republic of
Moldova also signed the Optional Protocols to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and supported
the “Say yes for children” campaign, thereby
contributing to strengthening cooperation between civil
society and State organs.
The Republic of Moldova’s ongoing transition
from a planned economy to a market economy is,
without doubt, limiting the ability of the State to
achieve the objectives set out in the Summit
Declaration and Plan of Action. The radical economic
transformation that has taken place in the Republic of
Moldova has required enormous social expenditure.
The amount of the State budget allocated to children
has therefore been significantly reduced, and the
situation of the child and the family have,
unfortunately, deteriorated. Financing goals in the State
sector have led to restrictions on access by the
population to free medical care and education, as well
as to a decline in their quality. The restricted access
that children have to medical care has led to an
increase in the number of disabled children, who go
without parental care more often than other children.
Moreover, in the context of the difficulties that families

11

A/S-27/PV.6

have to face, Moldova is encountering such problems
as trafficking in children and women.
For a number of objective reasons, the Republic
of Moldova, as a country with an economy in
transition, is not in a position to resolve, on its own, all
of its social problems, including those related to child
health care, development and protection. In this
difficult period, international cooperation for the
protection of our children is extremely important. We
are grateful to donor countries for their invaluable
support, on a bilateral basis and through UNICEF.
Cooperation with UNICEF in the Republic of Moldova
has resulted in a high rate of child vaccination against
polio and tuberculosis. We are currently working on
programmes to include iodized salt in the diets of
young people; to prevent trafficking in persons; and to
protect them in other ways.
In conclusion, I should like to express our
confidence that, thanks to the united efforts and actions
of the Government, States Members of the United
Nations, civil society and international organizations,
as well as of all the other participants in this forum, the
decisions that we have taken in the past, and those that
we will be taking in a few hours’ time, will be
implemented. By taking concrete and specific actions,
we must show children that we are determined to
provide them with a better start on the road through life
in terms of improving their primary education and their
ability to fully participate in the life of society. From
this rostrum, we have all said “Yes” to children; I
appeal to the Assembly in saying that the time has
come to take action.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Valentina Matvienko, Deputy Prime
Minister of the Russian Federation.
Ms. Matvienko (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Entering a new millennium under the banner
of globalization, which is a source both of hope and of
concern for mankind, the international community now
bears a particular responsibility for the destinies of
children throughout the world. We must unite our
efforts even more effectively to improve the situation
of children throughout the world, creating conditions
conducive to their full and harmonious development,
regardless of where they live.
The well-being of children must become the main
criterion for social progress, since it is the children of
today who will determine the shape of the world in the

12

twenty-first century. For the international community,
2001 was a turning point. The tragic events of 11
September confronted mankind with new challenges,
chief among them protecting the peace and ensuring
the security of our children, who face the threat of
terrorism. To respond to those new challenges, the
international community has no alternative to wide
cooperation among all States. Solidarity in the war on
terrorism provides a unique opportunity to build a new
system of international security under the aegis of the
United Nations, on a solid basis of international law.
Less than 24 hours ago, in the Republic of
Dagestan in Russia, a hideous act of terrorism took
place. In the city of Kaspisk, during the celebration of
Victory Day, which commemorates the allied victory in
the Great Patriotic War, an explosion occurred that
killed 41 people, including 17 children, according to
initial reports. Such acts of savagery, brutality and
violence cannot be justified. They can be stopped only
through joint efforts, and we would very much like to
believe that this session will help to unite the
international community in its struggle against
international terrorism and extremism.
The decade that has passed since the World
Summit for Children has coincided with profound
transformations in our State’s political, social and
economic systems. We are coordinating our efforts in
line with the high-priority objectives set out in the final
documents of the World Summit and with the
provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. They serve as guidelines for our national policy
aimed at improving the situation of children.
Despite the difficulties that Russia is still
experiencing today, the interests of our country’s young
citizens continue to be the focus of the attention of the
President and of the Government of the Russian
Federation. A presidential decree has proclaimed that
the survival, protection and development of children
are among our most important objectives. This year, for
the first time in the modern history of Russia, the
annual budget reflects expenditures for education that
exceed those for national defence. Work is now being
concluded on major areas of State social policy aimed
at improving the situation of children in the Russian
Federation, establishing objectives to resolve children’s
problems for the decade to come. The Russian
Government has already approved urgent measures in
that sphere.

A/S-27/PV.6

At the same time, the enormous and historic
changes that are taking place have posed new
challenges to our country — in particular, maintaining
children’s living standards under the conditions of a
transitional economy and given the need to devise and
develop mechanisms to counteract new risks that
children face: those of becoming homeless street
children, of being orphaned and of being exposed to
the spread of drugs and violence. Those problems are
relevant for many other countries as well; thus they
receive a great deal of attention in the draft outcome
document. It is important that the document emphasize
the need for the adoption of specific measures to
support such children and the institutions that care for
them, and that it emphasize the family’s role in those
areas. We would like to see that range of problems
among the top priorities of the activities of the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF).

developed and spiritually and physically sound young
people. Such actions by private businesses would be
fully in keeping with the Secretary-General’s Global
Compact initiative, which we consider extremely
useful.

Russia greatly appreciates United Nations efforts
to guarantee children’s rights and it intends to continue
to participate actively in international cooperation in
that sphere. Each of the speakers at this special
Assembly session has stated that children are of
inestimable value and that their well-being is a
guarantee of sustainable development for all mankind.
It is thus no accident that many speakers have
emphasized that such global forums as the recent
International
Conference
on
Financing
for
Development, held at Monterrey, and the forthcoming
World Summit on Sustainable Development, to be held
at Johannesburg, are designed to solve problems that
do not pertain directly to children but must ultimately
serve their interests. If we wish to see the world
develop in truly positive and sustainable ways, we are
obliged to see to it that the results of such global
forums serve, first and foremost, the needs of those
who will continue life on this planet — our children.

The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Mrs. Lidia Shuleva, Deputy Prime Minister
of Bulgaria.

This session’s draft outcome document contains
much that concerns the need to mobilize additional
resources for children’s well-being. In his statement at
the opening meeting, Secretary-General Kofi Annan
spoke persuasively of the need for capital investment in
children’s development as a binding prerequisite for
building a better world. We believe that an additional
source of financing for national and international
children’s programmes can and must be the resources
of large private companies and corporations. Those
companies, in collaboration with UNICEF, could
contribute to raising a generation of intellectually

Finally, I should like to express our great
appreciation for the active work of UNICEF, under the
leadership of its Executive Director, Carol Bellamy,
which not only has to a great extent ensured the
success of this special session but, we believe, will also
guarantee the implementation of relevant international
commitments in the decade to come.
In the few minutes during which I have presented
my short statement, thousands of new citizens of our
planet have been born. Let us wish them a peaceful and
happy childhood. May they never know need, hunger,
war or violence.

Mrs. Shuleva (Bulgaria): It is a great honour for
me to address this special session on children on behalf
of the Government of the Republic of Bulgaria. My
country is an active partner of the international
community in its efforts to create a better future for
children all over the world. Bulgaria thus aligns itself
with the statement of the European Union delivered
earlier in this session. I am very happy and proud to be
here and to reaffirm my country’s support for United
Nations activities on behalf of children.
In 1990, Bulgaria participated in the World
Summit for Children, and it aligned itself with its
outcome documents; the World Declaration and Plan of
Action. The Government of Bulgaria shared the belief
that a special policy on children was necessary to fulfil
the commitments made at the Summit. Hence, my
country was among the first Member States to ratify
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Later,
Bulgaria became a party to the two Optional Protocols
to the Convention.
Since submitting its initial report, and in
conformity with the recommendations of the
Committee on the Rights of the Child, the Bulgarian
Government has undertaken a number of legislative
initiatives to comply appropriately with its obligations.
In 2000 the National Assembly adopted the Child
Protection Law establishing measures for the full

13

A/S-27/PV.6

implementation of the rights of the child. An
independent State child protection agency and
municipal services for social assistance were
established and entrusted with the realization of the
national strategy and the national action plan on child
protection. The main priority of the State child
protection agency is to coordinate State policy in the
field of child protection and to exercise comprehensive
control of the implementation of the rights of the child.
A month ago, the Government adopted a national
programme entitled “The children of Bulgaria”. It
defines the commitments of State institutions for child
protection and health.
We are aware that it is families and especially
children that have to pay the social price for the
transition to a market economy. Therefore, we are
convinced that a well designed and active social policy
is necessary to overcome the challenges. I would like
to confirm the strong commitment of my Government
to solving existing problems related to children in
Bulgaria, despite all the challenges we are facing
during our period of transition. I would like to specify
some of the priorities we have set up.
One of my Government’s main concerns is to
translate into reality the right of every child to live in a
family. This priority is laid down in the Government’s
political programme entitled “People are the wealth of
Bulgaria”. We hope to achieve our goal through a
variety of projects aimed at reducing the number of
children placed in institutions by supporting their
families and relatives, by developing social services
and by training social agents. Some of these projects
are financed by donors and are implemented with the
participation of foreign partners.
The fight against poverty is still a serious concern
of my Government. We devote a great deal of effort to
financial assistance for low-income families. Recently,
a new law on family assistance for children was
adopted in Bulgaria.
The isolation of disabled children is another
serious problem which we are strongly committed to
resolving. In this regard, legislative and practical
measures aimed at facilitating the full integration of
disabled children are on the social agenda of the
Bulgarian Government.
I would also like to point out the successful
cooperation between the Bulgarian Government and
non-governmental organizations, especially with regard

14

to vulnerable groups. It includes projects developed by
the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy related to
education, the reintegration and desegregation of Roma
children, the integration of disabled children, et cetera.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that my
Government is determined to achieve the highest
standards concerning the rights of the child in Bulgaria.
That is an important element of the Bulgarian
Government’s policy towards European and EuroAtlantic integration.
When we face the challenges related to children,
we are fully aware that the common efforts of all
United Nations Member States are needed in today’s
globalized world. We are convinced that more
concerted and timely efforts are necessary to combat
smoking, drug and alcohol use, HIV/AIDS, child
trafficking and violence against children. Today, we are
confronted with one of the greatest challenges of the
modern world: combating terrorism. Therefore, we
believe that only coordinated actions can protect our
children.
Bulgaria reiterates its readiness to be fully
involved in consolidated actions within the framework
of the United Nations. We share the noble goal of
creating a world fit for children. In this respect, I
would like to affirm that we fully support the draft
outcome document of the special session.
We believe that it is within the ability of the
United Nations to successfully continue the fulfilment
of its weighty responsibility to protect the rights of the
child.
Oral presentations by the Co-chairpersons of the
three round tables
The President: As announced earlier, the General
Assembly, in accordance with resolution 55/276, will
now hear oral summaries of the discussions in the
round tables.
I first give the floor to His Excellency Mr.
Nambar Enkhbayar, Prime Minister of Mongolia,
Co-chairperson of round table 1, held on the afternoon
of Wednesday, 8 May.
Mr. Enkhbayar (Co-chairperson of round
table 1): It gives me great pleasure and honour to report
to the Assembly on the results of round table 1 on the
theme of the renewal of commitment and future actions
for children in the next decade.

A/S-27/PV.6

It was a great privilege for me and President Ion
Iliescu of Romania to co-chair round table 1. The
attendance and participation were impressive. Over 50
heads of State or Government and other dignitaries
vested with broad powers to make a difference took an
active part in the discussions, which lasted more than 4
hours and exceeded their time limit by over an hour. It
is virtually impossible to report on that rich and
thought-provoking debate in three minutes. Therefore,
I would like to apologize if I exceed the time limit in
order to usefully convey the message that came out of
the round table.
The meeting started with statements made by Ms.
Caroline Barebwoha of Uganda and Mr. Te Kerei Moka
of New Zealand, who highlighted the feelings and
views of many children of the world on a number of
pressing issues. They both stressed the importance of
education, especially for girls and for children from
indigenous groups.
Many participants spoke of progress in their own
countries in ensuring the right of all children to
education. Of course, some countries have made
greater progress than others, and progress has been less
than satisfactory in some respects, as the SecretaryGeneral made clear in his report, “We the children”
(A/S-27/3).
Education is a basic human right and one of the
keys to eradicating poverty. Speakers described laws
that make primary education free and compulsory and,
more important, spoke about how critical it is to ensure
that the education be of high quality and that it take
place in a safe and well-equipped environment and that
teachers be well trained. It was widely recognized that
quality pre-school education and early childhood
development are fundamental to children’s longer-term
development, followed by quality primary and
secondary education.
The lack of financial resources continues to
hinder the development of quality education, as does a
lack of equipment and trained personnel in many
countries.
Many participants spoke of the importance of
inter-regional and international cooperation to
maximize limited resources and share experiences. In
this regard, it was underlined that the United Nations
Literacy Decade, to be launched in 2003, should
provide an excellent opportunity for mobilizing
additional resources for the purpose of eradicating

illiteracy and promoting the development of quality
education, as envisaged in the Millennium
Development Goals.
Technology in education — especially computer
literacy and access to the Internet — has emerged as a
new priority. This will only grow in importance in the
next decade. As was pointed out several times,
however, in many countries, desks, infrastructure and
even electricity are still lacking in schools.
Another important theme was children’s health
and survival. Many participants spoke of impressive
achievements since 1990 in decreasing child and
maternal mortality through immunization, primary
health care and nutrition. However, the DirectorGeneral of the World Health Organization,
Dr. Brundtland, said that while there has been progress
since 1990, it has not been enough. The world is still
not reaching the children most in need of simple,
inexpensive,
life-saving
treatments
such
as
immunization and oral rehydration therapy, as well as
safe delivery and basic hygiene practices.
Several participants also spoke about the
importance of adequate food and nutrition for
children’s healthy development. The Executive
Director of the World Food Programme, Mr. James
Morris, stressed that a hungry child has no chance to
learn and no chance to grow. In some countries,
however, children face other challenges to their health,
including diabetes, heart disease and obesity. Other
problems facing children today include violence in
schools, and drug, alcohol and tobacco abuse.
Many delegations stressed the importance of the
family to children’s development and well-being,
including the need for interaction between young
people and their elders, and for children to be raised in
their own cultures, with respect for their traditions and
for the natural environment. Moka, a young Maori,
spoke of the daily battles of most indigenous people to
maintain their language and traditions. He said, “To
lose one’s culture is to lose one’s soul. A part of you
dies”.
It was said that even in wealthy countries there
must be better distribution of resources to ensure that
minorities do not lose their right to education.
However, it was understood that learning about and
respecting one’s own culture should go together with
learning about and respecting other cultures.

15

A/S-27/PV.6

The threat of HIV/AIDS was mentioned again
and again, with speakers citing continuing efforts to
educate and mobilize young people against this disease
through such initiatives as life-skills training, and to
prevent mother-to-child transmission of HIV. Other
important efforts involve care for children orphaned or
made vulnerable by AIDS.
Another major threat to children is continued
armed conflict. Participants were reminded of the
hundreds of thousands of children who have never
known peace, never been to school and never received
any health care because of war and conflict. The
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mr. Ruud Lubbers, spoke about the special challenges
faced by refugee children, including detention and
sexual abuse, and about the exploitation of refugee
women and children. He also referred to the need for
education for refugee children.
Mrs. Mary Robinson, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, underlined the importance of children’s
real participation, reminding participants of the
message from the Children’s Forum that they want a
world fit for them. Many speakers described children’s
opinion polls and elections, as well as children’s
parliaments and other forums where their voices can be
heard. One important forum is the network of
ombudsmen, or child defenders, of which there are 17
in Europe.
Another important issue was the question of
monitoring and assessing progress in implementing the
goals of the special session. One important suggestion
was to encourage regional peer reviews involving
national leaders, who would meet periodically to assess
progress made in fulfilling their commitments. Other
participants stressed the need for region-specific data
to allow for more accurate reporting, and of regional
agendas concentrating on areas of specific interest.
The question of resources was raised many times,
as was the importance of poverty eradication. Vast
resources will be needed to achieve the targets of the
special session, although resources are scarce and there
is vast competition for funds. Some participants urged
donors to increase resource allocations for
development, including through debt cancellation. One
valuable suggestion was to look again at the possibility
of reducing military expenditures and using the
dividend for children’s health and education. As 15-

16

year-old Caroline said, “There is a need to invest in us,
the children ... we are the world’s own destiny”.
In conclusion, I would like, on behalf of my
fellow Co-chairperson, to thank the substantive
Secretariat for its assistance in making round table 1
useful and highly productive.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Tarja Halonen, President of the
Republic of Finland, Co-chairperson of round table 2,
held yesterday morning, Thursday, 9 May.
President Halonen (Co-chairperson of round
table 2): On behalf of round table 2, and of my fellow
Co-chairperson, I have the honour to present our
report. I would like to start with the voices of the
children themselves.
Marie-Claire Umuhoza from Rwanda said, “I am
the voice of all the children who have suffered
throughout the world ... you who are members of
mankind — why have you let these things happen?”
Toukir Ahmed from Bangladesh said, “Give us,
your children, a good today. We will, in turn, give you
a good tomorrow”.
The importance of listening to children and young
people in a true inter-generational dialogue was one of
the major themes of round table 2, and in our meeting,
children made their voices heard. In addition to MarieClaire and Toukir, the child delegates who opened the
meeting, other young delegates told us of their
concerns. I should like to continue to refer to the texts
of the young ones for a little longer. Marie-Claire
eloquently described the devastating effects of violence
on her family and on her country. She said, “I am here
without a father or mother ... no one to call me ‘my
child’. Call me your daughter. I need love”.
Toukir spoke of the need to combat exploitation
and abuse in a world where there is violence and
cruelty, conflict and war — where children require
special attention, especially against child trafficking
and other forms of child abuse. The other young
delegates stressed the importance of real participation
by children and young people, as well as of the rights
of refugee children, girls and indigenous children.
They reminded us that the greatest challenge for adults
is knowing what to do when we go home so as to
translate our words into reality.

A/S-27/PV.6

Equality was a major theme of that morning’s
discussion. Every child must have an equal opportunity
to grow and develop, beginning with safe delivery and
access to medical care and to education. Children in
vulnerable groups, including refugees, ethnic
minorities, immigrants, indigenous children and
disabled children, need special care and attention. It
was underlined in particular that not enough is being
done for girls’ education.
It was said at the round table that education and
access to reproductive health services are rights, not
privileges. Many participants stressed the importance
of living up to existing international commitments and
of not going backwards. One said that this forum
cannot accept that children are negotiable. Another
underlined the need for the leadership and high-level
participation of developed and developing countries at
events like the special session.
The issue of adequate resources was raised
repeatedly. It was said that only five countries have met
the target of allocating 0.7 per cent of gross domestic
product to development assistance. It was also said that
the rich world has to give more, but that such resources
have to be used more effectively. There must be a
genuine partnership between donors and programme
countries, and, in addition to bilateral assistance
programmes, there must be a global plan for children.
Within countries, more resources must be allocated to
children. Many speakers appealed for debt relief in
favour of children and for fair access to markets.
At the round table, speakers stressed the special
needs of Africa, which has been affected by poverty,
conflict and disease. Malaria has affected Africa more
than any other continent and Africa has been especially
devastated by HIV/AIDS. The Executive Director of
the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
said that, in southern Africa, a 15-year-old boy today
has a 60-per-cent chance of contracting HIV and
subsequently dying of AIDS. He also said that AIDS
prevention and care must be integrated into all
development,
humanitarian
and
peacekeeping
operations, stating that AIDS has to be part of
everything we do because it is part of life. A number of
speakers said that adolescents must not be denied their
rights to reproductive health services in the face of this
disease.
Following the statement by Marie-Claire, many
participants spoke of the harm done to children by

conflict and war. It was stressed that there must be
early warning systems and that the United Nations has
a role in preventing conflict. In addition to immediate
relief, children affected by conflict require longer-term
assistance and psychosocial care from specially trained
teachers and caregivers, even after the media and the
public have lost interest. In such situations, children
must be asked about their views and feelings. One
participant said that conflict often resulted in violations
of children’s right to health care because of a lack of
access to affected areas. Another reminded the round
table that man-made disasters were equally damaging
to children’s health and well-being.
The importance of education, especially for girls,
was underlined by many speakers. The Deputy
Director-General for Education of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
spoke on behalf of the members of the Education for
All consortium, outlining progress made in terms of
national plans and international developments, such as
the Monterrey consensus and increased funding for
education from the World Bank.
The exploitation of children, child trafficking and
hazardous child labour were condemned by many
speakers. Governments were urged to ratify the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and
pornography in order to ensure accountability for these
crimes. The sexual abuse of children, which is a
problem all over the world, requires greater
cooperation with the police. The Director-General of
the International Labour Organization said that 180
million children are involved in the worst forms of
child labour. Many of them work because their parents
are unable to earn enough. He said that today’s global
economy is not generating the jobs that their parents
require in order to support their families, so children
are forced to work.
Many speakers outlined measures their countries
are taking to protect children’s rights, including the
designation of ombudspersons for children, the
formation of children’s parliaments and the
development of national plans of action. Countries are
also enacting national legislation and reforming
juvenile justice systems to conform to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child. The latter is especially
relevant in the light of new problems that have
emerged, including violence in schools, drug addiction
and drug trafficking. Because children require and

17

A/S-27/PV.6

desire the love and affection of a family, many
countries are moving away from institutions and
working with communities and non-governmental
organizations to support foster families for orphans and
other children without families.
The importance of regional and international
cooperation was stressed by several participants, who
have organized networks and working groups and are
sharing information, for example, to combat child
trafficking and child pornography. This type of
cooperation is also important for collecting data on
children for monitoring and follow-up to international
conferences, such as this special session. Participants
said that follow-up to the special session should result
not in more bureaucracy, but in real results. The
sharing of best practices by the United Nations system
would help to accelerate progress.
Two common threads of the debate were the need
to generate resources and that economic development
goes hand in hand with human development. The
special session on children is part of a “cycle of virtue”
which includes the International Conference on
Financing for Development recently held in Monterrey,
Mexico, and the upcoming World Summit on
Sustainable
Development
to
take
place
in
Johannesburg, South Africa, later this year, as members
know. The overriding priority of this cycle has been
children and young people.
I end by thanking all the participants in our round
table and the Secretariat in helping us to finish our
work. I repeat: the most important thing is not only
what we say here, but how we act when we are back
home. That was the wish and request of the young
ones.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by His Excellency Mr. Levy Mwanawasa,
President of the Republic of Zambia and CoChairperson of round table 3, held this morning.
Mr. Mwanawasa (Co-chairperson of round table
3): The Co-Chairpersons of round table 3 were His
Excellency Mr. Sher Bahadur Duba, Prime Minister of
Nepal, and myself.
I want to start this report by quoting from the
statements which were made by the two child
representatives to the round table. The first one was
Sara Mendic of Yugoslavia, who said, “Listen to what
we have to say, because it will help you make the right

18

decisions for us and with us”. Then there was Ngenfat
Yang of Suriname, who said,
“We need you to
believe in us and invest in us”.
Those two child delegates set the tone for the
round table discussion. Sara Mendic of Yugoslavia
spoke about the need for education and schools that are
fit for children, saying that poor quality schools “can
make us study but they cannot make us learn”. Ngenfat
Yang of Suriname stressed the life-long toll of abuse
and exploitation on children, asking participants to
imagine the many children who are abused, who are
sold and who do not have families to care for them, and
asking, “where is their future?” Other young people
joined the round table as part of their national
delegations, speaking about violence in the home, drug
abuse and the rights of indigenous children.
A number of themes arose throughout the
discussion. The question of resources was perhaps the
main theme, because adequate resources are so central
to achieving the goal of a world fit for children. The
round table heard many calls for meeting international
targets for official development assistance and for
increasing resources for programmes benefiting
children and women. There was a call for good
governance and for investment in people, as well as an
affirmation that aid for children should not be subject
to conditionalities. All participants agreed that the
cycle of poverty must end if children are to have a
good future. There were also calls for fairer trading
systems and open markets, and for economic solutions
that look at the realities of countries today.
HIV/AIDS is threatening the lives of children,
especially in Africa, where the gains of the last 50
years have been lost in the last five to 10 years. In
addition to drugs at reduced or preferential prices,
countries need appropriate infrastructure, clinics,
trained health workers, voluntary counselling, testing
and even clean water. Mr. Kunio Waki, Deputy
Executive Director of the United Nations Population
Fund, said that we have to trust young people and
empower them with knowledge about reproductive
health.
Many participants stressed the importance of
paying special attention to the needs and rights of girls
to adequate nutrition, education and protection from
abuse and exploitation, especially given the dangers of
HIV/AIDS. In many families, girls still do not go to

A/S-27/PV.6

school because parents cannot afford fees for all their
children, and so send only boys to school.
Education remains critical to children’s
development as productive and happy members of their
societies, beginning with pre-school and through
primary and secondary school. The particular
importance of quality primary education was stressed,
and there were calls for quality education that trains
children for our changing world, teaching them new
skills and about entrepreneurship, science and
technology.
There must be adequately trained teachers.
Access to computers and the Internet are critical for
bridging the digital divide. Children must also learn
about things that interest them and develop their
creativity, as one of the young delegates pointed out.
Children must learn tolerance and respect for others,
and for the environment. They must be taught about
their rights so they may, in turn, educate their families.
There were a number of comments about corporal
punishment in schools, with some speakers saying it
was accepted in their countries. Ngenfat Yang said that
he had been hit and told that he was stupid. He also
said that there should not be a “bossy” relationship
between students and teachers. “Pay attention to our
goals and don’t put us down,” he said. One participant
said there should be positive disciplinary measures in
place of corporal punishment.
The education of the child begins in the family,
which ensures that children have a good start in life.
Participants stressed the important role played by both
mothers and fathers in the lives of their children. As
one of the young speakers said, children have a right to
live without violence in their homes. Several
participants said their Governments had enacted
legislation to protect children from abuse in their
homes, but that it was also vital to teach and socialize
police officers, children and families, and the rest of
society to respect these laws. It was said that while the
State had the main responsibility to protect rights,
families,
communities
and
non-governmental
organizations also shared that responsibility. In some
cases, families require financial or other support so
they can send their children to school instead of to
work.
Many participants spoke of the devastating
effects of conflict on children. Conflict harms children
physically: they are abducted as child soldiers and are

maimed and mutilated, injured by landmines or
wounded in combat. It also prevents them from
receiving immunizations and other health services and
halts their education. Conflict also harms children
emotionally and mentally; children affected by conflict
need special care and attention. Other participants
spoke about other forms of exploitation of children,
especially sexual exploitation and the recent Yokohama
Declaration on that issue.
The young people all said that words must be
followed by clear action. Many participants at the
round table spoke of the need for legal mechanisms to
match political commitments, and of the need to
develop and implement national laws and judicial
systems that reflect the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. The importance of reaching minorities and
marginalized children was stressed by several
participants.
Many
countries
have
children’s
parliaments and other means for children to express
themselves, including newspapers written by children
for children.
Many participants, including the young delegates,
emphasized the importance of agreeing on the final text
of the draft outcome document so that when everyone
returned home from New York, they would have
something positive to build on. As one of the Cochairpersons said in closing, the future would be too
ghastly to contemplate if the world did not move
forward from here.
Agenda items 8 and 9 (continued)
Review of the achievements in the implementation
and results of the World Declaration on the Survival,
Protection and Development of Children and Plan of
Action for Implementing the World Declaration on
the Survival, Protection and Development of
Children in the 1990s
Renewal of commitment and future action for
children in the next decade
Draft resolution (A/S-27/L.1)
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Mrs. Irene Ashira Assih, Minister for
Social Affairs, Advancement of Women and Childhood
Protection of Togo.

19

A/S-27/PV.6

Mrs. Assih (Togo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to convey to all participants the
cordial greetings of the President of the Republic of
Togo, His Excellency Mr. Gnassingbé Eyadema, and of
the Government and the people of Togo. I should also
like, Mr. President, on behalf of the Togo delegation
and on my own account, to express our satisfaction at
the outstanding way in which you are conducting the
work of this session.
Because it constitutes an additional milestone in
the international community’s continuing efforts to
improve the condition of children throughout the
world, this special session is of particular importance
to the Government of Togo. Indeed, the constant
increase in the number of children who fall victim to
abuse of all kinds in many countries reflects the
collapse of human values and the deterioration of
cultural norms that have always preserved the family
unit and the balance of societies.
That situation has led to the need to establish new
mechanisms, to conform scrupulously to those
envisaged in the International Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocols, and to
respect our religious and cultural values, which are the
foundation of the family. It is therefore our duty to
continue our efforts to protect all family members — in
particular the children, who will become the women
and men of tomorrow — by guaranteeing their rights
and their dignity.
More than a decade after the adoption of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
convening of the World Summit for Children, we are
pleased to note that there has been significant progress
in the advancement of children’s rights. Nevertheless,
major challenges remain to be met. Among those
challenges are problems of high priority: the
HIV/AIDS pandemic, the phenomenon of child
soldiers, child labour, trafficking in children and, above
all, the poverty which the world’s leaders committed
themselves, at the Millennium Summit, to reduce by
half by 2015. In that regard, this session must enable us
to identify major guidelines for more sustained action
within a dynamic of increased cooperation among
peoples.
Constantly concerned with improving children’s
lives, my country has undertaken a number of actions.
In that regard, I would recall that Togo was the
nineteenth country to ratify the Convention on the

20

Rights of the Child, on 1 October 1990. Since then,
despite the difficulties it has faced, my Government has
taken specific measures on the national level with a
view to ensuring the survival, protection and
development of children.
From that perspective, and in order to ensure the
Convention’s smooth implementation, Togo has, inter
alia, established, within the Ministry of Social Affairs
and Advancement of Women, a department charged
with childhood protection. A national committee for
the protection and promotion of children, as well as a
children’s parliament — whose presiding officer, who
is at my side, will be addressing the Assembly in a few
moments — have also been established. Moreover, the
Code for the Children of Togo has been brought into
conformity with the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. All these activities are being conducted with the
participation of children themselves and with the
contribution of national and international nongovernmental organizations that work side by side with
the Government of Togo every day on behalf of
children’s well-being.
Before I conclude my remarks, we warmly
congratulate the United Nations Children’s Fund and
the other partners that are helping us in our efforts to
advance all the rights of children and to fight scourges
such as the HIV/AIDS pandemic, armed conflicts and
their consequences, child labour and trafficking in
children and the exploitation of children as soldiers —
that is, to build a world fit for children.
I should now like to yield the floor to Fati Mabel
Hoenouwawa, President of the junior parliament, so
that participants can hear the voice of the children of
Togo.
Ms. Hoenouwawa (Togo) (spoke in French): It is
a great honour and a true pleasure for me to take the
floor at this session on behalf of the children of Togo.
Despite all my country’s efforts for the protection and
the advancement of childhood, children continue to be
the victims of trafficking and child labour; of low
school enrolment, especially among young girls; of the
spread of HIV/AIDS; and of the poverty and destitution
of many families, which give rise to juvenile
delinquency.
We the children hope that this new alliance of
partners committed to the defence and protection of
children will constitute a real starting point for
improving the situation of children in Togo and

A/S-27/PV.6

throughout the world by building a world of peace and
tolerance for a better future in which they can flourish.
Mr. Cristea (Republic
President, took the Chair.

of

Moldova),

Vice-

There is a phenomenon having a pernicious effect
on children’s well-being that requires attention: the
economic sanctions imposed on certain countries,
including my own. Because of those sanctions, the
affected States have had difficulty in creating schools,
in building clinics and hospitals and in buying
medicines. The victims of all this are children, in
particular the children of the poor. Thus the
discrimination that UNICEF is fighting is being
aggravated by the international community itself,
which decides to impose such sanctions.
In expressing my thanks for this opportunity to
speak at this session, I hope that in the coming years,
there will be fewer unhappy children on the Earth.
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): I now
give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Achmad Suyudi,
Minister of Health of Indonesia.
Mr. Suyudi (Indonesia): It is indeed a distinct
pleasure for me to congratulate Mr. Han Seung-soo on
his election to the presidency of the twenty-seventh
special session of the General Assembly, devoted to
children. I am fully confident that, under his capable
leadership, our deliberations on the survival, protection
and development of children will be fruitful.
Let me extend our sincere appreciation to the
United Nations Children’s Fund for its tireless efforts
to promote the implementation of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and for the cooperation and
assistance it has rendered to many Governments,
including my country, to promote improved living
conditions for children.
While we fully recognize the accomplishments
thus far, we are also very much aware of the magnitude
of the work that lies ahead. Each year, millions of
children are lost to disease and hunger, which are often
readily preventable. This landmark session and the
proposed outcome document, “A world fit for
children”, will undoubtedly bring a renewed
commitment, mobilize support for a better future for all
children and help us build a world fit for children.
As we begin the new millennium, chronic poverty
has become the single greatest obstacle to a better and

brighter future for every child. Indeed, children are the
hardest hit, as poverty strikes at the core of their
potential for development. The eradication of poverty
must therefore be a key objective of development
efforts.
Turning briefly to the situation in Indonesia, there
is no question that even in the midst of our economic
turmoil, Indonesia remains fully committed to the goals
of the 1990 World Summit for Children and to the
provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. Last year, to strengthen its commitment to the
promotion and protection of the rights of its children,
Indonesia signed the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and the
Optional Protocol on the sale of children, child
prostitution and child pornography.
Over the past decade, the Indonesian Government
has made a number of major policy adjustments.
Among them, it has sought to sharpen the targeting of
its development plans and programmes for realizing its
urgent goals, particularly in the area of the health,
nutrition, education and overall well-being of children,
women and families. In fact, one such policy document
on child protection law is being scrutinized at the
moment by our parliament, which considers it one of
its top priorities for the current parliamentary session.
In the recent past, our efforts have been hindered
by the prolonged economic turmoil in our country. As a
result, the poor spend a greater percentage of their
income on food, thereby reducing the resources
available for health, education and other critical
services. Thus, unless measures are urgently taken, the
threat of a lost generation of malnourished, unhealthy
and poorly educated children could become a stark
reality. To deal with poverty and related problems, as
well as to respond to the economic crisis, the
Government of Indonesia is now implementing various
programmes and approaches under its social safety net
programme. Such new programmes have been more
comprehensive than in the past, which has helped to
reduce the worst effects of the crisis on the poor. The
social safety net programme covers food security,
education, health, social welfare and incomegenerating programmes that are quickly and directly
provided to intended recipients such as children,
women, families, schools and health centres.

21

A/S-27/PV.6

Indonesia takes pride in its progress in the area of
health care. In the last decade alone, approximately
1.25 million village-based, integrated-service posts
have been established, which all provide preventive
maternal and child health care, nutrition information
and services including family planning, throughout the
country. Likewise, Indonesia has successfully reached
a number of goals including its 1990 goal of universal
child immunization. By 1999, safe and clean water was
available to 67 per cent of all households in urban
areas, along with the sanitation standards set by the
World Health Organization.
On the issue of HIV/AIDS, the statistics for
Indonesia are considered relatively low. Yet the danger
of widespread infection has grown sharply with the
increase of adolescent drug abusers. In facing this
situation, Indonesia has established a national AIDS
committee that focuses its efforts on minimizing the
spread of infection through enhanced adolescent
awareness of sexually transmitted diseases, particularly
HIV/AIDS.
A number of strategies and activities have been
conducted to improve the quality of education,
especially at the primary and secondary levels. This is
done through the nation’s basic education for all and
Education for All programmes. Particular efforts have
also been carried out to eliminate the gender disparity
in education. This is consistent with our objective of
equality for all people, in all walks of life and across
all age groups.
At the global level, child-related problems such
as the eradication of poverty, the elimination of
diseases, child labour and the need to control
HIV/AIDS require collective, worthwhile efforts
involving both the industrialized and developing
countries. Therefore, international cooperation should
continue and should be strengthened. In particular,
donor countries should vigorously strive to reach the
agreed official development assistance target of 0.7 per
cent of gross national product.
In conclusion, let me just add that we see the
draft outcome document, “A world fit for children”, as
a comprehensive and action-oriented document that
will renew our commitment to the promotion and
protection of the rights and well-being of children.
Indonesia, for its part, stands ready, and is fully
committed to moving forward to improve the survival,
protection and development of its children in line with

22

the plan of action to be adopted by the special session.
However, the financial crisis that still grips Indonesia
may place constraints on the Government’s efforts to
fully implement the targets set in that document.
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): The
Assembly shall now hear a statement by Her
Excellency Ms. Vilija Blinkevičiuté, Minister of Social
Security and Labour of Lithuania.
Ms. Blinkevičiuté (Lithuania): Let me, on behalf
of the Lithuanian delegation, extend our warm
greetings to all participants in this special session of
the General Assembly. I would like to thank the
Secretariat for organizing this tremendous event, the
Secretary-General for his excellent and comprehensive
report, “We the Children” (A/S-27/3), and Ambassador
Patricia Durrant for her outstanding work.
I believe that the special session — which seeks
to assess the experience gained and the lessons learned
by the world’s nations in the field of children’s rights
and to set further objectives for the next decade — is
very important and significant. It is an important
manifestation of the world’s desperate wish and need to
build a child-friendly twenty-first century for peoples
of diverse nationalities, cultures and beliefs. I
completely agree that the aim of every country and
Government should be to build such a world together
with the growing generation.
In my brief statement on Lithuania’s 10 years of
experience in the field of children’s rights, I would like
to emphasise that the restoration of Lithuania’s
independence almost coincided with the adoption of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Thus, the
basic principles associated with children’s rights as
established in the Convention have become a part of
the national policy of the democratic nation of
Lithuania.
Having restored independence in a democratic
way, Lithuanian society faced inevitable economic and
social changes. The decade was marked by a series of
reforms dealing with the country’s economy,
administration, Government, health care, education,
social security, et cetera.
In the field of health care, child mortality has
decreased during the past decade. Prenatal care has
improved, and the State programme for immunization,
which provides compulsory and accessible vaccination
for infants, is being implemented.

A/S-27/PV.6

The number of people infected with HIV/AIDS in
Lithuania is not high, but we are worried that the
increasing rate of drug addiction among teenagers and
other young people will increase the risk of the spread
of the epidemic.
I would like to point out that the education
system is considered one of the Government’s highest
priorities. Girls and boys have equal educational
opportunities from kindergarten through university.
This is confirmed by the fact that almost all
Lithuanians are literate and prepared for entering the
labour market.
I completely agree with and support the point of
view that the family is the main unit of society, and
that it bears the biggest responsibility for our children’s
future and well-being. Acknowledging that a child’s
well-being is primarily associated with the well-being
and security of his or her family, Lithuania, like many
other countries Members of the United Nations, has
adopted a poverty diminution strategy and programme,
which provides for instruments to overcome this
problem. In 2001, the Government of Lithuania
adopted a long-term programme to develop
employment opportunities. This programme aims to
remove regional disparities in employment, thus
diminishing poverty and raising the standard of living
of families, while increasing the well-being of children.
In the field of foster care, Lithuania seeks to
follow the basic principles of the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child, acting in the
child’s best interests. The foster-care system is being
changed so that preventive measures, such as social
work with families, are implemented as a priority.
Priority is accorded to placing the child within a
guardian’s family, rather than institutionalizing him.
Non-governmental organizations are taking an active
part in these activities. Their practical experience of
social work with families and children is greatly
appreciated. The importance of the issue of the
protection of children’s rights in Lithuanian policy is
demonstrated by the fact that in 2000 the Lithuanian
parliament established the office of a children’s rights
ombudsman.
We acknowledge that we have achieved much in
the field of the protection of the rights of children. But
in my opinion, child welfare remains one of the most
important aspects of State policy, and requires more
attention.

Violence against children and their commercial or
sexual exploitation are among the gravest violations of
children’s rights. This phenomenon is intolerable and
unacceptable. The efforts of both national and
international organizations are called for to protect
children from violence of all kinds.
A national programme against the commercial
and sexual exploitation of children has been adopted in
Lithuania. The purpose of the programme is to create
preventive instruments, both nationally and in the
Baltic Sea region, in order to ensure that children do
not fall victim to such crimes and to create a
rehabilitation system for those who become victims.
I am glad to inform the Assembly that, in
February this year, Lithuania signed the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict. At
the same time, Lithuania supports and speaks out in
favour of the ratification of International Labour
Organization Convention No. 182 on the elimination of
the worst forms of child labour, and is itself prepared
to ratify it.
The participation and initiatives of children and
young people in resolving children’s issues represents a
very significant contribution to our country’s national
policy. It is my great pleasure to say that a
schoolchildren’s parliament has been established and is
operational in Lithuania. Members are democratically
elected by schoolchildren themselves. Its activities
have shown that schoolchildren are seriously
determined to represent the interests of children and
youth.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
Lithuania is prepared to take part in international
initiatives aimed at achieving a better future for
children, and to do so with, and for, children.
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): I give
the floor to His Excellency The Right Honourable John
Denham, M.P., Minister for Children and Young People
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland.
Mr. Denham (United Kingdom): Action to
abolish child poverty is essential to improve children’s
lives today, to enable children to reach their full
potential as adults and to break the cycle of poverty
and disadvantage.

23

A/S-27/PV.6

Achieving the internationally agreed Millennium
Development Goals is vital, and we have a real concern
that the proposed 2010 interim targets in the draft
outcomes document are not sufficiently ambitious. We
must aim to reduce infant mortality and under-5
mortality by more than one third by 2010 if we are to
succeed in reducing it by two thirds by 2015. We must
aim to reduce maternal mortality by more than one
third by 2010 if we are to succeed in reducing it by
three quarters by 2015.
As our Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon
Brown, proposed in New York today, we need a new
development compact in which no country genuinely
committed to good governance, poverty reduction and
economic development should be denied the chance to
achieve the 2015 goals through lack of resources.
We have been far too slow in advancing towards
our education goals. We believe that the richest
countries should back the new World Bank initiative
with the funds it now needs to fast-track our
commitment to meeting the goal of primary education
for all by 2015.
Recognizing that half of all child deaths result
from four avoidable diseases, the British Government
believes that just as we fast-track investments in
education for countries that have a plan, so too for
health we should fast-track support to help build
universal and equitable health-care systems.
Furthermore, because we must build a virtuous
circle of debt relief, poverty reduction and sustainable
development for the long term, our Government also
proposes that we step up our commitment to making
the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative a
success.
We also need to maintain the global consensus
reached at the Cairo International Conference on
Population and Development and at the Beijing World
Conference on Women. Those conferences highlighted
the need for sustained action to achieve greater equality
for women; the importance of ensuring access to
quality reproductive and sexual health services; and the
right of individuals, including young people, to enjoy
the highest attainable standards of sexual and
reproductive health. All of these are vital if we are to
tackle HIV/AIDS. In this, and in all work towards the
Millennium Development Goals, the Convention on the
Rights of the Child serves as an inspiration. The way to
ensure children’s well-being is to take full account of

24

their rights. We believe that the draft outcome
document for this special session — still under
negotiation — should recognize the importance of
those issues.
Tackling child poverty is also a priority for
domestic action. In the mid 1990s, the United Kingdom
had the highest rate of relative child poverty in Europe.
Our commitment is to halve child poverty by 2010 and
to eradicate it within a generation. By tax and benefit
changes and by investing in services for children, we
are on course to reach our targets. But there is much
more to be done. We are targeting our efforts towards
improving the position of the most vulnerable families.
Young people’s participation in this session has
brought a sense of both reality and ambition to the
many debates. We must hear their voice at the national
as well as the international level. We are restructuring
the machinery of Government in the United Kingdom
to put the interests and voices of children and young
people at the heart of policies and services. As Minister
for Young People, my task is to make sure that children
and young people’s voices can shape the priorities and
practices of Government and to bring together
Government, the voluntary sector, business, local
communities and families with a common vision for
young people.
Our society, like a number of others around the
world and particularly in Europe, is increasingly
racially, ethnically and culturally diverse as a result of
planned and unplanned immigration, asylum and
populations arriving as a result of poverty and conflict.
For our whole society, and for our young people in
particular, we have to find ways of building societies
which share a common vision and common values, yet
respect diversity. This is essential if we are to resist
effectively those who want to exploit racism and
xenophobia. The United Kingdom Government wants
to work with others who have been successful in
meeting these challenges in finding the most effective
way we and other countries should respond. Nationally
as well as internationally, young people must be at the
centre of our efforts to bring communities together and
to develop shared values which bind people together
and which recognize the value of diversity.
The measure of the success of this conference
will be the extent to which the lives of children are
improved. That is the only measure of our success.

A/S-27/PV.6

The Acting President (spoke in Russian): The
Assembly will now hear a statement by Her Excellency
Mrs. Atsuko Toyama, Minister of Education, Culture,
Sports, Science and Technology of Japan.
Mrs. Toyama (Japan): It is my great pleasure to
speak for our children here today as a representative of
the Government of Japan.
I believe that the United Nations was right to
choose children as the theme for this special session at
the dawn of the twenty-first century. This choice
reflects our strong will and desire to start the new
century with the work of laying the foundation for a
better world for children. If adults were sincerely
working to build a society conducive to the well-being
of children, the world would be a better place. In
reality, however, children are often deprived of
happiness. This may be the result of political unrest,
armed conflict, poverty or just of adults pursuing their
own interests.
I believe that we should take this occasion to
seriously consider what we can do for the world’s
children and make genuine progress. The future is on
the shoulders of children. Creating a world fit for
children, therefore, will contribute to the future of all
humankind. Whether in developed or developing
countries, we as adults have a moral duty and political
responsibility to do our best for children. Developed
countries especially have a significant role to play,
since considerable resources are needed in this
endeavour.
Japan has made every effort to promote the wellbeing of children, especially in the four priority areas
of this special session: education; protection against
abuse, exploitation and violence; health; and
HIV/AIDS.
First, access to education is the right of all
children. Education develops their potential and
enables them to overcome poverty and hardship. It also
contributes to cultivating global citizens. It is
especially important to ensure equal access to
education for girls. Education was the cornerstone of
Japan’s nation-building and post-war reconstruction. I
believe that this experience could be a model for
nation-building efforts in other parts of the world.
Japan will promote cooperation on education with what
I might call “the Japanese spirit”, that is, through
earnest good will without prejudice or dogmatism,
making use of the experience of our educators, while

considering the cultural and historical backgrounds of
the countries concerned.
Uninterrupted education, even in conflict-ridden
areas, should be provided to children. I met with Mr.
Amin, the Minister of Education of the Interim
Administration of Afghanistan, last month to discuss
support we might provide in the field of education. Our
discussion renewed my conviction that reopening
schools and normalizing education is essential for the
sustainable peace and reconstruction of Afghanistan.
Secondly, I would like to emphasize that the
exploitation of children is the exploitation of
humankind itself. Last December, the Government of
Japan, together with the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF) and two international nongovernmental organizations, hosted in Yokohama the
Second World Congress against Commercial Sexual
Exploitation of Children, which is now widely known
as the Yokohama Congress. Through the Yokohama
Global Commitment 2001, the international community
demonstrated its strong determination to take further
action to eliminate the commercial sexual exploitation
of children. We should now put the commitment we
made in Yokohama into action.
Japan, for its part, has been making sincere
efforts to tackle child abuse and child prostitution,
which have become serious social problems in recent
years. It enacted the Law for Punishing Acts related to
child prostitution, child pornography and the protection
of children in November 1999. The Child Abuse
Prevention Law, which took effect in November 2000,
promotes a comprehensive range of measures, from
prevention of child abuse to the protection of child
victims. In addition, Japan has ratified the Convention
on the Rights of the Child, the Convention concerning
Minimum Age for Admission to Employment and the
Convention concerning the Prohibition and Immediate
Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child
Labour. I am happy to announce that today Japan
signed the two Optional Protocols to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child.
Thirdly, access to basic health care is essential for
the physical and mental well-being of children. Japan
has long promoted cooperation in this area with
developing countries. In the Okinawa Infectious
Disease Initiative launched in 2000, Japan decided to
allocate up to $3 billion over five years to support
action against HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria in

25

A/S-27/PV.6

developing countries. Japan continues to play a leading
role as the Vice-Chair of the Board of the Global Fund
to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria and has
pledged $200 million to the Fund. Furthermore, since
1993, Japan has contributed over $230 million to
activities aimed at eradicating polio in cooperation
with UNICEF. I am pleased that the Western Pacific
area was declared polio-free in the year 2000.
Fully committed to the outcome of this special
session, Japan will further support the world’s children
in cooperation with other Governments, international
organizations and civil society, including nongovernmental organizations, corporate entities and the
media.
As the First Lady of the Republic of Korea
mentioned in her statement (see A/S-27/PV.1), the
International Federation of Association Football World
Cup games, hosted by the Republic of Korea and
Japan, will commence soon after this special session.
The games will be dedicated to the well-being of the
world’s children. The Government of Japan promotes
cooperation with civil society by supporting the
projects of non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
local authorities and others in the area of basic human
needs through grant assistance for grassroots projects
and subsidies to NGO projects. Furthermore, my
Government established the Children’s Dream Fund
last year for the purpose of supporting hands-on
learning and reading groups.
Children are born into this world under unequal
conditions. We must make a world where all
children — who embody our hopes and dreams and
who are our most precious asset — can freely develop
their potential. I appeal to all gathered here: let us
share our ideas and work together for children, the
messengers of our future and the creators of that future.
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): The
Assembly will now hear a statement by His Excellency
Mr. Talal Mubarak Al Ayaar, Minister for Social
Affairs and Labour, Minister for Electricity and Water
of Kuwait.
Mr. Al Ayaar (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to say that it is my pleasure on
behalf of the State of Kuwait to extend my heartfelt
congratulations to Mr. Han Seung-soo on presiding
over the twenty-seventh special session of the General
Assembly devoted to children. I would also like to
express my thanks to the Preparatory Committee and

26

its Chairperson, Ambassador Patricia Durrant, for their
preparation of this special session. My gratitude also
goes to the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
for its constructive role in the preparations for this
special session. I also wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his detailed report (A/S-27/3) highlighting
the achievements made in attaining the goals of the
World Summit for Children. This is a unique
opportunity to renew our determination to achieve what
we have not been able to achieve over the past decade.
Children, in whose interests we are gathered
today in this international forum, are our future and the
real wealth of nations. We are here to follow up on the
implementation of the goals of the 1990 World Summit
for Children. As we take note of the progress and
achievements, we must also review the problems that
continue to hinder the attainment of our aspirations.
The majority of children the world over continue
to suffer from poverty, exploitation and armed conflict.
We must focus on several essential elements that,
despite the obstacles they may pose, should not
diminish our resolve. We call for urgent national and
international priority to be given to the physical, social
psychological and emotional growth of children.
Children should begin their lives in a secure
environment that enables them to live in emotional
balance with a sound mind in a sound body and to
enjoy social justice and access to education.
The State of Kuwait endorses the draft outcome
document, entitled “A world fit for children”, which is
in line with lofty Islamic laws. We believe that families
and households should be our focus, as they bear
primary responsibility for children and provide them
with care and protection. All of us must face up to the
challenges confronting children through strategies
involving all of a society’s active and responsible
actors.
While the security of children is threatened by
many dangers, including armed conflict, substance
abuse and other social ills, we must nevertheless be
steadfast in our fight against disintegration and fear.
Children constitute more than 50 per cent of Kuwait’s
population. The State of Kuwait has taken a number of
steps to provide basic services for children.
First, a high-level committee on the care of
children and families has been established,
encompassing both governmental and private entities.
Secondly, health care, education and social and

A/S-27/PV.6

psychological care and services are provided for
children with special needs, such as the children of
prisoners of war, martyrs, juveniles and abandoned
children. This includes kindergartens, social clubs for
children and special care for both disabled and highly
talented children. Thirdly, numerous pioneering
projects have been implemented, including a centre for
children’s culture and science and a centre for early
intervention to prevent disabilities. Fourthly, many
household and families benefit from State financial
assistance. In addition, working women enjoy
maternity leave and social security benefits.
The State of Kuwait deeply sympathizes with the
tragedy of the many children throughout the world who
for political or economic reasons, or because of the
selfishness of certain rulers, continue to suffer. In that
regard, we cannot ignore the plight of Palestinian
children suffering under the practices of Israeli
occupying forces, who use indiscriminate and brutal
force to wreak havoc and destruction. Among the
victims of the Israeli forces are children, who are the
most vulnerable group in society. We call on the
General Assembly to condemn Israeli practices and to
call on Israel to end immediately all such practices and
to protect all civilians, especially children.
At the same time, Iraq is preventing many
Kuwaiti children from seeing their relatives. There are
more than 600 Kuwaiti prisoners in Iraq, some of
whom are children. I pray to God Almighty to crown
with success the Assembly’s efforts to make use of the
laws and instruments of the United Nations to provide
a life of dignity and security for children.
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): I wish
to remind the Assembly that more than 40 speakers
remain on the list for this meeting. I would therefore
ask all speakers to observe the five-minute rule.
Otherwise we shall not be able to complete our meeting
in the time allotted.
The Assembly will now hear a statement by Her
Excellency The Honourable Netumbo Nandi-Ndaitwah,
Minister for Women’s Affairs and Child Welfare of
Namibia.
Ms.
Nandi-Ndaitwah
(Namibia):
I
am
addressing the Assembly on behalf of the President of
the Republic of Namibia, Mr. Sam Nujoma, who is
unable to be with us due to other, equally important
national duties.

Allow me at the outset to congratulate Mr. Han
Seung-soo on his unanimous election as President of
the twenty-seventh special session on children. I am
confident that he will lead the work of this session to a
successful conclusion.
Allow me also to thank the Chairperson of the
Preparatory Committee and the other members of the
Bureau for a job well done. Our sincere gratitude goes
also to the Executive Director of the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and to her team for their
tireless efforts in, and continued commitment to,
promoting the rights of children throughout the world.
My delegation commends the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report entitled “We the
children”, and end-decade review of the follow-up to
the World Summit for Children. The World Summit for
Children took place in 1990, six months after
Namibia’s independence. Soon after that Summit, the
President of the Republic of Namibia established an
inter-ministerial committee which developed a national
programme of action for children. Namibia has also
ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
its two optional protocols.
The national programme of action for children
focuses on the following: health care; nutrition and
household food security; water and sanitation; early
childhood development; basic education and literacy;
and children in especially difficult circumstances.
Namibia’s
commitment
to
the
national
programme of action is reflected in the 46 per cent of
the national budget that is allocated to social sectors
such as health care, education, housing, water and
sanitation.
After the introduction of the Global Movement
for Children, Namibian members of Parliament held a
one-day meeting to make their pledge to the
Movement. They identified HIV/AIDS, education for
every child, poverty reduction and investing in children
as the first priorities in Namibia, thus directing our
focus to the implementation of the Global Movement
for Children.
Health care is a priority in Namibia. Since the
introduction of primary health care, the incidence of
diarrhoea in children under five as well as cases of
respiratory infection have shown a significant decline
over the years. Neonatal tetanus has been eliminated,
and no case involving the polio virus has been reported

27

A/S-27/PV.6

since 1995. Overall, access to health services is more
than 80 per cent.

therefore embarked on an extensive poverty-reduction
programme to address those problems.

The nutrition programme introduced in 1991
continues to focus on the prevention and control of
micronutrient deficiencies, such as iodine deficiency
disorder; vitamin C deficiency; and iron deficiency
anaemia. Over 80 per cent of households are using
iodized salt.

We all should commit ourselves to respect and
uphold the rights of children. I wish to take this
opportunity to remind this House, including the
children who are present — and I am happy that these
children, some of whom are from Namibia, are here
today — that there are no rights without
responsibilities. Therefore our children, too, have
responsibilities and obligations, such as to study hard
and to be responsible to themselves, their peers, their
parents and the community at large.

The water and sanitation programmes developed
in 1993 are being implemented. Currently, more than
98 per cent of the urban population and more than 66
per cent of the rural population have access to safe
drinking water. Similarly, more than 50 per cent of the
rural population and over 90 per cent of the urban
population enjoy appropriate sanitation.
The Government encourages early-childhood
development, and the Ministry of Women’s Affairs and
Child Welfare is working closely with parents and
communities in this regard. The link between the
Government and parents has led to the establishment of
many registered early-childhood development centres
all over the country.
Furthermore, primary education in Namibia is
free and compulsory. Currently the enrolment rate is at
95 per cent, with no disparities between boys and girls.
Repetition rates have also decreased substantially. The
major challenge is to provide universal and sustainable
quality education.
Mechanisms to protect and care for children in
especially difficult circumstances are in place.
Depending on the situation, some children are put up in
places of safety, such as children’s homes and shelters,
while arrangements are being made to reintegrate them
with their families.
Social grants are also given to children after their
needs are assessed. The devastating impact of
HIV/AIDS has increased the number of children living
in difficult circumstances. It is estimated that there are
over 80,000 orphans in Namibia as a result of
HIV/AIDS. The Government is currently in the process
of developing national guidelines on the care and
protection of orphans. In its efforts to address the
spread of HIV/AIDS, the Government has established
the National AIDS Control Programme.
Children are further disadvantaged by many other
social problems, such as widespread poverty and
unemployment. The Namibian Government has

28

In conclusion, let me reiterate once again my
Government’s commitment fully to implement the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and to put
children first. It is the hope of my delegation that the
final document of this session will serve the best
interests of the children of the world. All of us must
commit ourselves to its fullest implementation.
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): I call
on Her Excellency, Mrs. Ebamba Boboto, Minister for
Social Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
Mrs. Boboto (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (spoke in French): On behalf of Major General
Joseph Kabila, President of the Republic, and on behalf
of the children of the Congo, allow me to thank
Secretary-General Kofi Annan and Mrs. Carol
Bellamy, Executive Director of the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), for their outstanding
contribution to the preparatory work for this session on
children.
This meeting is being held almost one year after
the date initially set because of the terrorist attacks —
which my Government immediately condemned — that
occurred on 11 September 2001, which plunged
America and all of humankind into mourning.
Ten years after the historic World Summit for
Children, considerable progress has been achieved in
numerous areas, including the areas of health,
education and participation. However, in his report
entitled “We the Children” (A/S-27/3), the SecretaryGeneral recalls the formidable challenges that we must
still tackle to effectively implement the Plan of Action
of the World Summit and to address new problems.
Today, key measures we must take for children
fall in the following areas: providing them with a good

A/S-27/PV.6

start in life; ensuring good basic education, giving all
adolescents a chance to fully develop their potential
and to actively participate in community life.
In many developing countries, and specifically in
my country, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
humanitarian situation has become alarming. In urban
areas, poverty has expelled many children from the
family home. Thus, many children are homeless and
live without the protection or the love they should
rightfully receive from their families. They are at the
mercy of all classes of predators. The phenomenon of
street children has taken root despite the traditionally
strong, inclusive family structure of our society.
There is an urgent need to renew international
commitments to place children first in order not to
waste the world’s most precious human resource and in
order to construct a stable and productive society.
Children’s problems are at the centre of the
concerns of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. That special attention has taken
form in a legal and institutional framework that ensures
children’s rights. The legal framework includes the
international legal instruments ratified by our country
and the relevant provisions of national legislation that
deal with numerous ongoing problems including
violence, poverty and scourges such as AIDS and war.
Bearing in mind those important issues, the
situation of Congolese children is very worrying. The
poverty rampant among the majority of families denies
our children access to basic social services.
With respect to health care for children, the
situation is marked by a high infant mortality rate,
currently 127 per 1,000 live births; generally poor
vaccination coverage except in combating acute flaccid
paralysis, for which the strategy of national vaccination
days has led to an appreciable improvement; the
prevalence of protein-energy malnutrition due to
especially acute food insecurity. As well, in 2001, there
were approximately 900,000 Congolese children under
the age of 15 who had lost one or both parents due to
HIV/AIDS, which reached a prevalence rate of nearly
15 per cent in some towns in our country.
With respect to education, since 1990, the
primary school attendance rate has fallen constantly.
Currently, the rate has stabilized at approximately 58
per cent.

With respect to child protection, the problem of
street children, which did not exist previously in our
society given the strong, inclusive nature of the family
structure, has worsened over the last 10 years.
As well, one can observe throughout the world
the grave consequences of the disregard for universally
recognized values, particularly the daily tragedy lived
by tens of millions of children, due to war. In this
regard, we look forward to the entry into force on 1
July 2002 of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, whose sixtieth instrument of
ratification was deposited last 11 April. That treaty
includes an important provision on the protection of the
rights of the child by declaring the recruitment of
children under the age of 15 in national armed forces to
be a war crime.
Despite the prevailing situation of war, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has reacted
positively to the recommendations of resolution 1261
(1999) of 25 August 1999, in which the Security
Council urged States and all relevant parts of the
United Nations system to intensify their efforts to
ensure an end to the recruitment and use of children in
armed conflict. For that reason, my country has
acceded to the principle international instruments for
the protection of the rights of the child, including the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the African
Charter of the Rights and Welfare of the Child, the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict and the Optional Protocol on the sale of
children, child prostitution and child pornography, the
International Labour Organization’s Convention No.
138 on the minimum age for admission to employment
and its Convention No. 182 on the worst forms of child
labour, and the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court.
It should also be stressed that the President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Major General
Joseph Kabila, was personally involved in this process
by promulgating law 66 of 9 June 2000 to demobilize
and reintegrate members of vulnerable groups found
among combatants. He demonstrated his political will
by creating the National Bureau for Demobilization
and Reintegration, charged with carrying out and
following up that legislation in partnership with the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF).

29

A/S-27/PV.6

I would like to stress here that my country no
longer recruits children for its armed forces despite the
fact that our aggressors continue the practice of the
forced recruitment of our children in the regions of the
country that they occupy, and of using them against us.
At the domestic level, the harmonization of all
the aforementioned instruments with national
legislation is under way. Soon, Congolese legislation
will fully protect the rights of children. The draft law
on the protection of the Congolese child has already
been drawn up and is now only awaiting parliamentary
approval before being promulgated by the head of
State.
The war of aggression that has been raging in our
country for four years now is not only responsible for
the phenomenon of child soldiers. It has also caused
brutal and tragic forced population displacements
within the country’s borders and has forced a great
number of our compatriots into exile in neighbouring
States. That population consists in its majority of
women and children, which are the most vulnerable
groups. According to recent estimates, the total number
of displaced persons in our country is 2 million, while
the number of refugees is estimated at approximately
332,000, not counting the number of orphaned
children.
Despite the alarming situation I have just
described, I must assure the international community
that the situation of children remains at the centre of
my Government’s concerns. That special attention has
resulted, first, in an institutional and legal framework
that guarantees the rights of the child. Secondly, it has
resulted in the implementation of multisectoral
programmes for the survival, protection, development
and participation of children, with the support of our
international partners, in particular UNICEF and nongovernmental organizations, particularly Save The
Children.
Currently, significant efforts are being made to
bring the actors back to the negotiating table to
establish a lasting peace. A step towards that was the
19 April 2002 signing of the framework agreement, in
Sun City, South Africa, for the consensual management
of the transition. That agreement was signed by three
quarters of the participants in the national dialogue
provided for in the Lusaka Agreement. I call on the
international community to support the Agreement for
the rapid restoration of peace in our country; it is one

30

of the principle conditions for ensuring a better future
for our children. I also take advantage of this
opportunity to invite all international actors present in
the Assembly to spare no effort to persuade other
parties to accede to Agreement for the total
reunification of the national territory.
As I have said, my country has made a decisive
step in enabling us to better say yes for children, by
saying yes to peace. The Congolese people cherish
peace, reconciliation, development and a better future
for its children. And, as the President of the Republic,
Major General Joseph Kabila has often said,
“The Democratic Republic of the Congo
intends to live in peace with its neighbours. The
policy of good neighbourliness is one of the
guiding principle of our foreign policy. Our
children first need peace, then well-being, must
come from our natural resources, which
unfortunately continue to be subjected to
pillaging by foreign armies. That is why my
country is firmly committed to ensuring a better
future for our children through the Global
Movement for Children.”
I now wish to underline that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo supports the draft outcome
document that the Assembly will adopt at the end of
the special session. We are committed to taking all
measures necessary to implement that document in the
framework of our national plan of action, which we
plan to draw up with the support of Congolese civil
society and with the participation of children.
My delegation would like to express the hope that
the Governments that are represented here today will
work together to produce a common plan to achieve a
world fit for children, based on the principles enshrined
in the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
I would like to conclude by appealing to all of our
international, regional and subregional partners to help
us to carry out our programme to promote and protect
the rights of the child, because we believe that the
future of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
dependent on the well-being of its children and young
people. By investing in children today we can ensure
peace, stability, security, democracy and sustainable
development tomorrow. Long live children, and long
live international solidarity.

A/S-27/PV.6

The Acting President (spoke in Russian): I
would like once again to refer representatives to the
rules governing statements. I remind speakers that
statements should last for no more than five minutes.
There are three lights. A green light flashes at the
beginning of the statement, and a yellow light flashes
30 seconds before the end of the statement. The red
light means that time has expired. I hope that, in a
spirit of cooperation, all representatives will observe
that rule.
I now call on Her Excellency Ms. Samia Ahmed
Mohamed, Minister for Social Welfare and
Development of Sudan.
Ms. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): It is
my privilege and my pleasure to address the Assembly
on behalf of the President of the Republic of Sudan and
the children of my country. I congratulate Mr. Han
Seung-soo on his election to the presidency of the
Assembly at this special session. We are confident that
his wise leadership will lead to the success of the
session. I am also pleased to extend our gratitude to
Ambassador Patricia Durrant, Chairperson of the
Preparatory Committee, to the members of her office,
and to the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF),
for their important contributions to this special session.
While preparations were under way for the
special session on children, which has been convened
to assess their living conditions and to review the
achievements that have been made in caring for them
and safeguarding their welfare, the rights of children
were being undermined and their innocence was being
destroyed by the bullets of the Israeli occupation forces
in Palestine, in a show of horrendous and atrocious
oppression and persecution. Such attacks were being
perpetrated against children and women in full view of
the entire world.
All children have the same rights, and
international law must apply to all, without exception.
Only in that way can children be protected and human
rights fully guaranteed. We therefore call for
international protection to be provided to the
Palestinian people and for the implementation of
relevant Security Council resolutions so as to guarantee
the protection of the civilian population.
Children’s rights have been high on the agenda
since the 1990 World Summit for Children. They have
received a great deal of attention from Governments,
non-governmental
organizations,
civil
society

organizations, scholars and researchers. It is essential
to develop the potential and abilities of children and to
satisfy their basic needs in a secure family atmosphere,
guaranteeing their welfare, providing them with
knowledge and teaching them a sense of morality.
States, guided by the earlier Plan of Action and the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, have taken
great steps forward. But many fundamental goals
related to ensuring the welfare and guaranteeing the
rights of children — goals of developing policies and
strategies at the national, regional and international
levels — have not been achieved.
The report of the Secretary-General on the enddecade review of the follow-up to the Children’s
Summit (A/S-27/3) refers to the many goals that have
not been met. It refers in particular to the wide
disparities among regions, particularly Africa, with
regard to plans and priorities for implementing these
programmes. An analysis of the situation of children in
sub-Saharan Africa shows how goals have not been
achieved, particularly in the field of vaccination and
primary-school enrolment and with regard to the
increase in deadly diseases such as malaria, diarrhoea,
AIDS and tuberculosis. The suffering of children in the
developing and least developed countries has
continued — indeed, it has worsened — and we believe
that in the coming decade it will deteriorate still further
unless firm measures are taken. This will require
renewed political will at the national and international
level.
Although a limited number of developed
countries have fulfilled their commitments, many have
not met their internationally agreed obligations with
regard to official development assistance to developing
and least developed countries.
Armed conflicts must be brought to an end. Their
root causes must be addressed, and special focus must
be placed on peace and reconstruction if the
endeavours of developing countries to implement their
national action plans for children are to be properly
supported. The international community should support
the family unit as the basis of a sound and healthy
society — one of psychological, mental and emotional
equilibrium from which the child can benefit. There
must be a true commitment to eradicate poverty in
implementation of the relevant recommendations of
international conferences, particularly the review
conference of the Copenhagen World Summit for
Social Development. A serious attempt must be made

31

A/S-27/PV.6

to cancel the debts of developing and least developed
countries and to alleviate the grave consequences of
debt servicing and structural adjustment programmes.
Because of our great concern for children, the
Sudan was among the first States to sign and ratify the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. The Sudan
formulated a national programme of action to
implement the Convention, and has made great strides
in that regard, particularly with respect to child health
and the elimination of endemic diseases and diseases
resulting from malnutrition. It has embraced the
principle of health insurance for students and
cooperative medical care, and has reached the goals set
for child vaccination.
In the framework of making education available
to all, the State has put into practice education policies
and programmes designed to build institutional
capabilities, meet school needs, encourage child
parliaments and associations and expand educational
institutions to cover school-age children, as well as
nomads and internally displaced persons, paying
special attention to eliminating inequalities between
boys and girls. A special department for girls’
education has been set up. The State has also enacted
the necessary legislation to ensure the rights of the
child based on societal values and identity, which are
steeped in the teachings of divine religious and in high
morals. A national council for childcare has been set
up. It is one of several State institutions that take care
of children.
The State’s interest in children’s affairs extends to
civil and local society. The Sudanese movement for
children consists of more than 54 non-governmental
organizations active in the field of children’s rights and
welfare, which help to provide services to children
with special needs and to disseminate the culture of
peace. Despite my Government’s efforts over the past
decade to implement the first plan of action, achieving
the remaining objectives remains a daunting challenge
to my country and other developing and least
developed countries, particularly in Africa, because of
the numerous obstacles they encounter, especially the
broad increase in poverty, the slow pace of
development and the heavy debt burden.
In this connection, the persistence of the war
forced upon my country is a real stumbling block for
all child-welfare programmes, owing to the recalcitrant
refusal of the terrorist rebel movement to respond to

32

our Government’s recurrent calls for an unconditional
ceasefire. Those programmes are based on our desire to
reach out to children and to provide them with the
services they need. From this important rostrum, we
invite the international community to bring greater
pressure to bear on the rebel movement to agree to a
comprehensive ceasefire and to put an end to the
suffering of citizens, especially children and women, in
the outlying areas.
In fulfilling the Sudan’s commitment to
protecting children and safeguarding their welfare, I
am pleased to inform the Assembly that, yesterday, the
Sudan signed the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict. The atrocious exploitation
of children as a result of their use by rebel movements
and outlaw groups as soldiers and human shields
requires the cooperation of the international
community in ending the suffering of those children
and in providing them with a decent living.
In conclusion, there is no doubt that the
unanimity with which the Convention on the Rights of
the Child has been embraced proves States’ awareness
of the importance of children and of the need to secure
their welfare. This should be an impetus for us all and a
favourable opportunity to affirm our earnest and just
political will to implement the programme of action to
be adopted at this meeting with a view to ensuring the
growth and well-being of children and the preservation
of their rights.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by Her Excellency Mrs. Ana Dias Lourenzo,
Minister of Planning of Angola.
Mrs. Lourenzo (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese;
English text provided by the delegation): In taking the
floor, we have the honour of transmitting to you, Sir,
on behalf of the Angolan delegation, our warmest
greetings on your election to the presidency of this
important special session of the General Assembly. We
assure you of the full cooperation of the Angolan
delegation during the session.
This session of the General Assembly is taking
place as the world confronts complex social, political
and economic conditions contributing to the already
bleak and uncertain future for children. Conflicts are
gradually spreading everywhere, undermining peace
and international security. This context renews the
responsibilities of the United Nations. As such, this

A/S-27/PV.6

noble Organization should continue to devote its
attention to this critical situation, particularly in Africa,
where internal and border conflicts persistently hamper
efforts to ensure a better quality of life for the people
and, in particular, for our children.
The unleashing of the Angolan armed conflict
immediately following the 1992 elections exacerbated
the already bleak social conditions of Angolans. As a
result, nearly 4 million internally displaced people,
some 50,000 orphans of war, 100,000 children
separated from their families and 100,000 disabled
citizens depend on internal and international
humanitarian assistance.
The percentage of children in the population of
Angola is estimated at above 50 per cent and they
therefore represent the country’s potential for
development in the coming decades. Recent estimates
regarding delayed growth in children, low weight and
emaciated children confirm that poor protein-caloric
nutrition is one of the most serious problems affecting
them. Indications are that the rates are higher in rural
areas than in urban areas.
Additionally, the following statistics further
illustrate the dramatic situation confronting Angola: a
maternal mortality rate varying between 1,200 and
1,500 per 100,000 live births; an infant mortality rate
of 250 per 1,000 for children under five; access to
drinking water for only 54.1 per cent of the population;
access to basic sanitation for only 59.1 per cent of the
population; and access to pre-school education for only
6.6 per cent. Approximately 57 per cent of school-age
children find themselves outside the education system,
while nearly 2 million are subject to physical and
emotional hardships, 1 million of whom have no
special protection.
We note with deep concern the increasing number
of children separated from their families in urban
centres and exposed to risks ranging from early
pregnancy to sexual and commercial exploitation
leading to child prostitution.
Children are the primary resource of the Angolan
nation. Their future will depend on protective and
development actions that are being undertaken by the
Government,
United
Nations
agencies,
nongovernmental organizations, religious organizations
and civil society. In keeping with our commitments and
the recommendations that emerged from the World
Summit for Children, the Angolan Government created

the National Institute for Children and hosted and
promoted a workshop under the heading “Absolute
Priorities for Children”, in which stakeholders analysed
such issues as basic education, health, nutrition, access
to drinking water, sanitation and the condition of
families and children living in difficult circumstances.
Furthermore, and in accordance with the rights of
children, the Government of Angola has been
implementing a number of initiatives aimed at securing
the survival and development of children, which
include a programme to find and reunite children with
their biological families or substitutes; a national
conference on the sexual and commercial exploitation
of children that resulted in the approval of a national
plan of action; a national conference on the
exploitation of child labour; and the promotion and
conducting of free child registration campaigns. The
first took place in 1988, registering 80,000 children;
the second began in 2001 and will end in December
2002. To date, 500,000 children have been registered.
A juvenile judicial system has been created to protect
and secure the rights of children, as well as their
obligations under the law. A Children’s Parliament was
held in 2000. Children’s programmes have been
established, especially for early infancy development.
Literacy and adult education campaigns have been
promoted, while budgetary allocation to the social
sector, currently representing 20 per cent, has been
increased.
In accordance with Angola’s pledge to eradicate
poliomyelitis by the year 2005, more than 3 million
children were vaccinated in 2001. The advent of peace
is enabling the Government and its partners to reach a
greater number of children, thereby contributing to the
attainment of our objective. The Government of
Angola has initiated the introduction of antiretroviral
drugs to reduce the vertical mother-to-child
transmission of HIV/AIDS. It is expected that up to 70
per cent of children born from an infected mother will
be disease-free.
Today Angola finds itself on the threshold of a
new stage in its history. The Government of Angola
thus continues to be engaged in the process of
economic reform, in the fight against poverty and in
the strengthening of democratic institutions. After four
decades of debilitating war, we are now witnessing an
improvement in the environment for the protection of
children’s rights. The Government of Angola
recognizes children as a priority in the formulation of

33

A/S-27/PV.6

its economic and social policies, and thus we protect
and ensure their survival and development.
The Government of Angola undertakes this major
commitment before the thousands of suffering children
in my country. On behalf of the children of Angola, we
appeal to the General Assembly and to the international
community to take action in a gesture of solidarity with
the children of Angola to support the maintenance of
peace, national reconstruction and development, all of
which represent fundamental necessities for the
implementation of the Convention on the Rights of
Children and of the recommendations that will emerge
from this special session. In conclusion, the Angolan
delegation would like to express its support for the
adoption of the draft outcome document entitled “A
world fit for children”.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by her Excellency Mrs. Shirley Gbujama,
Minister of Social Welfare, Gender and Children’s
Affairs of Sierra Leone.
Mrs. Gbujama (Sierra Leone): We have heard
them before. They appear in various United Nations
and other documents. Here are a few of them: “Put
children first”, “A good start for every child” and
“First call for children”. These are not mere slogans.
They are principles that my delegation wholeheartedly
endorses. So, let me begin with children.
With your permission, Mr. President, I would like
to read the following short message to the child
delegates attending this special session from His
Excellency President Alhaji Ahmad Tejan Kabbah of
Sierra Leone, who is unable to be present here today
and whom I humbly represent.
“Child delegates, this is your session. The
heads of State or Government are here to support
you and your right to a better future; your right to
survival and happiness. We are here also to make
a new pledge to work harder on the solemn
commitments we made 12 years ago, before some
of you were born, and to protect your rights and
welfare and those of children everywhere. We are
here because we still believe that your well-being
requires political action at the highest level of
every country.”
At this special session of the General Assembly
on children, I must pay tribute to the work of an agency
that has been at the forefront of the effort to create a

34

world fit for children. Beginning as an agency
established to provide care and support to children in
one corner of the globe more than half a century ago,
the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) has
become the foremost organization for the rights and
well-being of children worldwide. We salute its
Executive Director, Carol Bellamy, and the thousands
of people in local and international organizations, as
well as those in the private sector, who are working
assiduously to create a world fit for children. UNICEF
has identified 10 principles for improving the lives of
children and adolescents worldwide. Those principles,
in the view of my delegation, are crucial for developing
our programmes for children in the next decade. One of
them is that we must listen to children.
We in Sierra Leone have been trying to listen to
our children. They have a children’s forum, which they
say should be their own centre for advocacy on such
issues as child protection, drug abuse, HIV/AIDS,
street children, the special needs of ex-combatants,
peace and education. Indeed, we received inspiration
for our statement today from a Sierra Leonean child
who has articulated the plight, as well as the
aspirations, of the approximately 2 million child
survivors of a brutal rebel war in my country. We thank
God that we have peace today.
As survivors one would have expected the
children of Sierra Leone to highlight protecting
children from war as the number-one objective on the
list of 10 UNICEF principles listed in a worldwide poll
in connection with this special session. Considering
that thousands of Sierra Leonean children had been
abducted, drugged, armed and forced to serve as
combatants, and knowing that hundreds of their young
sisters and brothers were victims of merciless and
deliberate amputations, one would have expected the
children of Sierra Leone to tell us that their primary
objective is the need to protect children from war,
violence and exploitation. Rather, we found out from
listening that for the children of Sierra Leone the two
most important objectives are the eradication of
poverty and the need to invest in children.
Eleven years ago, we in Sierra Leone embarked
on an ambitious national plan of action in that
direction. Unfortunately, the prolonged rebel war
compelled us to divert resources to emergency and
related humanitarian programmes. Nevertheless, we
take pride in the fact that the main targets and
beneficiaries of the emergency programmes have been

A/S-27/PV.6

children. The recent establishment of a national
commission for war-affected children, whose executive
director is here as part of our delegation to the special
session, also attests to our determination to focus
attention on this group of young people. In this
connection, we acknowledge with gratitude the
important role played by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ambassador Olara Otunnu, in setting up the
commission. We have also already drafted a children’s
rights bill that will become the Magna Carta of
children’s rights in Sierra Leone.
Global statistics show an overall improvement in
the health of children under 5 years of age. According
to the Secretary-General’s report “We the Children”
(A/S-27/3), there has been a reduction in the number of
deaths among children from diarrhoea, polio and other
childhood illnesses. We are told that this year 3 million
fewer children will die than did a decade ago; polio has
been brought to the brink of eradication; and 90 million
newborn babies will be protected each year from
significant loss-of-hearing disability.
In a global context, we cannot afford to ignore
those developments. In fact, we can pat ourselves on
the back that we have done a good job. But, for us in
Africa, we can only take note of these figures and the
improving conditions because for us the statistics are
much bleaker. The challenges identified in the World
Declaration on the Survival, Protection and
Development of Children, especially for Africa, remain
as daunting as they were some 11 years ago when
heads of States met in the Assembly Hall.
The rebel war in Sierra Leone was the main
inhibiting factor in our effort to meet the targets. This
notwithstanding, we are convinced that Sierra Leone
and other developing countries would have
achieved much more for our children in the past decade
if the international community had fulfilled its
commitment — the commitment to assist us in
reducing poverty by at least 5 per cent. Let us make no
mistake about it. There is a direct linkage between
poverty reduction and the protection of the rights and
welfare of the child. Failure to meet the targets of
poverty reduction programmes is reflected, and will
always be reflected, in the status of our children.
At the Millennium Summit, from this very
rostrum, President Ahmad Tejan Kabbah spoke of the
need for the international community to adapt and

equip itself to deal with the new manifestations of the
perennial problems of human insecurity and
underdevelopment. He suggested that action by the
Security Council to address armed conflict must be
followed by more innovative responses by our
development partners, in particular the international
financial and development institutions, with strategies
that are essentially child-centred, if we are to put
children first.
It is in that context that I take this opportunity, on
behalf of the children of Sierra Leone and of all the
children in the least developed countries, to renew the
appeal for the cancellation and rescheduling of all debt,
as applicable, for the sake of our children.
Let us remember that when we speak of funding
the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Debt
Initiative, we do so on behalf of our children; and that
when we call upon developed countries that have not
yet reached the target of 0.7 per cent of their gross
national product for overall official development
assistance to intensify their efforts to achieve the
agreed target, we do so in particular on behalf of our
children.
We in Sierra Leone acknowledge that it is the
primary responsibility of our country to set its own
priorities and targets and to mobilize national resources
for improving the livelihood of our people, including
children. However, assistance from our international
development and trading partners can make all the
difference.
Finally, as my delegation sees it, it is not enough
to listen to our children or to give them a voice at this
special session, which is taking place in the largest
multilateral forum in the world, or to promise them
participation in all matters pertaining to their welfare.
What matters most is that we actually translate our
words into reality for our children. The special session
is about action — action on behalf of our children.
We have been challenged. We cannot afford to
disappoint them, those who will inherit this beautiful
world. That is why my delegation is pleased that,
following lengthy and intensive negotiations under the
leadership of Ambassador Patricia Durrant of Jamaica,
supported by the Permanent Representatives of
Bangladesh and of Germany, we now have a Plan of
Action that is appropriately named “A World Fit for
Children” and that is ready for adoption at this session.

35

A/S-27/PV.6

We pledge our commitment to every positive
move in that direction and to every clause in that
document.

Republic of Kazakhstan. Thus Kazakhstan now has an
adequate legislative framework for the protection of
the rights and interests of children.

The President: I give the floor to Her Excellency
Mrs. Aitkul Samakova, Minister, Chairperson of the
National Commission on Family and Women’s Affairs
of Kazakhstan.

In practical terms, a great deal is being done in
Kazakhstan to create normal living conditions for
children. We have a far-reaching network of medical
institutions that provide top-notch medical assistance
to pregnant minors pre- and post-natally.

Mrs. Samakova (Kazakhstan) (spoke in
Russian): The people of Kazakhstan were deeply
shocked by the brutal acts of terrorism that occurred
here in America last September, which deferred the
special session for eight months. As frequently occurs
as a result of acts of terrorism, the casualties included
thousands of children, who lost their mothers and
fathers. Among them was a 5-year-old girl from
Kazakhstan, whose mother is still buried under the
ruins of one of the towers.
Kazakhstan itself has been fighting the terrorist
network in Afghanistan, and we support the actions
now being taken to re-establish peace in that country. It
is our hope that the children of Afghanistan will have a
brighter future. In order for this to happen, the
international community needs to focus its efforts on
the economic rehabilitation of Afghanistan. Kazakhstan
has already begun to lend assistance to that longsuffering country and will continue to help it.
Kazakhstan is a young State, but in the span of its
10 years of independence we have been able to carry
out important economic and political reforms. We have
now embarked on a course of successful socioeconomic development. The European Union and the
United States have recognized Kazakhstan as being a
country with a market economy.
We have acceded to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, and we have ratified the two Optional
Protocols to that Convention on the involvement of
children in armed conflict and on the sale of children,
child prostitution and child pornography. A draft
national law on the rights of the child is before
Parliament today; it is fully in accord with the
requirements of those international instruments.
A special law has been passed on children’s
villages and youth housing, which are aimed at
improving the situation of orphans. We will soon be
passing a law on State support for children and
adolescents with limited access to health care. A bill is
also being drawn up on State youth policies in the

36

With the support of the Asian Development Bank,
we are also endeavouring to prevent anaemia and those
illnesses connected to iodine deficiencies. We have set
ourselves the task of producing iron-enriched flour for
all bread and of iodizing all salt that is used for
nutritional purposes.
Secondary education is free and compulsory for
the entire population of our country. We have never had
any hostilities or armed conflict, and our children have
the opportunity to grow up in a safe environment in
conditions of multi-ethnic concord. In this connection,
it should be borne in mind that we have more than 100
different ethnic groups in our country. We believe that
all of this is the result of the wise policies of our
President, Mr. Nazarbaev.
The Government intends to draw up a national
plan of action to improve the situation of children in
the Republic of Kazakhstan. The basis for that plan
will be the final document of this special session,
which we fully support.
In Kazakhstan, preparations for this special
session of the General Assembly were an undertaking
of tremendous scope. Last year, the traditional lesson
to be learned on 1 September was devoted to two
subjects: the tenth anniversary of the independence of
Kazakhstan and the campaign “Say Yes for Children”.
The media provided strong information-technology
support for that undertaking. As a result, approximately
4 million teachers, students, parents and citizens said
“Yes” for children. This represents almost a fourth of
our country’s inhabitants.
We have also been very actively involved in
preparing the final document of this session and have
made a number of proposals in that respect. For
example, we proposed the incorporation into public
education of special programmes that would help to
prevent violence.
We believe that violence in society in all its forms
and manifestations can be reduced by consistently and

A/S-27/PV.6

systematically educating children in a spirit of nonviolence. We believe that particular attention should be
paid to gender-awareness education among children.
From their very earliest years, girls and boys should
know that they have not only equal rights but also
equal opportunities. In that connection, we suggested
an addition to the final document relating to the
inclusion of gender programmes in the educational
system. We in Kazakhstan have already elaborated our
own special projects on gender education and the
prevention of violence. As part of these projects, we
have developed programmes, textbooks and teaching
aids and have made recommendations for how they can
be incorporated into the public education system.
We highly commend the contents of the draft
outcome document, prepared under the guidance of
UNICEF experts. We believe that it covers all the areas
needed if we are to create a world fit for children. The
draft outcome document maps out what needs to be
done to improve the situation of children over the next
10 years. I appeal to all members to vote in favour of
it. The document incorporates a number of ideas
suggested raised by Kazakhstan in previous meetings,
and we are very pleased that the experts listened to the
proposals made by our country at that time.
In conclusion, I would like to congratulate the
United Nations; UNICEF and its Executive Director,
Ms. Carol Bellamy; and all those who participated in
the successful preparations for and the convening of
this far-reaching and extremely important special
session.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency The Honourable Girlyn Miguel, Minister of
Social Development, Ecclesiastical and Gender Affairs
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
Ms. Miguel (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
It is my privilege to represent the Government, the
people and, especially, the children of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines at this special session on children.
In order for children to inhabit a world fit for
them, we the adults must provide them with the basic
necessities for a productive and rewarding life. It goes
without saying that these include nutrition, health and
education. We as a body must leave this session having
made a disciplined effort to identify the structural and
constitutional changes needed to undertake the reforms
necessary for the achievement of our goals. At the
international level, we need the creation of sound

practical laws and other institutions to uphold the
rights of the child. At the domestic level, we need to
re-examine our laws, our social structures and our
attitudes to ensure that we create a framework in which
our children can thrive and excel, not merely exist.
We are aware of the horrifying statistics of
children involved in armed conflict. These figures
bring shame not only to those who use children as
weapons of war, but also to us all. We are also
painfully aware of the 10 million children who die
every year from preventable diseases. Once again, this
statistic produces universal shame and should
hopefully bring renewed conviction for action to those
countries that have the wherewithal to provide the
medicine, clean water and other essentials to ensure
that our children survive.
The
three
United
Nations
international
conferences this year all have a direct and fundamental
bearing on the welfare of our children. If they are
implemented, the noble goals of the Monterrey
International
Conference
on
Financing
for
Development will reduce the level of world poverty in
a significant way, thus ensuring that the world becomes
a healthier and happier place for children. This session,
which is now nearing its conclusion, will define what is
necessary for the provision of a world fit for children.
The next conference, the World Summit for Social
Development, to be held in Johannesburg, will deal
with environmental issues and will seek to reverse or
limit some of the damage that we have done to the
physical world which we bequeath to the children.
I hope that you will forgive me, Mr. President, if I
concentrate on the progress that we have made in our
tiny country in caring for and providing for our
children. Notwithstanding our limited resources, we
ensure that children have access to health care through
a system of island-wide rural health clinics. We are
concentrating fiercely on our educational system, and it
is our hope and our promise that free education will be
available to all our children up to school-leaving age
within the next decade.
We are doing our utmost to create an environment
that will attract foreign investment that, in conjunction
with local industry and agriculture, will provide
employment opportunities for our children. In order to
achieve our goals, we need help — help from our ageold partners, like the churches, which play a pivotal
role in our educational system, and from new, creative

37

A/S-27/PV.6

and committed global entities. It is essential for us to
be part of the global economy; only by creating
favourable conditions for trade and investment will we
succeed in this. We need the prosperous countries of
the world to live up to their commitment to provide
help to the poorer countries of the world.

children are in dire need of medical treatment.
One hundred thousand of them are engaged in
hard labour under hazardous working conditions.
The Assembly is well aware of the level of
impact that armed conflict can have in harming
children’s lives.

It grieves me that one of my country’s principal
benefactors and friends, the Republic of China on
Taiwan, is excluded from a global conference. The
millions of Taiwanese children have the same basic
rights as those in the rest of the world, and need our
hand of fellowship.

“While the scope of the suffering of Afghan
children is exceptionally great, we also bear in
mind the entrenched challenges that affect
children’s lives throughout the world. We are
aware that children suffer in various ways in
many countries. We hope that this special session
on children will result in the adoption of vital
decisions for the protection and promotion of
children’s rights worldwide.

During the course of this conference, we have
heard millions of seemingly sincere words about what
needs to be done for our children to enable them to live
in a world fit for them. Let us hope that those were not
just words, and that we will all leave here enriched,
inspired and ennobled in our commitment to create a
better world for our children. Let those of us who use
children to wage war find it in our hearts to stop. Let
those of us who abuse children — whether we be
parents, clergy or strangers — cease. Let us hear the
voices of our children, heed their words and remember
that it is our responsibility to ensure that the future is
not desecrated. Let us endeavour to see the future
clearly and take urgent steps to protect our world and
our children from future desecration.
Let me conclude by thanking all those who were
instrumental in organizing this wonderful and pivotal
event. It has been an honour for me to be here.
The President: I thank the Minister for Social
Development, Ecclesiastical and Gender Affairs of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for her cooperation
in keeping to the time limit.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Abdul
Rahim Karimi, Minister of Justice of Afghanistan.
Mr. Karimi (Afghanistan) (spoke in Dari;
English text provided by the delegation): I have the
honour to read out a statement from His Excellency Mr.
Hamid Karzai, Chairman of the Interim Administration
of Afghanistan, who, despite his desire to attend this
special session on children, was unable to be present
due to urgent duties in Afghanistan.
“The armed conflicts of the past 23 years
have had a drastic impact on all segments of
civilian society, in particular on the lives of
Afghan children. Millions of Afghanistan’s

38

“In that context, the interim administration
of Afghanistan stands committed to deploy all
possible efforts to achieve this objective. It is
important to note that Afghanistan will not
succeed in overcoming the daunting challenges
that face its children unless we receive assistance
from the international community, the United
Nations and other organizations that deal with
humanitarian issues. I should like to add that if
Afghanistan had not been not liberated from the
domination of terrorists and fundamentalists, no
Afghan child would be ready to enrol in school;
rather, Afghan children could have been trained
to serve terrorism and to become arch-enemies of
their own country instead of serving their people.
“I should like to take this opportunity to
convey, on behalf of the Afghan children, our
deepest gratitude to the children — and their
families — who expressed their solidarity by
offering a small part of their minimal assets to the
children of Afghanistan.
“In conclusion, I should like to reiterate my
best wishes for the success of this gathering and
my best wishes to those who have taken practical
measures aimed at enhancing the well-being of
children throughout the world.”
I shall now read my own statement on this special
session on children.
The protection of children’s rights remains a
fundamental responsibility of the human community,
requiring that children be raised in a healthy
environment that ensures their spiritual and physical

A/S-27/PV.6

well-being. With much regret, I must state that many
negative changes in our country as a result of two and a
half decades of armed conflict have had drastic impacts
on the upbringing, training and education of the next
generation.
In Afghanistan, there exists a generation of
children who have been brought up in an atmosphere of
armed conflict, deprived of education, recreational
facilities and medical care. After witnessing the death
of their loved ones and the loss of their material and
moral assets, children have fallen victim to various
psychological illnesses. Moreover, they have been
forced to accept jobs that require hard labour and, in
some instances, to perform military tasks in order to
feed themselves. As we are all aware, finding remedies
to such problems will be no easy task. It will therefore
be a fundamental responsibility of every member of
human society to attract the attention of the world’s
leaders to finding solutions to these major problems.
Today, our children do not have adequate medical
care. The ground is not prepared for recreational
facilities. Thousands of children who are eligible to
attend educational institutions are unable to pursue a
decent level of education. There are not enough schools
or teaching facilities. In some cases, children are too
old to qualify for admission to primary schools. Hence,
it is vital that adult teaching centres providing literacy
courses be opened.
In addition, infant feeding centres are nonexistent. We have no nurseries to provide care to
children under the age of seven. There are not enough
professional teachers to provide education in
vocational institutions. Educational standards are
extremely low.
In order to prevent further privation of
children — many of whom have lost their parents and
have no guardians — we must take the necessary
measures to ensure that they are cared for. Many such
children wander in cities, accepting jobs as paid
trainees. Furthermore, efforts must be undertaken to
provide vocational training for those who missed the
opportunity to attend school and were forced to resort
to accepting military duties. Opportunities must be
provided so that children can disassociate themselves
from weaponry. Those who continue to suffer from
various psychological illnesses as a result of the
destructive war must receive treatment.

Nationwide training and education must be
provided for all children. Above all, children who
commit crimes must be kept in training centres, where
they should receive training that will enable them to
become responsible members of society. At the
moment, no such centre is available. We have been
unable to provide training facilities, medical care or
housing for these children. Currently, they are being
housed in locations next to the quarters of adult
criminals. Despite the fact that, on several occasions,
we have raised this issue with the authorities and the
officials of the United Nations, we have yet to see any
results. Nevertheless, we will continue in our efforts to
resolve these problems in our country.
I should also like to mention that, after the
collapse of the terrorist and anti-national regime of the
Taliban, and following the establishment of the Afghan
Interim Administration, we have accomplished many
useful tasks. Many schools have been opened in Kabul
city and in other provinces, where a great number of
children are continuing their education. The total
number of children who are attending various schools
has reached 2.01 million. The number of female
students attending school has reached 673,000. In
addition, orphan centres have been reopened in Kabul
city and in other provinces. Those centres provide
housing and care for many orphans in dire need. In
Kabul alone, 1,300 orphans, including 120 girls, are
registered in homes for orphans. Two hundred
additional orphans have been registered in Herat,
Logar, Kapisa, Badakhshan and other provinces.
However, despite such progress, many other orphans
throughout the country remain unregistered.
The Interim Administration has also undertaken
initiatives to prevent the employment of children in the
military sector. In addition, measures have been taken
to decrease hard labour for children as much as
possible. However, much more can and should be done.
It is only with the international community’s assistance
that we can have further success with respect to
children’s lives.
In conclusion, I wish a prosperous future for all
children, who are the future of our countries.
The President: Before giving the floor to the
next speaker, I strongly urge all speakers to cooperate
by strictly observing the five-minute time limit in
making their statements.

39

A/S-27/PV.6

I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Gabriel Riveros, Minister of Public Health of
Colombia.
Mr. Riveros (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I should like to congratulate Ambassador
Patricia Durrant, Permanent Representative of Jamaica,
on the preparation of this session. I should also like to
thank Secretary-General Kofi Annan and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), Carol Bellamy, for their intensive work.
Tomorrow is too late for the children of the
world. In developing countries, the majority of children
are poor and, what is worse, the majority of the poor
are children. They are particularly exposed to a series
of violations of their rights because they lack adequate
systems of protection and defence; this has a grave
impact on their future. High levels of poverty and
unemployment commonly lead to the break-up of the
family unit, to an increase in domestic violence, to
labour exploitation, to sexual abuse and exploitation,
and to abandonment.
Colombia, too, suffers from the effects of an
armed conflict linked to the global problem of illicit
drugs, which has a negative impact on our children’s
living conditions, in particular with regard to health
and education. Those most directly affected are child
soldiers, the victims of narco-terrorism, the victims of
armed actions and abductions, and displaced children
and orphans. That increases the risk that the process of
development and of the accumulation of human and
social capital will be disrupted. Indirectly, the cost of
the conflict affects public investment and social
spending, which in turn affects the development of all
children, especially those from low-income families.
However, the impact of that situation has been
mitigated, since spending for health, education and
nutrition is protected by law and by the parafiscal
origin of resources that finance the programmes of the
national family-welfare system. That has caused social
spending in our country to constitute approximately 13
per cent of the gross national product, nearly double
what it was in 1990. That is due to a great effort during
a very severe process of fiscal adjustment.
With the purpose of creating conditions that
would guarantee children’s access to goods and social
services, the national Government designed and
implemented a set of comprehensive measures and
reforms so that the economy would return to stable

40

growth. In addition, a series of mechanisms to protect
and focus social spending were implemented,
supported by structural reforms in the redistribution of
resources. Such public intervention is aimed at
eradicating poverty and at protecting vulnerable
groups. To achieve greater efficiency in structural
health and education spending through the social
security system, we have created incentives to reduce
the school dropout rate, to discourage child labour and
to provide adequate nutrition for minors, monitoring
their weight and height, among other activities.
Over the next 10 years, we must make this a
world within the reach of children, with the help of the
outcome document to be adopted at this second “world
summit for children”. Our challenge as adults is to
ensure that our children are healthier and better
educated so that they will achieve better results than
we, the adults of today, have achieved.
For our part, Colombia’s commitment with and
for children, led by the President of the Republic and
the first lady of the nation, is based on the recognition
of the central role of children as the fruits of society, as
the citizens of the future and as the builders of a better
tomorrow. The obligation of today’s adults is to build a
more loving and humane Colombia, with the help of
those children. The challenge, then, is to build a public
policy as a collective effort, heeding the Colombian
constitutional precept that those responsible for
promoting and defending children’s rights are the
family, society and the State. Such a public policy
should focus national efforts on the building of human
and material wealth in an equitable way, not on its
accumulation for the benefit of limited groups.
Promoting children’s rights also means truly
carrying out activities of monitoring and evaluation.
We have proceeded to identify each of the rights of the
child — understood as property of the individual and as
assets of value to society — so that they can be
measured, planned and evaluated. When we review
national reports on fulfilment of the 1990 goals, we
find that there have been substantial advances,
although in some cases the goals have not been
reached. This teaches us that, in order to set long-term
goals, it is imperative that the mechanisms and
strategies established must be accompanied by
methodologies of evaluation and monitoring to
measure the degree of compliance with commitments
in a systematic and continuous process.

A/S-27/PV.6

Placing Colombia within the reach of children
means immediately fulfilling each commitments that
we will make at this special session, as a collective
effort of our entire society and as a duty of the State as
guarantor of their implementation. Let me reiterate:
tomorrow is too late for the children of the world.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Luis Alfonso Dávila, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Venezuela.
Mr. Dávila (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Let
me begin by reading out a poem by Creole author
Andrés Eloy Blanco:
“When one bears a child,
One must think of the child safe at home and the
child in the street,
The child carried on the back of a poor woman
The child in the carriage pushed by the English
governess,
The white child carried by the Creole woman,
The white child carried by the black woman,
The Indian child carried by the Indian woman,
And the black child carried by the earth.”
With brilliance and sensitivity, Andrés Eloy
Blanco expresses the feelings inspired not just by one
or two children but by all children throughout the
world.
Venezuela welcomes the convening of this special
session as an opportunity not only to assess the actions
taken and the achievements registered since 1990, but
also to build a better future for the children of the
world. Venezuela ratified the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on 13 September 1990, and, in so doing,
committed to complying with its provisions.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is in the
process of charting its own course, which, being
peaceful and democratic, has attracted the attention of
the international community. Therefore Venezuela can
now, from this lofty rostrum, speak with great pride of
some of its concrete achievements: a legal framework,
our Bolivarian Constitution; the constitutional law for
the comprehensive protection of children and
adolescents, whose purpose is to comply with the
provisions of the Convention. With this extremely
modern law, we have created the National Protection

System, which is made up of key children’s
organizations and constitutes a national network
covering Venezuela’s 24 states and 334 townships.
Venezuela, as a participatory democracy,
consulted children and adolescents in assessing the
annual Operative Plan in this area, in order to
incorporate their observations. That initiative was part
of the process of expanding the social rights enshrined
in the national Constitution, which is divided into four
major categories: survival, development, protection and
participation.
A group of Venezuelan children and adolescents
is participating in this world summit. A few minutes
ago, they asked me to appeal to those nations that have
not signed the Convention to do so and to translate it
into concrete action, as they have seen us do in
Venezuela.
We would like to congratulate the Rio Group for
its contributions to, and for its clear-sightedness in, the
negotiations prior to and during the summit.
In Venezuela, investment devoted to children and
infants rose from 2 per cent of the gross domestic
product three years ago to 7 per cent today. That figure
represents almost 25 per cent of the national budget. In
the last three years, we have integrated 1.4 million
children who had been excluded or who had dropped
out of school.
By controlling macroeconomic variables, in
particular inflation, we have managed to lift more than
1.5 million people — many of them children and
adolescents — out of poverty. In that way we would
like to end the perverse dynamic of poverty and crime.
We have created the Women’s Bank, with which
we assist unemployed women, granting them credit to
undertake a new and productive economic activity. We
have also created the People’s Sovereign Bank. We
have opened more than 2,500 Bolivarian schools so far;
this year, their number will reach 3,000.
This reflects the concept of comprehensive care
for schoolchildren and reaffirms the idea of a healthy,
educated and well-fed child, one who is cared for while
his or her parents are working. In addition, in three
years we have also tripled teaching salaries. Education
is and will be at the heart of a strategy designed to
form the new Venezuelan citizen.

41

A/S-27/PV.6

I should like to share with the Assembly the pride
that I feel at seeing the 280 members of Venezuela’s
Youth and Children’s Orchestra, the best of its kind in
the world, here to perform tonight at the gala, at the
request of the Secretary-General. This is but one facet
of our broad social project. Indeed, the number of
children participating in this musical programme has
risen from 60,000 to 110,000.
In the area of health, we have reduced the infant
mortality rate to 17 per 1,000. The world average is 57,
and 63 in developing countries. Through networks
devoted to promoting quality of life, we provide
comprehensive care to 250,000 children in 19,000 day
care centres. The goal for this year is to reach 300,000
children.
Through a programme called Friend of Children
Hospital — which includes 18 hospitals throughout the
country — we have increased the level of care for
children under one year of age. The initial result is a
drop of 10 per cent in the rate of infant mortality due to
underdeveloped lungs.
We are also carrying out programmes to
encourage breastfeeding. Today in Venezuela the State
guarantees to its entire population free access to
vaccines for children under 5 against preventable
infectious diseases such as polio, measles, whooping
cough, diphtheria, German measles, tuberculosis,
hepatitis and meningitis, many of which have already
been eradicated in Venezuela.
I do not want to bore the Assembly with figures
and data, but I do want to say that all of these
intentions, concrete plans and achievements were
seriously threatened when, in recent days, a group of
political outlaws carried out an assault on legitimate
authority. This was an unprecedented event: a small
elitist group with resources and with the support of
certain elements, which are being investigated today,
abducted the constitutional President of the Republic,
decreed the dissolution of the legislative branch,
removed the heads of institutions and refused to
recognize governors and mayors — all of them elected
democratically by the people.
I am dismayed that such events could have taken
place in my country, but I am also proud that a people
with a political culture, aware of its responsibility and
of its historical commitment — that same commitment
I have been speaking of — took to the streets, without
weapons but with decisiveness and courage, to defend

42

a democracy, the Bolivarian Constitution and its
legitimate Government, and to return to President Hugo
Chávez the mandate that had been given him in a free
and democratic fashion.
On behalf of my Government, my people and my
country, and on behalf of all of us, I should like to
thank the Rio Group, the Organization of American
States, the G-15, the G-77, the Non-Aligned Movement
and in particular those countries that swiftly and
unequivocally, without delay of any kind, recognized
that this situation was in fact a coup d’état and
supported without hesitation the constitutional
Government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
On behalf of the children of Venezuela and the
world, I wish to confirm our concern at the
considerable fall in the assistance which developed
countries dedicate to the most needy countries. We
have not yet understood that investing in children
means investing in the future. During the International
Conference on Financing for Development held
recently in Mexico, President Hugo Chávez Frías
proposed the creation of an international humanitarian
fund enabling us to break the vicious circle of poverty
that so greatly affects children. Such a fund, consisting
of a percentage of the world’s foreign debt and a
percentage of military spending, could then be invested
in programmes reducing infant mortality and benefiting
children. Only thus will we be responding to the
common demand of all the children who attended this
summit: to be heard. Therefore I insist on the
implementation of this proposal. Thus we would
undoubtedly be saying yes to children.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by Her Excellency the Honourable
Musuleng Cooper, Minister of Gender and
Development of Liberia.
Ms. Cooper (Liberia): On behalf of the
Government and the people of the Republic of Liberia
and the Liberian delegation, I am pleased to present to
the Assembly our profound congratulations for
successfully hosting the special session on the future of
our children. I also extend our sincere appreciation to
the United Nations family, especially to the United
Nations Children’s Fund, for assisting Liberia in all its
national programme efforts to improve the overall
situation and environment of the Liberian child, as we
also join the world in saying “yes” for children.

A/S-27/PV.6

It is indeed an honour for the Liberian delegation
to be here. Our participation in the special session
demonstrates once again the full commitment of our
Government and national leaders to contributing
meaningfully to the global movement of concerted
action on behalf of our world’s children.
Liberia’s participation today is not in response to
its political obligation as part of the global village but
stems from a realization and moral conviction that if
we do not provide an environment in which our
children can achieve their fullest potential, we will be
negligent in our duties and obligations as leaders and
as parents.
It is in that context that the Liberian Government
has achieved the following: ratification and promotion
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, with
particular emphasis on the girl child; full immunization
of all Liberian children, thus nearing the goal of the
total eradication of polio in Liberia; and in the spirit of
love, reconciliation and cooperation, provision of
information and application of a special mobilization
strategy to our neighbouring Manu River Basin
countries. In April 2001, the establishment of the
Ministry of Gender and Development set the stage for
the full implementation of the National Programme of
Action for Children 2001-2015.
To pursue appropriate policies and action plans
which impact positively upon the Liberian child, the
Government and national leaders are engaged in
dialogue and cooperation in the implementation of
capacity-building
programmes
for
war-affected
children, including but not limited to advocacy and
treatment of HIV/AIDS.
For us in Liberia, the global movement urgently
calls us to serious action with real significance,
especially since our nation is reported to have some of
the lowest indicators for health and well-being, with
increasingly high levels of illiteracy, infant mortality,
and malnutrition. The situation of our youthful
population is further affected by lack of access to basic
necessities of life such as safe drinking water and
sanitation, as well as basic primary education in the
rural areas, especially those affected by the war and
continuous, recurrent dissident attacks.
The situation of the Liberian child is continuously
compromised due to the inability of the Liberian
Government to focus attention on on-going
programmes which could impact positively on the lives

of our children. Obstacles to further progress on behalf
of our children include continued dissident activities in
western and north-western Liberia, which further
exacerbate the forced displacement of women and
children, with children comprising the largest
percentage of the displaced population; and the lack of
steady and significant support for the national
development agenda, which prevents improvements in
the areas of health and education. Of more serious
concern is the continuing destruction of newly
constructed facilities by ongoing dissident attacks in
several parts of the country.
Further obstacles are the large national debt and,
especially, the inability to repay age-old debts and
loans, which has led to increased general poverty
among the population. If this issue of the inability of
Liberia and other African nations to repay their debts is
not addressed as a priority concern for peace, stability
and eventual progress, our efforts towards concerted
action on behalf of our children will become
meaningless propaganda, promises without results.
In addition, the impoverished state especially of
the rural poor in Liberia, as in other third world
nations, remains very precarious due to the inability of
families to adequately feed their children as a result of
the prolonged and continued disruption in agricultural
activities. To farm and to produce food, the farmers and
their families must be settled and stabilized.
The insensitive attitude of some States to the
humanitarian plight of Liberia, whose innocent
children are victimized by the continued sanctions
against our peace-loving people, can only lead to more
disastrous conditions for our children, the physically
challenged, members of our citizenry, women, children
and other vulnerable groups. Are we not our brother’s
keepers?
Liberia, the former champion of the cause of
peace and democracy on the African continent and in
the world, now stands naked before you, appealing to
the deep recesses of your individual and collective
consciousness and pleading with the United Nations to
lift its sanctions on Liberia, for the sanctions have only
served to increase the suffering of our war-weary
people.
It is on behalf of the children that I stand here,
pleading with the United Nations to strengthen the
ability of the Governments and the peoples of the
nations here represented to place our children first. For

43

A/S-27/PV.6

alone, we have nothing on which to lean. Our
individual and collective difficulties have reached such
an alarming level that we are compelled to appeal to
the moral reasoning of this noble human institution to
place the safety, well-being and happiness of
humankind, especially that of our children, first, above
other, political, concerns.
I sincerely pray that, together, we will seize this
historic opportunity to make up for the broken
promises of our inactive years and to meet our
unfulfilled goals. Let us make this a renewed
opportunity to change our world for the betterment of
our children. And may we begin this new era on behalf
of each and every child, accepting the global ethical
challenge of living for the greater good of all, thereby
ensuring that no child will be left behind.
May the love of our children keep us strong, firm
and steadfast, and may God grant us peace as we make
commitments for the future of the world’s children,
particularly the children of Liberia.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Her Excellency Ms. Phetsile Dlamini, Minister for
Health and Social Welfare of Swaziland.
Ms. Dlamini (Swaziland): The Kingdom of
Swaziland shares the pleasure of being part of this
important gathering to consider a topic that is vital to
each of the nations of the world.
Despite the escalating challenges, a lot of effort
has gone into making Swaziland a better place for all
Swazi children. Love for children is deeply entrenched
in our culture, because we know that a child is like a
seed that carries the family history down the line.
Some achievements made in the Kingdom of
Swaziland include the development of a national
programme of action for children for the period 1993 to
2000, through which a number of committees were
formed to ensure the implementation of children’s
issues. The ratification of the Convention on the Rights
of a Child in 1995 gave impetus to initiatives geared to
the protection of children, as well as to those that
address issues affecting children. The establishment of
a children’s unit this year will further help in
promoting and protecting the rights of children. Under
that unit, closer collaboration is under way with the law
enforcement department in order to foster greater
protection of children at all times.

44

While Swaziland has not achieved the goal of
free primary education, we have made an effort to
make education more accessible and affordable by
providing free textbooks to all primary-school children.
The Government, working together with nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), has facilitated
some bursary funding to assist needy children.
However, the escalating number of needy children,
including orphans, whose needs have not yet been fully
met, has dwarfed this effort. The Government and its
partners are searching for more innovative ways to
improve access to education, including computer
literacy.
The biggest challenge is the HIV/AIDS
pandemic. The Kingdom has introduced a school health
programme, has integrated information on HIV/AIDS
into the school curriculum, and has encouraged the
formation of health clubs in all schools so as to
promote peer education. A child-to-child learning
strategy has also been introduced in schools, through
which children are taught about the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, the prevention and treatment of
childhood illnesses and life skills for self-protection
against abuse and exploitation.
The Government, in collaboration with NGOs and
other partners, has contributed immensely towards the
distribution of health services in the country. The
expanded immunization programme is accessible to
every child, at no cost. This has contributed to the
decline in infant mortality. Neonatal tetanus is now a
rare disease, and the country is now in the final stages
of the certification of a polio-free Swaziland.
As a drive to further improve the health of the
nation, including that of children, the Government now
fully subsidizes primary health care in all clinics.
Furthermore in partnership with various agencies, the
Government is working tirelessly to combat the
HIV/AIDS pandemic. Families headed by children,
which are on the increase because of HIV/AIDS
pandemic, continue to pose a challenge.
A juvenile court is now in place, thereby
improving the juvenile justice system. The training of
officers in the law-enforcement agencies has also had a
positive effect in handling cases that involve children.
Community protection committees are currently being
established, including at the grass-roots level, so as to
protect children.

A/S-27/PV.6

Children and young people have participated in
the development of some national programmes, such as
the national development strategy. This has encouraged
the formation of youth clubs and organizations working
around certain issues such as poverty reduction,
HIV/AIDS, gender and recreational activities. Under
the
national
poverty-reduction
strategy,
the
Government has developed programmes to encourage
youth entrepreneurs. NGOs and community-based
organizations have spearheaded the way in this regard.
Some of our cities have junior city councillors,
led by junior mayors. This shared responsibility is a
good way of grooming young people for leadership
positions.
A number of challenges remain, including those
relating to poverty, orphans, vulnerable children and a
general decline in the economy, which is aggravated by
the HIV/AIDS pandemic. To address these problems,
there is a need to share resources so that the best
interests of the child may be served at all times. It is
for this reason that Swaziland is committed to
promoting orphan care within communities. This poses
a challenge for the Government and civil society in
assisting communities in coping with this extra
challenge. The issue of food security and nutrition for
all children in Swaziland also remains a challenge.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
international cooperation in fulfilling our commonly
desired goal has yielded positive results in the past, and
we believe it remains important. We believe that in
order for the children of the world to survive, the
international community must engage in intense
resource mobilization campaigns. We therefore appeal
to this special session to produce concrete proposals for
how the additional resources can be mobilized, pooled
and then equitably distributed to benefit all of the
millions of children in developing countries,
particularly in the southern African region, which is the
epicentre of the HIV/AIDS pandemic.
Furthermore, the United Nations should not lose
sight of the plight of children in those countries that are
not represented in the United Nations. Although the
Republic of China on Taiwan is committed to working
with the international community for the well-being of
children in that country, its efforts are undermined by
the fact that it is denied membership in the United
Nations. This limits its contribution to the advancement
of child welfare in the international community. The

Kingdom of Swaziland strongly supports, and earnestly
appeals to the international community to support,
Taiwan in its quest to participate in the work and
activities of the United Nations designed to promote
the rights and welfare of all children.
The Kingdom of Swaziland pledges its support
for the draft declaration proposed for this special
session. We further appeal for more support in
providing resources to create a world fit for children.
We reaffirm our commitment to ensuring the best
interests of the child. Help us to help our children.
The Acting President: I give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Chan Soo Sen, Minister of State for the
Prime Minister’s Office and the Ministry of
Community, Development and Sports of Singapore.
Mr. Sen (Singapore): The world gathers here
today to reaffirm one common value that we all share:
our children are our future. They have rights that
should be protected. We brought them into this world
in order for them to take over our heritage from us
when we leave. What they experience today as children
will shape the world tomorrow, when they become
adults.
The Association of South-East Asian Nations
(ASEAN), of which Singapore is a founding member,
is committed to building a world fit for our children. At
the fourth Meeting of ASEAN Ministers Responsible
for Social Welfare, chaired by Singapore last year, the
ministers adopted a Declaration of Commitments for
Children in ASEAN. The document reaffirms
ASEAN’s commitment to protect our children and to
provide them with opportunities to learn, play, grow,
participate and reach their full potential.
In Singapore children are regarded as valued
members of the family and as our country’s assets and
future. Their rights are well protected because we
believe that in Singapore we have: first, good laws;
secondly, strong families; thirdly, a comprehensive
health-care system; and fourthly, good education that
prepares children for life. Let me elaborate on each of
these.
First, regarding good laws, we have a good
legislative framework that protects the fundamental
rights of our children. Our Employment Act prohibits
children under the age of 12 from being employed. For
young persons under the age of 16, the Act restricts the
type of employment and the maximum number of hours

45

A/S-27/PV.6

they can work. The Children and Young Persons Act
protects
children
from
abuse,
neglect
and
abandonment. It also provides for the rehabilitation of
children and young persons who commit offences or
who are beyond parental control. In addition, our
Women’s Charter protects girls against sexual
exploitation.
We also accord special protection to children
who, unfortunately, get into trouble with the law. We
believe that every child deserves a second chance and
that institutionalization must be the last resort.
Therefore, a community-based approach is taken in
which professionals and family members are actively
involved to counsel, educate and empower the child.
We have a separate court process — the Juvenile
Court — that is especially dedicated to these children.
We believe that this will ensure that their different
needs are well taken care of. We strongly believe that it
is our duty to ensure that every child will be able to
pick himself or herself up and start anew.
Secondly, regarding strong families, a strong and
good family is the best guarantee of children’s rights. It
provides a nurturing environment in which children can
develop. In a survey of the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF), “Speaking Out! Voices of Children
and Adolescents in East Asia and the Pacific,”
Singapore children were reported to be happy most of
the time and admired their parents most. The same
survey also found that the family is still the most
significant source of values and love for the child.
Singaporeans still expect their marriages to last for life.
Our divorce rate is low and the family is essentially
strong. This ensures that our children are well
protected within the realm of their own families.
No doubt, the family may be under pressure.
There will be ups and downs in family life. Families in
difficulties need support. Hence, we in Singapore have
set up Family Service Centres. They are located in our
population centres so that families can get professional
help in their neighbourhoods. Family Service Centres
are run by a voluntary organization and are partially
funded by the Government. They offer a range of
family-related services under one roof. For example,
couples may turn to Family Service Centres for
marriage counselling or to attend parenting
programmes. Some Family Services Centres excel in
certain specialized areas. One of them, for example, the
Bukit Ho Sweet Family Service Centre, has a creative
outreach programme, where social workers and

46

volunteers hang out with children living on the edge in
order to win them over and provide them with
guidance.
We also have voluntary organizations that are
dedicated to serving our children. One of them is the
Singapore Children’s Society. It is celebrating its
fiftieth anniversary this year. The Singapore Children’s
Society has a network of service centres and
professionals to cater for the various needs of children
and their families. One of the initiatives is called
Tinkle Friend, which is a national helpline for children
between the ages of 7 and 12. Another creative project
is called Cabin Club. This project has cabins located in
schools so that children can hang out in cabins at
schools, rather than on the streets.
A critical phase in the development of children is
adolescence. Adolescents are vulnerable to exploitation
if they go astray. The Government of Singapore set up
a National Youth Council in 1989 to provide
opportunities for young people to maximize their
potential and enhance their contributions to society. I
am pleased to report that many of their efforts have
borne fruit and have resulted in a decrease in the
juvenile delinquency rate over the past five years.
Thirdly, with regard to comprehensive health
care, good health is fundamental to a child’s wellbeing. We are pleased to report that in the UNICEF
State of the World Children’s 2001 report, Singapore is
ranked among the countries with the lowest infant
mortality rate and under-5 mortality. We have invested
much since independence towards achieving worldclass health care. The care of our children in fact
begins even before they are born, because in Singapore
women have access to good obstetric practices and
quality prenatal care. After a child is born, a
comprehensive family health-care system provides for
development screening and inoculation during a child’s
pre-school days. This is followed by a very
comprehensive school health services and dental
services programme for school-age children.
In fact, the health-care programme for our
children is so successful that the two major health
issues associated with children are not diseases, but are
obesity and myopia. And we do indeed have
programmes to help our children exercise and keep fit
to overcome obesity, and programmes to fight myopia.
The best gift that we can offer our children is, of
course, a good education. Good education has been

A/S-27/PV.6

Singapore’s top priority since independence. Our
education is heavily subsidized. Our programmes are
good. The school dropout rate is very low. Most
children have at least 10 years of education, including
in institutions of higher learning, such as polytechnic
institutes and universities. Students with disabilities are
also integrated into normal schools where possible or,
when that is not possible, into special schools.
Let me conclude by saying that Singapore has
made progress towards maximizing every child’s
potential to be the best person that he or she can be. We
will continue to do more and do better.
The President: I give the floor to Her Excellency
Mrs. Ruby Pardiwalla, Chairperson of the delegation of
the Seychelles.
Mrs. Pardiwalla (Seychelles): Today I bring a
message of peace from the children of Seychelles. This
special session provides a timely opportunity to reflect
on the progress made in implementing the goals set at
the 1990 World Summit for Children. In fact, it is more
than just timely. It has become a matter of moral duty
and pragmatic reality for the children of the world to
be, once again, truly at the focus of international
attention.
Twelve years ago, the almost universal
endorsement of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child by Governments worldwide gave reason to hope
that these simple truths would be a daily reminder of
our responsibilities towards children. Today, slightly
more that a decade after its adoption, and at the turn of
a century, it is to humanity’s credit that much has been
achieved. Yet, unfortunately, achievements in some
areas also highlight the tremendous amount that still
remains to be accomplished in other crucial areas. It is
indeed sad to note that much of the dream has gone
astray.
What has happened to our aspirations? What has
happened to our principles? What has happened to our
good intentions? Why are we still battling exploitation,
violence, injustice and denial of basic rights towards
children in most parts of the world? The Convention
has enjoyed widespread and global acceptance by
Governments, organizations and individuals at all
levels. The rights and responsibilities as laid down are
a way of life that we all embody, believe in and
identify with. Why then, have we been unable to
implement this vision? It would appear that
somewhere, somehow, the links between goals and

implementation, beliefs and practice, purpose and
meaning to life have been slashed, exposing a deep
gash.
We cannot truly understand rights and
responsibilities without first understanding the values
on which they are based. A simple awareness and
acceptance of the worth and dignity of each individual
child would, maybe, help us focus on what we need to
do to respect the Convention. The fulfilment of rights
and the building of a better world for our children is
ultimately based on bringing back into our daily lives a
culture of thinking, attitudes and behaviour based on
human values of respect, responsibility, love and peace.
We must reinstate the awareness that are all members
of one family, that the world’s children are our children
and that we can all do something to fulfil our
responsibility. In this forum, let us, both individually
and collectively, reaffirm and rekindle the universal
principles and aspirations of the Convention. This time
around, let us really work together in unity towards
promoting a better world for our children.
I would like to end with a quotation from Deepak
Chopra:
“A principle of physics states that when an
electron vibrates, the universe shakes. Let us
then, you and I, be these electrons that vibrate at
the level of consciousness to bring peace,
harmony, joy and love to the children of the
world.”
We in Seychelles, have reason to hope that,
through a joint vibration, there will be a brighter
tomorrow for our children and for the children of the
universe. But let us all start vibrating now: tomorrow is
too late. Remember, the children have said, “We are the
present, not the future”.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by Her Excellency Ms. Nadine Alatoa,
Secretary-General for the Council of Ministers of
Vanuatu.
Ms. Alatoa (Vanuatu): It is an honour for me to
be here to address this important special session on
children. I bring greetings from President Father John
Bani and the people of the Republic of Vanuatu. I join
previous speakers in thanking Secretary-General Kofi
Annan and the capable staff of the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) for the warm welcome and

47

A/S-27/PV.6

the excellent arrangements made for this important
special session.
On 30 September 1990, 71 heads of State and 88
other country representatives gathered at the World
Summit for Children to endorse the World Declaration
on the Survival, Protection and Development of
Children. Vanuatu was represented at that meeting by
the late Prime Minister Father Walter Hayde Lini, who
signed the Declaration to show the nation’s support for
the rights of children. Prior to signing the Convention,
Vanuatu had declared a national children’s day, which
was first celebrated on 24 July 1990. That day remains
a national day for all the children of Vanuatu.
Following the signing, the Vanuatu Parliament ratified
the treaty, in November 1992.
Vanuatu’s commitment to the global goals has
also resulted in changes to my Government’s policy
priorities in the areas of education and health. Those
areas have been acknowledged to be core sectors that
recognize and contribute to child development. Our
work is supplemented by the joint efforts of our
development-partner
agencies,
United
Nations
agencies, national non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and others too numerous to mention here, to
whom I must apologize.
The areas that need improvement for the benefit
of the children of Vanuatu are those concerning the
health and nutrition status of children, access to basic
education, expanding the child immunization
programme, changing the health status of women, and
programmes and services for young people. I wish to
register
the
Government
of
Vanuatu’s
acknowledgement and appreciation, for without
support Vanuatu might not have come this far.
The office of the ombudsman of the Republic of
Vanuatu is in the process of establishing a child’s desk.
That desk will provide a mechanism for handling the
complaints of children whose rights have been
violated.
The emerging issues that challenge the survival,
protection and development of our children can be
identified in five different areas: rapid population
growth, urban squatter settlement, urban food security,
equitable access to education and vulnerability of
young people.
According to the census of 1999, Vanuatu
possesses a population of more than 200,000.

48

Compared to other countries in the region, Vanuatu has
a very high population growth rate ─ 3 per cent ─ and
a very young population, with more than 50 per cent of
the population aged 15 to 25 years. The urban
concentration has more or less doubled in the last
decade.
The issue of urban drift has also contributed to
urban squatter settlements. Living standards have
changed due to high expectations for employment
opportunities and to various changes in the urban cost
of living. Food security becomes a problematic issue
where there is changing demand for cash-cropping and
imported processed-food items. Changing patterns in
food consumption and lifestyle have also brought about
an increase in lifestyle diseases. The Vanuatu
Government recognizes the changes in disease patterns,
and last year made a public declaration that public and
private institutions and individual households should
promote consumption of local island kakai, or food.
Although Vanuatu may not have any recorded
cases of HIV/AIDS, recent surveillance of sexually
transmitted infections showed that sexually-transmitted
infection is increasing. As a corrective measure,
preventive programmes are currently in place.
The strategies undertaken by the Vanuatu
Government to address the issues and to improve the
situation of the children of Vanuatu focus on: policy
development to guide decision-makers, so as to achieve
meaningful results; fostering commitment and
ownership at different stages of children’s development
programmes; development of action plans to bring
about practical changes in the implementation of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child; development of
a comprehensive information and management system;
development and dissemination of information through
awareness campaigns and the use of media; improved
and expanded access to, and higher-quality, equitable
education programmes; promotion of community
participation and ownership in primary health-care
services; and development of programmes for people
with physical and mental disabilities.
In conclusion, I wish to mention that the Vanuatu
Government, like those of other Member countries, is
committed to ensuring that our global vision for
children is achieved.
Vanuatu is conscious that, in order for justice to
be done for its children, it must be responsible, so as to
ensure that it is a Vanuatu fit for its children.

A/S-27/PV.6

The Acting President: I give the floor to Her
Excellency Mrs. Virginia Gillum de Quiroga,
Chairperson of the delegation of Bolivia.
Mrs. Gillum de Quiroga (Bolivia): I am
honoured to be here today at this United Nations
special session on children in representation of my
country, Bolivia. I was not born in Bolivia, but my
heart and my four children are Bolivian. My children
were all born in Bolivia, but, unlike the 52 out of every
1,000 who die each year, my children are doing well. I
am here for those children who need the Assembly’s
help, my dedication and our wholehearted efforts.
It is a great honour for me for three reasons: first,
because this is a special session on children, a subject
very close to my own heart; secondly, because children
have participated in the making of the decisions and
plans that will come from it, and because true
development can take place and be sustained only
when participation is broad and the consensus wide as
to how to get there; and thirdly and finally, because I
have the honour to follow in the footsteps of Gabriela
Azurduy, the 13-year-old Bolivian leader who, at the
opening meeting, shared with us a message from the
children on how to make a better world.
From this important initiative of the United
Nations concerning children have come many concrete
actions and a great deal of legislation that will continue
to make a difference in the lives of many children, and
for that I would like to express my gratitude.
During the last decade in Bolivia, we have been
true to our commitments to the United Nations and to
our children and have seen our infant and maternal
mortality rates drop significantly. We have in the last
few years begun to make the transformation from a
country focused on survival to a country that promotes
the rights and protection of the child. Bolivia is
beginning to focus on the quality of life that these
children will have, after survival is ensured.
The provision of free health insurance has not
only saved the lives of many children under 5, it also
ensures that fewer of their mothers will die. Our
immunization
programmes,
financed
by
the
Government, have completely eradicated polio and
cover 90 per cent of other very common diseases.
Our successful educational reform programme
has reduced primary school desertion and repetition.
There has been a change in the style of teaching that

increases participation and ensures a better quality of
education. Bilingual education, often developed with
the input of the indigenous populations, many of which
did not have the possibility of formal education
themselves, has brought a cultural awareness that had
been slipping away. Lessons are taught in Aymara,
Quechua and Guarani, as well as in Spanish. Many
children attend school for the first time, participating
actively because they are learning, in a language that is
theirs, about things that are important to them.
We are very proud of the legislative advances that
have been made in the name of children. In 1999 the
Code for Children and Adolescents, which strictly
governs their rights, was signed into law. Just recently
a supreme decree was signed giving all newborns in
Bolivia the right to receive a free birth certificate.
Presently we are looking for financial support so that
we can ensure that all children have that same right.
This week we are awaiting approval of several new
bills that will allow international adoptions to take
place, help prevent child abuse, give attention to
abused children, sanction offenders, and put a stop to
the trafficking of children.
Bolivia will benefit over the next 15 years from
$1.6 billion in debt relief through the Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries (HIPC) Debt Initiative programme.
These funds will flow through municipalities, assigning
more money to rural communities because they have
more needs. Civil society will have an active role in
determining where the funds go and in overseeing the
social programmes implemented with these funds.
Parents will be able to make decisions involving their
own children.
It would be unjust to speak of the advances we
have made without mentioning the many areas in
which we still need to improve. Our insurance
programmes are not being utilized as they should be.
We do not have enough schools, nor enough teachers to
staff them, and often the laws do not protect the people
who need them most.
There are also several important areas, addressing
children’s specific needs, that require immediate
attention, beginning with Government policy, so that
we can ensure the realization of, and respect for, the
rights of children. Among these issues are child labour,
early
childhood
development,
children
with
disabilities, the growing phenomenon of children living
in the streets, neonatal deaths and HIV/AIDS. We can

49

A/S-27/PV.6

do better in meeting children’s basic needs and
ensuring their basic rights.
For these reasons and many more worldwide, we
need to continue to work together between countries,
international
organizations,
non-governmental
organizations and civil society to fight for the children
of the world. Therefore let us together commit
ourselves to promoting the rights of the child; demand
children’s participation and access; and resolutely stand
to prevent all forms of child abuse.
In the name of Bolivia, I offer our complete
support to the United Nations and our commitment to
the plans made and decisions taken during this special
session on children, because nothing is sadder then the
despair in the eyes of a child without a future, and
nothing brings greater joy than the eyes of a child who
has been vaccinated, fed and educated. It is up to us to
light up the eyes of every child in Bolivia and of every
child in the world.
The Acting President: I give the floor to Her
Excellency Mrs. Ellen Margrethe Løj, Chairperson of
the delegation of Denmark.
Mrs. Løj (Denmark): As this special session
comes to an end, I am pleased that children have again
so successfully been placed at the top of our agenda.
We have come together to talk about children, but we
have not only talked. We have listened to the children,
and they have influenced our decisions, here in the
General Assembly Hall, at the many side events and in
the delegations. I do not think that we can ever again
discuss the issues of children in the old way, without
listening to their opinions.
The children have told us that they want to see
the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. They are impatient, and for good reason. An
enormous gap exists between our many good intentions
and the lives that millions of children are forced to
live, in poverty and neglect. In spite of progress in
some areas, much remains to be done. Good intentions
and fine words need to be translated into concrete
action.
Poverty is the root cause of most infringements of
the rights of children. At the Social Summit in
Copenhagen, we promised to eradicate absolute
poverty. But progress has been slow. Globally, 25 per
cent of all children live in families which have to live
on less than $1 per person a day. Millions of children

50

die from preventable diseases. One hundred million
children do not go to school. That is why the
Millennium Development goals must be attained and
why these goals must guide all our actions.
As the Secretary-General has stated, children
have the right to demand that we do better. The
Convention on the Rights of the Child confirms that
children, as well as adults, have rights: they have the
right to development and the right to be protected from
discrimination, economic exploitation, abuse and
violence. They have the right to participate and to be
heard in all matters that affect them.
Rights mean reaching not only the few, but also
the most marginalized groups of children. We must do
more to reach the unreached — not least, children with
disabilities and children who belong to ethnic
minorities.
Rights also include sexual and reproductive
rights. Adolescents are sexually active all over the
world. We can deny it, we can be silent about it, but it
is a fact. And with silence, we seal the destiny of yet
more millions of adolescents as they fall victim to
HIV/AIDS, to early and unwanted pregnancies, to
unsafe abortions and to sexually transmitted diseases.
That trend will be reduced only if we accept the rights
and needs of adolescents.
I believe that we can indeed achieve our goals,
especially if we recognize that children are not
problems or vulnerable groups — they are the best and
brightest resource that we have. Therefore, we agree
with what the Children’s Forum statement said:
“We are not the sources of problems; we are
the resources that are needed to solve them. We
are not expenses; we are investments. We are not
just young people; we are, above all, human
beings and citizens of the world.” (A/S-27/PV.1).
Engaging children and adolescents in dialogue,
listening to their opinions, building partnerships with
them and learning from them make good sense. This
special session has been a good starting point for
furthering that dialogue. Children and adolescents can
be important and constructive players in development
processes. It will be our challenge to ensure that they
are allowed to participate in the design, planning and
implementation of programmes that aim at improving
their lives.

A/S-27/PV.6

We, the Governments, must also support children
and do everything in our power to help them on their
way. In order to achieve the Millennium Development
Goals for children in education and health, we reaffirm
our commitment to our partnership with developing
countries. The target of 0.7 per cent of gross national
product for official development assistance must be
honoured. Concrete and determined efforts by the rich
world are long overdue.
The future of our children lies with leadership at
all levels and in the choices that leaders make. I hope
this special session is the beginning of a global
movement that puts children first in all matters, not just
in words but also in deeds. The children and the
adolescents of the world will judge how we managed
and, it is to be hoped, hold us accountable for our
efforts to protect and promote their rights and to
improve their lives. And to the children and the
adolescents, I say: please hold us to our commitments,
and claim your rights.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Tuiloma Neroni Slade, Chairman
of the delegation of Samoa.
Mr. Slade (Samoa): This gathering has rightly
been proclaimed to be unique and historic. We need to
ensure that it is so, not by words alone, but by
determined and concrete action. In 1990, world leaders
agreed on actions that carried a solemn promise always
to put the best interests of children first. This special
session is an occasion for rededication to the spirit of
that promise.
The Convention on the Rights of the Child must
remain at the heart of international efforts to give
meaning to the rights of children. The Convention is
the most widely accepted human rights instrument ever.
It sets out the basic principles for ensuring the
realization of children’s rights on a global scale. Nonimplementation of those principles is at the root of our
failure to move significantly forward on children’s
rights.
We thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report entitled “We the Children” (A/S27/3). It is not surprising that the report confirms the
disparities and the pervasive poverty that we all know
exist. More tellingly, the report shows that those
conditions are directly related to underinvestment in
young people, especially in their health, in their
education and in their protection. If Governments are

serious about reducing poverty, then they must make
children truly their first priority.
My delegation welcomes the proposals for the
outcome of this special session. The draft outcome
document sets out what we regard as the right
ingredients for a world fit for children, and we support
its adoption. As the international community, we need
to ensure and to safeguard such a world, where
children are loved and respected and where they can
develop in health, in peace and in dignity. As a
representative of the Children’s Forum said at the very
start of this session, a world fit for children is a world
fit for everyone.
My Government believes that for Samoa, the
rights and freedoms of children are best nurtured in the
context of our traditions and of our culture. The
Constitution of my country reflects a strong and
fundamental commitment to human rights and
freedoms and to equality of opportunity for all citizens,
irrespective of gender. A ministry dedicated to
women’s affairs and charged with a responsibility for
children reflects the critical role of women in the
traditions and in the development of the country, and it
ensures equal opportunities for women and for children
in all areas of Samoan society.
Samoa has a population of just under 200,000, 53
per cent of which is under the age of 20. Every person,
young or old, has access to basic health services, to
adequate and safe water supplies and to sanitary
facilities. Improvements are being progressively
introduced as we try to overcome the constraints on our
resources and other constraints.
Primary education is compulsory for all children.
School enrolments at all levels are very high. Major
emphasis has also been placed on early-childhood and
special education. Village and district communities
play key partnership roles, as do private and nongovernmental organizations. Of the total Samoan
population, approximately 73 per cent of females and
69 per cent of males have received formal education.
Samoa’s literacy rate is estimated at around 97 per
cent.
The provision of health services is highly
subsidized by Government. Most publicly funded
health services, from immunization to maternal health
care and in-patient services, are either free at the point
of delivery or heavily subsidized. The Government
actively promotes a policy of equal access to health

51

A/S-27/PV.6

services for all, with all children under the age of 5
receiving free medical care. There is an ongoing
comprehensive project to address the concept of a well
child, which includes injury prevention, rheumatic
fever prevention and general policy development on
children’s health.
A national coordination mechanism involving
Government departments and all stakeholders is in
place. I should also like to say that active and informed
media have a vital role to play in the promotion of
children’s welfare.
Our efforts at the national level are supplemented
by what we need to do as the Pacific Islands Forum
region. The Permanent Representative of Nauru, our
group Chairman, yesterday outlined some of our
regional activities in that area, and I endorse what he
said. I need to touch on only two aspects.
First is the concept of the Healthy Islands
framework, which recognizes, in part, the need for
ecological balance. The links between health and the
environment and impacts on vulnerable groups,
especially children, raise real and serious issues. That
point is noted in the draft outcome document for this
special session. Small island communities are exposed
to significant and sometimes severe environmental
degradation, exacerbated by the pressure of
urbanization and by the consequences of climate
change and of natural disasters.
Secondly, the economies of a regional approach
would seem to my delegation to be an aspect that could
facilitate improved access and greater use of
breakthroughs in information and communication
technologies that could offer improved opportunities
for education in general and for children in particular.
We fully share the fears and concerns that have
been expressed about HIV/AIDS. Our own country has
not been spared. While the incidence of HIV/AIDS is
low, there is clearly no room for error of policy or for
complacency. The consequences for a country as small
as mine would be too catastrophic. We have in place a
national strategy, and we will continue to seek support
and technical assistance as required.
While we can point to significant achievements
for the world’s children in the past 11 years or so, there
remains significant unfinished business, particularly on
issues that are critical to the protection of children,

52

including sexual exploitation, the impact of armed
conflict, child labour and all forms of abuse.
Children are calling for a response. And while
must promise them the future, we must not forget that,
as they have so rightly reminded us from this rostrum,
they are also very much of the present.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Abdi
Hashi, Chairman of the delegation of Somalia.
Mr. Hashi (Somalia): Today, we stand at a
historic juncture. More than a decade ago, we the
international community adopted the Convention on
the Rights of the Child. At this special session, we are
taking stock of the achievements and shortcomings of
each country and of the global village in the
implementation of the principles and goals enshrined in
the Convention and its Optional Protocols. Much has
been achieved, but a lot remains to be done. Respecting
the rights of our children remains daunting and is a
challenge requiring immediate attention at all levels.
The children of the world deserve better.
It was in that spirit that it was my privilege to
sign yesterday, 9 May 2002, on behalf of the
Government of Somalia, the Convention on the Rights
of the Child. We shall ratify the Convention soon. We
shall also sign the Optional Protocols at the appropriate
time.
The children of Palestine and of Somalia deserve
better. Palestinian children are denied by the Israeli
occupation forces nearly all the rights enshrined in the
Convention. Palestinian children are killed by the
Israeli forces, their homes are destroyed and their right
to a peaceful environment is shattered with impunity.
In Somalia, we acknowledge and appreciate the
role of the United Nations, in particular the United
Nations Children’s Fund, the World Health
Organization and others, in improving the quality of
life of Somali children. However, Somali children
continue to face challenges. For example, the rates of
child morbidity and mortality in Somalia are extremely
high. Our infant mortality rate is among the highest in
the world. Curable infectious diseases such as
tuberculosis cause more than half of all child deaths. It
is estimated that only 10 per cent of Somali children
receive all the recommended vaccinations in their first
12 months. Mortality among mothers is among the
highest in the world. Only 15 per cent of children in

A/S-27/PV.6

Somalia sleep under a bed net, and only 28 per cent of
the population has access to safe water — not to
mention that access to sanitary disposal is very limited.
Cholera in Somalia is well above the threshold of 5 per
cent, while funds for combating AIDS are insignificant.
In terms of education, a child who was 5 years
old in 1990, at the beginning of the civil war in
Somalia, and who is now 17 years old, does not have
access to structured, formal education. Unable to get an
education and to secure a decent livelihood, that 17year-old boy today is a child soldier, at the mercy of
notorious warlords. These child soldiers are taught to
kill and to abduct aid workers for ransom or to scare
the international community away from engaging in
Somalia.
In war-torn societies of the world and
particularly in Africa, children are exploited and
abused by warlords, who care only about their political
survival and interests. Our future, our children, are
turned into killing machines. In Africa, more than a
million have died from violence, displacement and
famine. Conflicts destroy not only the political and
social fabric of our societies but also our future, our
children.
Children in conflict-affected countries such as
Somalia are taught the gun — the killing culture — not
the three Rs. They are taught how to handle arms not to
heal wounds. Somali children have been denied the
right to peace and peaceful development by
unscrupulous warlords. The continuous flood of arms
and landmines into Somalia encourages the child
soldier and child militia culture. In this context, it is
imperative that all States, particularly Somalia’s
neighbouring States, respect and implement the arms
embargo on Somalia sanctioned by the Security
Council. Strict compliance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions will enhance the chances for
creating the peaceful environment necessary for the
full development of the great potential of our children.
In the light of our commitment to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and the two Optional
Protocols, as well as to the African Charter on the
Rights and Welfare of the Child, my Government will
continue its peace-building efforts; re-establish basic
services; mobilize, encourage and support the existing
civil-society efforts in the areas of human rights
monitoring, health service provision and education; and
form partnerships with women’s activist groups to

monitor human rights violations against women and to
eliminate gender discrimination in all aspects of life.
My Government will also mobilize human and
financial resources from private and international
sources in order to provide the following emergency
services: resettlement of displaced children and reunion
with their families; the promotion of small-scale
economic activities that facilitate the earning of
livelihoods; the rehabilitation and counselling of child
members of militias and child combatants; and the
establishment of mine awareness programmes and the
rehabilitation of mine victims, especially children.
However, peace, stability and development
opportunities are the first prerequisites for honouring
the rights of the child. By fulfilling its mandate to
promote peace and stability, my Government will
prepare the stage for the adoption and implementation
of national programmes that consciously address the
needs of Somali children.
In that context, I appeal to the international
community to help us not only to comply with the
obligations of the Convention we signed yesterday, but
also to provide a better life for our children.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by His Excellency Mr. Farid Abboud,
Chairman of the delegation of Lebanon.
Mr. Abboud (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like at the outset to congratulate Mr. Han on
his election to preside over the Assembly at this special
session. It is my honour to convey to him greetings
from His Excellency the President of the Lebanese
Republic and best wishes for the success of the session.
Lebanon, which participated in the 1990 World
Summit on Children, is more concerned than ever
before about the Summit’s objectives. Despite the
challenges and economic difficulties that Lebanon and
the majority of its citizens are facing, we have
demonstrated our commitment to the rights of the child
by undertaking various initiatives at the legislative
level, foremost among them the ratification of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child in 1991, signing
the Optional Protocol relating to trafficking in children
and child prostitution and acceding to the International
Labour Organization Convention banning child labour.
A parliamentary committee on the rights of the
child was formed in 1992 in order to update the laws
relating to the situation of children in Lebanon, and a

53

A/S-27/PV.6

Supreme Council for Childhood was established in
1994. That Council drew up a national consultative
framework on cooperation between the private and
publics sectors so as to protect the rights of the child.
We also established a ministry for youth and sports,
which caters to children and adolescents, elaborated
laws on disabled children and juveniles and on
compulsory education, in addition to the adoption of
other practical measures.
In the field of public health, Lebanon, working in
cooperation with the World Health Organization
(WHO) and the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), has managed to reduce by one third the
mortality rate for infants under five by providing
medical treatment, including treatment to combat polio.
Lebanon has also sought to combat malnutrition among
children, leading to a reduction in the effects of that
phenomenon. Indeed, studies and indicators by
UNICEF and WHO show that the Lebanese experience
has proved to be one of the most successful in this area.
With regard to education, the Lebanese
parliament adopted a law relating to free and
compulsory primary-school education. A national
survey carried out in 2000 showed that primary-school
enrolment is greater than 98 per cent for both girls and
boys. Enrolment in nursery school and kindergarten is
85 per cent. The Government has sought to modernize
the educational curriculum, rehabilitate school
buildings and amend Lebanese labour laws as they
relate to children so as to reduce child labour,
especially in industrial and hazardous jobs.
With regard to the dangers of smoking and drug
and alcohol abuse, in 1997 the parliament adopted a
modern law that includes articles relating specifically
to children, including provisions to protect them and to
rehabilitate those who are addicted to drugs.
Conditions for children in our region have been
negatively impacted by the continuation of Israel’s
aggressive policies against civilian communities.
Israel’s occupation and bombardment of southern
Lebanon, and its infrastructure and institutions, which
continued for many years, have caused enormous
destruction and have badly eroded the social
infrastructure. The negative effects on children were
tremendous.
Paragraph 74 of the Secretary-General’s report on
landmines states that the Israeli occupation left behind
more than 400,000 landmines, which have killed many

54

children and other civilians. Mine clearance is proving
to be difficult because Israel has not provided Lebanon
with detailed maps showing where mines were planted
in our territory. Furthermore, the occupation by Israel
of Palestinian territories and its pursuance of a
consistent and comprehensive policy of aggression
against the Palestinian Authority and its institutions,
including the targeting of civilians, has destroyed or
paralysed educational and health-care institutions in
Palestine and subjected the Palestinian people to grave
dangers, which must be dealt with quickly, before
disaster strikes.
The
Israeli
practices
had
catastrophic
consequences in the Jenin camp, where Israel targeted
civilians of all ages, including innocent children. It is
not the school curriculum that is the main reason for
the violence in Palestine, as some have claimed, but
this pattern of aggression against civilians, especially
children, that is responsible. Facts, not words, lead to
action; we must change the facts of occupation. The
child whose father is killed, whose brother is detained
or whose house is destroyed will resist, whatever the
school curriculum says. Occupation and oppression are
among the most dangerous threats to children and to
childhood. The best way to protect the children is to
put an end to the occupation, which is destroying their
lives and their territory.
Furthermore, the continued embargo against Iraq,
whatever the arguments used to justify it, has destroyed
the social infrastructure, especially that relating to
children and adolescents. It is incumbent upon us to
review ways of dealing with this issue so as to save the
children of Iraq, who are being put at risk.
Lebanon, while emphasizing the need for
complementarity between the efforts of the
Government and civil society, reaffirms its
commitment to the rights of the child, and it pledges to
the Assembly at this session that it will take into
consideration the objectives set out in the document to
be adopted at the end of the session.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Jeremiah Manele, Chairman of the
delegation of Solomon Islands.
Mr. Manele (Solomon Islands): With the
Children’s Forum and the many other supporting
events being held during the week, this special session
of the General Assembly on children is undoubtedly
providing us with a historic opportunity to strive for a

A/S-27/PV.6

world fit for children — a world that is just and
peaceful and from which extreme poverty is eradicated.
Such a world is one in which child and maternal
mortality is reduced and where all children have access
to clean water and basic education. It is a world that is
well equipped to combat HIV/AIDS and malaria.
Solomon Islands fully concurs with the SecretaryGeneral that children’s issues are critical, because the
starting point of international development strategies
that emphasize equitable human development is, quite
naturally, the rights and well-being of children. It is
children whose individual development and social
contributions will shape the world’s future, and it is
through the advancement of children that the
intergenerational cycles of poverty, exclusion and
discrimination can be broken.
My Government is therefore committed to the
welfare and protection of the rights of all children. Our
constitution grants children the same rights and
protection as adults, and other existing laws are
designed to protect children from sexual abuse, child
labour and neglect. Children are also respected and
protected within the traditional extended-family
system. In addition, various policy frameworks have
been developed to support activities throughout the
country targeting children. These include the 1996
revised national children’s policy and plan of action,
the national food and nutrition policy of 1995, the
breast-feeding policy of 1996, the 1998 national
women’s policy, and the 2000 national youth policy.
Our infant mortality rates reflect major
improvements during the past decade, dropping from
38 per 1,000 live births in 1986 to 28 per 1,000 in
1999. The major causes of infant mortality are
childbirth complications, pneumonia and malaria.
Malaria is also the major cause of death in children
under five years of age. Our immunization programme
is well established, with a coverage rate of more than
80 per cent of children under one year of age.
However, malnutrition in children under five years is
an increasing concern. Drug and substance use among
young people is also an emerging issue. With regard to
clean water, most urban households have access to a
chlorinated water supply, but only 60 per cent of the
rural population has access to clean water.
Education is not yet universal or compulsory in
the Solomon Islands. The current policy is to provide
greater opportunity for access at all levels of education

and to increase the provision of education services.
Since 1996 early childhood education has been part of
the formal education system. The literacy rate has
increased from an estimated 22 per cent in 1994 to 64
per cent in 1999.
Despite some progress, much more remains to be
done. The recent ethnic unrest and its devastating
impacts have produced a major setback in all sectoral
programmes. It has caused population displacement
and has disrupted coordination and administrative
systems. School enrolment, which had increased
progressively, also declined drastically in areas
affected by the crisis. The Government is working
diligently to restore law and order and to make
Solomon Islands a secure and peaceful place for our
children.
Economic reconstruction and development is also
a key priority, as our capacity to deliver better health
and education services depends on it. The support of
our development partners, including United Nations
funds and programmes, is also vital. The Government
welcomes and supports the initiative taken by UNICEF
to evaluate its programmes in the Solomon Islands.
Additional financial resources are required to expand
those programmes and to sustain and supplement
national efforts towards realizing the needs and rights
of our children. Above all, we are fully cognizant of
the need for good governance and sound polices, and
we are taking the necessary steps towards that end.
Our efforts to create a world fit for children must
be based on universal participation. Every country and
entity should be allowed to participate in international
organizations that contribute to the realization of
children’s rights, if we are to create a world fit for all
children. In that connection, my Government strongly
supports the request of the Republic of China on
Taiwan to participate as an observer in the World
Health Assembly (WHA). Participation in the WHA is
a matter of fundamental human rights. It is a universal
truth that health and humanitarianism have no
boundaries, and that disease heeds no borders. Let us
not forget the children and young people of Taiwan.
They too have rights. The Government, the private
sector and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in
Taiwan have contributed to many humanitarian causes,
including children’s causes around the world. Let us
give them the opportunity to benefit from, and
contribute to, a world fit for all children.

55

A/S-27/PV.6

Finally, Solomon Islands is grateful for the
support of its development partners during the last
decade, including that of United Nations funds and
programmes. I also wish to acknowledge the
contributions of civil society and NGOs, including the
Solomon Islands Red Cross for its work with disabled
children. My Government is committed to
reinvigorating these partnerships.
Tonight we will adopt a programme of action for
the next decade entitled “A world fit for children”. Let
us match our words with action by making the
necessary investments in our children. Let compassion
and a true sense of our common humanity be the
guiding principles of our endeavours to serve our
children and future generations. Solomon Islands joins
in the global movement to build a world fit for all
children.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Hammarberg, Chairman of the delegation of Sweden.
Mr. Hammarberg (Sweden): We are close to a
conclusion. The negotiations are over, and tonight we
will probably be able to adopt a declaration and a plan
of action — and that in a spirit of consensus. We want
to thank and congratulate the Bureau, Patricia Durrant
and her colleagues, and, of course, to recognize the
guidance and support provided by UNICEF. With that
decision later tonight, we pledge new efforts to respect,
protect and fulfil the rights of the child. That pledge to
our children should now be turned into reality. No one
is satisfied with empty promises, certainly not the
young generation. Actions are required.
The implementation of the rights of the child is
more than a question of charity; it is a political
challenge requiring a political vision, political will and
a conscious political ambition. The Convention on the
Rights of the Child tells us to give the best interests of
the child primary consideration in all the decisions we
take affecting children. That, in turn, requires a serious
child-impact analysis as a normal aspect of political
and administrative decision-making.
We should review our legislation in order to make
it consistent with the principles of the rights of the
child, and of the Convention as a whole. One example
is to ban corporal punishment and other abuse of
children. We should establish a system of gathering
data and statistics relevant to the situation of children.
Such data should be disaggregated on the basis of

56

gender, age, disability, family status and other essential
criteria. Such facts should be analysed as a basis for
further reforms. We should also support the systematic
monitoring of the situation of children, for instance
through the establishment of an independent
ombudsman who could speak for the interest of the
child and propose child-friendly reforms. We should
spread awareness about the situation of all children and
their rights. Professionals working directly with
children should be given education and advice on the
meaning of child rights. The Convention should be part
of school curricula, and daily life in schools should be
organized in the spirit of the Convention, that is, we
need to democratize our schools.
The Convention also tells us to use the maximum
of our available resources to secure children’s wellbeing. The interests of the child should weigh heavy in
our national budget processes. More affluent societies
and countries have an obligation to assist in burdensharing. When it comes to children our duties do not
stop at national frontiers. Development cooperation
programmes should now be directed towards assisting
in the implementation of the rights spelled out in the
action plan we are to adopt.
For our part, we pledge to continue to allocate
more than 0.7 per cent of our gross national product to
development cooperation and to focus our contribution
even further on the needs of children. We are prepared
to share experiences — both progress and
difficulties — with all our partners.
All these political actions should be undertaken in
dialogue with the young generation. A major challenge
is to open up adult society to young people. On the
local and national levels we should seek avenues to a
meaningful, respectful dialogue. It should be obvious
that we involve children in all matters concerning
them. We should respect their views in accordance with
their age and maturity, as the Conventions says.
In that spirit, the Swedish delegation has asked a
young member of our delegation, Maja Frankel, to
conclude this presentation with her reflections on child
participation.
Ms. Frankel (Sweden): In 1990, the Children’s
Summit decided to create a better world for children.
Why has it not happened? The world today has the
resources to make all children survive and grow up. My
answer is that the political will to involve young people
in decision-making is still missing. Participation: you

A/S-27/PV.6

have all used and abused that word many, many times,
but do you really know that it means? Twelve years ago
you forgot to ask the experts themselves, the young
people. However, the Convention granted us rights; and
for this session there was some progress made. More
children were included in the preparations and in
governmental delegations. Unfortunately, we forgot to
define meaningful participation before we started to
practice it.
It is not participation when young people are
present just as decoration, to smile gratefully or just to
sing and dance. Neither is it participation when we
have inferior meeting rooms and translation to those of
adult delegates. We often need more assistance, but we
can do without luxury.
Participation becomes meaningful when we are
here on the same terms as everyone else — before,
during and after decisions are made. And we do not
expect you to listen, smile and say that you agree if you
do not. Respect is when you take our views seriously.
Tell us what you disagree about and be prepared to
make compromises with us. We are not stupid. We
understand that all cannot be achieved at once. With
that kind of meaningful participation, young people can
start being seen as a big resource instead of a burden or
a problem.
It is common to say that we represent the future.
That is not the best reason to involve us. Instead, we
are living in the present and it is today that many of us
suffer too much. We are the experts on the realities of
young people today, not on how it was 20 or 40 years
ago. I know that you have all been young, but the
world is changing fast. To understand how the present
forms the future, you have to listen to us and respect us
as you respect other experts.
I want to look all of you in the eye to say that if,
when adopting the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, you had realized that it meant dealing with us
seriously, I am not sure that you would have agreed on
it.
Finally, the more opinions that are heard, the
harder it is to reach agreement; but the chances are that
important aspects will not be forgotten. Understanding
how children live today is how we can make the
Convention come true. That is what we want to do,
isn’t it?

The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Jean-François Giovanninni, State
Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Switzerland.
Mr. Giovanninni (Switzerland) (spoke in
French): The Swiss delegation would first of all like to
thank the President and the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF) for organizing this special session of
the General Assembly devoted to children. The Swiss
delegation takes great pleasure in participating in this
event of such fundamental importance, which aims to
reaffirm the commitment of the entire international
community to make the rights of the child a reality.
The Convention on the Rights of the Child
constitutes a concrete legal basis to evaluate the efforts
that have been made, to set goals and to mobilize new
energy. Along with the Convention, other international
instruments strengthen the rights of the child. In
particular, those instruments include the International
Labour Organization (ILO) Convention No. 182, on the
worst forms of child labour; the Optional Protocols to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and on the
sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography.
Many — far too many — children are still living
under precarious conditions, without basic education or
access to adequate care and health services, confronted
daily by all forms of violence and discrimination, and
exploited economically or sexually. Children are
therefore a vulnerable group, and protecting them is
essential. But within that group there are children who
are even more exposed, and appropriate measures must
be taken to meet their specific need for protection.
These include in particular the disabled, those
belonging to minority groups, street children, refugee
and internally displaced children, children who have
been orphaned by AIDS and others living in intolerable
situations.
Switzerland is doing everything within its power
to ensure that children are better protected at the
national and international levels, both in law and in
fact. Switzerland’s commitment is based on the
following fundamental principles: protection; respect
for the physical and mental integrity of children; the
prohibition of discrimination, particularly between
boys and girls; the best interests of the child; the right
to life, survival and development; and respect for the
opinions of the child.

57

A/S-27/PV.6

Switzerland will continue its commitment to
eradicate poverty and to promote human security. My
country is determined to protect to the fullest children
involved in armed conflict and affected by it. That
protection entails, inter alia, condemning all
involvement of children under the age of 18 in armed
conflict, respecting international humanitarian law and
protecting and assisting all vulnerable groups.
At the national level, Switzerland will redouble
its efforts on behalf of children in the following five
priority areas: preventing violence against children,
particularly sexual exploitation; fighting trafficking in
human beings; encouraging the participation of
children and young people at all levels of society, be it
within the context of the family, schools or politics;
and, lastly, working to better integrate foreign-born
children, in particular as regards training.
On 29 May 2002, Switzerland will present to the
Committee on the Rights of the Child its first report on
the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. We consider the Committee’s expertise to be
essential to critically assessing the situation of children
in Switzerland and to identifying future courses of
action.
Switzerland welcomes the existence of a global
consensus on the need to protect and promote the rights
of the child. Although major progress has been made in
various regions of the world in a number of areas since
the 1990 World Summit for Children, obstacles remain
and major new challenges have arisen, including the
consequences of HIV/AIDS on children. The entire
international community must continue and strengthen
its efforts. Switzerland will contribute to those efforts
with a strong commitment of its own.
The Acting President: In accordance with a
decision taken by the Assembly at its 5th plenary
meeting, the General Assembly will now hear a
statement by His Excellency Mr. Ivan Šimonović,
President of the Economic and Social Council.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia), President of the
Economic and Social Council: We all know that
children are the world’s future. Our investment in
children today is a moral imperative, and the only real
legacy that we will leave behind. So, are we investing
enough?
The United Nations Children’s Fund tells us that
children are often the first victims of armed conflicts,

58

economic recession and poverty. In developing
countries, one out of three children live in absolute
poverty. In families with incomes lower than $1 per
day 26 of every 100 will not be immunized against any
disease, 30 will suffer from malnutrition in their first
five years of life, 19 will have no access to clean
drinking water and 40 will live without adequate
sanitation. In the numerous conflicts being fought
around the world, 300,000 children are fighting in wars
for which they are not responsible and which bring
only immense suffering to them. We know that out of
every 100 children, 17 will never go to school. Of
every 100 children who enter first grade, 25 will not
reach the fifth grade. We know that in some regions
and countries, and especially in Africa, the numbers are
even starker. All over the world, too many children
continue to be born into a life of chronic poverty and
hopelessness, and become victims of sexual
exploitation, conflict, and HIV/AIDS, malaria and
other diseases.
It is obvious that we are not investing enough.
Responding to children’s rights, interests and needs
must become a political priority for all. By failing to
invest in them now, we undermine their future and the
future of the world. We are facing a knowledge-driven
global economy, where the quality of human capital
has become a crucial factor in increasing incomes for
both the individual and the State. How can children
with deficits such as these in the areas of health and
education have a fair chance to better their standard of
living as adults and contribute meaningfully to their
societies?
As the Assembly is aware, the Economic and
Social Council will be meeting in July at the
ministerial level to debate the theme “The contribution
of human resources development, including areas of
health and education, to the process of development”.
During that session we should not talk about those
matters in the abstract. I will urge my colleagues to
reaffirm and expand our commitment to concrete
intervention in health, nutrition, water and sanitation,
as well as education for all children, especially girls. It
is imperative that we invest in children’s health and
education so as to give them the tools to create their
own opportunities and to escape poverty.
The current special session of the General
Assembly on children is providing us with a
comprehensive agenda for children as citizens of the
society of today and tomorrow. Together with the

A/S-27/PV.6

Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocols, that new agenda for children in the twentyfirst century contains sets of standards and actions
aimed at securing the well-being of all children.
This special session represents an important link
in the chain of major conferences and summits
intended to create a set of internationally agreed norms.
The Millennium Summit committed us, among other
goals, to halve extreme poverty and hunger, to achieve
universal primary education and gender equity, to halve
the proportion of people without access to safe
drinking water and to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS
and malaria by 2015.
We should insist from now on that, in working to
reach these targets, our interventions focus on
children’s rights, interests and needs. We are heartened
by the new spirit of international cooperation and
solidarity that has come out of the International
Conference on Financing for Development, held at
Monterrey. A couple of weeks ago, during the
discussion between the Economic and Social Council
and the Bretton Woods institutions it was emphasized
that the Monterrey consensus represents a performance
contract between donor and recipient countries, one
that has to be delivered on. So let us start now with our
children.
The Economic and Social Council can contribute
to the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals and the creation of a world fit for children by
continuing to mobilize international political support.
Furthermore, the Economic and Social Council can, in
its oversight and management responsibilities, ensure a
coherent, coordinated and targeted response by the
entire United Nations for the implementation of actions
required to achieve these goals. To that end, the
Council will mobilize its own subsidiary machinery, in
particular its functional commissions, as well as the
full, broad potential of civil society organizations,
including non-governmental organizations, the private
sector and academia.
A world fit for children is possible. It is entirely
up to us whether we will be remembered with a curse
or a blessing. Let us work together and make our
children proud of us.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by His Excellency Mr. Hussein
Hassouna, Chairman of the observer delegation of the
League of Arab States.

Mr. Hassouna (League of Arab States) (spoke in
Arabic): The leaders of the world are today
participating in this special session, which is being held
12 years after the World Summit for Children, to
review the goals on the protection of children endorsed
in the Convention on the Rights of the Child. With
Somalia’s signature yesterday, all Arab States have
acceded to the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
The States members of the League of Arab States have
acted effectively; they have implemented national plans
of action and have made sincere efforts to implement
the Convention. They have done so in response to a
noble global call, but also to protect the Arab heritage,
where children and families have pride of place.
Most Arab States have established supreme
councils on children’s affairs and have enacted laws on
the rights of the child on the basis of guidelines
adopted by the League of Arab States. States members
of the League of Arab States submit periodic reports to
the Committee on the Rights of the Child at Geneva
and benefit from the comments of that Committee as
well as those of Arab League bodies such as the
committee on children. The latter reviews national
efforts to implement plans of action to carry out the
outcomes of its meetings.
In March 2001, the cause of children was the
subject of a summit-level meeting of the League of
Arab States held in Amman. There, participants called
for effective follow-up to the results of the summit.
The Arab Summit in Beirut also adopted very
important legislation and guidelines regarding the
rights of the child and the issue of protecting
Palestinian children from the unprecedented violence
to which they are being exposed. The legislation aims
at protecting the rights of children and at implementing
and enforcing other international agreements on
children and on their survival.
The President returned to the Chair.
Today, Palestinian children are isolated in their
world, landlocked in their own homeland, deprived of
food and medicine. We call on the Assembly to adopt a
resolution establishing a mechanism to investigate the
atrocities committed against Palestinian children and
another mechanism to ensure the protection of
Palestinian children.
The special session is important because it is
being held at the dawn of a new decade and a new
millennium. This is a historic moment for human

59

A/S-27/PV.6

civilization, notably because of globalization. That is
not a new phenomenon, though it is very different in
terms of its goals and tools and its various positive and
negative aspects. Its negative aspects are increased
poverty, growing numbers of poor people in various
regions of the world and increased suffering for
millions of children. In many countries, there has been
a deterioration in the health of children and families,
and in education. There has been an increase in armed
conflicts in many parts of the world. The main victims
of such conflicts are children, who lose their lives, who
are permanently injured or whose innocence is violated
through abuse and sexual exploitation. These are the
reasons for the formulation of the two Optional
Protocols to the Convention in addition to all the other
international instruments for the protection of children.
The slogan of the special session, to create a
world fit for children, is very eloquent. It describes the
real situation and promotes the status not only of
children but of all related issues. This question requires
our focused attention. Donors must help implement the
20/20 Initiative as it relates to international assistance
for children. We also need to protect children in armed
conflict and those affected by occupation and
international sanctions. The Convention should be
considered a point of departure for future work.
I would like to stress the importance of the family
in raising young people while instilling in them the
moral values which emerge from divine law. In their
families and in society, adults must set an example. A
world fit for children would be our children’s salvation.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by His Excellency Mr. John Richardson,
Chairman of the observer delegation of the European
Community.
Mr. Richardson (European Community): In
addition to the statement made by Spain on behalf of
the European Union, it is a great pleasure and honour
for me as a European Commission official and as a
father to address this special session on behalf of the
European Community. It is special in a double sense,
because it is the first time the General Assembly has
specifically addressed issues relating to children but
also because of its unique composition — including
young delegates for the first time.
Twelve years ago the World Summit for Children
set a precedent by causing a shift in international
priorities. Since then, increasing importance has been

60

given to human and social development and to the fight
against poverty. In that respect, the work accomplished
by a series of major United Nations conferences — on
population, social development, gender, education and
communicable diseases — provides an agreed
framework for national and international action,
reaffirmed by the Millennium Declaration. This special
session highlights the fact that children are central to
human progress and that, therefore, there cannot be a
better future for the world unless there is a better future
for its children.
Creating a world fit for children is about creating
an enabling environment with impact on the everyday
lives of children and their families. This must be
reflected in poverty-eradication strategies, but also in
mobilizing resources at the national and international
levels. The European Union collectively provides 55
per cent of all official development assistance. At the
recent International Conference on Financing for
Development, held in Monterrey, the European Union
announced its intention to further increase development
assistance by $7 billion per year by 2006, from 0.33 to
0.39 per cent of gross national product (GNP), and to
continue towards the target of 0.7 per cent of GNP.
In implementing our policies, we recognize
children as a particularly vulnerable group in the
overarching policy focus on poverty. Within that
framework, the mainstreaming of gender aspects and
human rights, including rights of the child based on the
Convention of the Rights of the Child, is closely linked
with our poverty eradication efforts.
In the protection and promotion of children’s
rights, implementing the Convention on the Rights of
the Child — the most widely ratified international
instrument in the world — is crucial. It is by basing our
action for children on its general principles that we will
be able to secure the progress required.
Concerted international efforts have brought
health, education and gender issues to the core of the
development process — which is essential, in
particular, for children, who are among the most
vulnerable members of the society. There is also a new
global consensus, reflected, for instance, in wide
support for the Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria, to respond effectively to
those major diseases, which hit children hardest. We
have recently seen the first grants made to countries to
enable them to scale up their efforts in that respect.

A/S-27/PV.6

Considering that half of the world’s 3 billion poor
are children, urgent implementation of the
commitments is needed to complete the unfinished
agenda of the 1990 World Summit. The end-decade
review by the Secretary-General (A/S-27/3) highlights
that progress in creating a better world for children has
been very uneven, with obstacles still to be overcome,
particularly in developing countries, where a large
majority of the 129 million children born this year will
live.
As acknowledged in the draft plan of action,
poverty remains a serious obstacle to meeting the needs
and protecting and promoting the rights of children. It
should be every child’s right to grow up in health,
peace and dignity. Poverty eradication is at the heart of
our development strategies with, as essential
components, food security, education and health —
including access to services and the prevention of
communicable diseases such as HIV/AIDS, malaria
and tuberculosis.
The four priority action areas highlighted in the
draft plan of action — promoting healthy lives,
providing quality education, protection from abuse and
violence and combating HIV/AIDS — are all already
important areas for the development and humanitarian
policies of the European Union.
Also, we fully support efforts to assist children
affected by conflict, building on the obligations and
principles spelled out in the Convention on the Rights
of the Child. Children are the first and most vulnerable
victims of armed conflicts, whose effects on children
can be diverse and long-term — unfortunately, often
life-long. Recognizing that the legal responsibility for
protecting children affected by armed conflicts falls to
States, the European Community is ready to contribute
to those efforts through the provision of humanitarian
assistance to children in areas affected by conflict.
However, our endeavours require cooperation from all
State parties in order to ensure full, safe and
unhindered humanitarian access to regions of concern.
The impact of armed conflicts on children is not
yet fully documented. The lack of hard facts is not only
detrimental to the credibility of international advocacy
efforts; it is also a major obstacle to improving
humanitarian response. As a major donor of
international humanitarian assistance, the European
Community would like to take this opportunity to
encourage activities aimed at improving data collection

and analysis related to children in armed conflicts.
Thus we welcomed the initiative, supported by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and by UNICEF, to
establish an international research network on children
affected by armed conflicts.
We welcome the recent entry into force of the two
Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Right of
the Child, on the involvement of children in armed
conflict and on the sale of children, child prostitution
and child pornography. In our programme for the
establishment of an area of freedom, security and
justice in the European Union, we introduced a new
dimension in 1999 relating to children in fields such as
the fight against human trafficking and against sexual
exploitation and a common asylum and immigration
policy. Our Daphne and STOP programmes address
issues in relation to the protection of children against
violence, trafficking and sexual exploitation.
In the context of the EU’s enlargement process,
the European Commission is monitoring children’s
rights with a view to ensuring that the Convention is
respected by the candidate countries. More information
on our activities in support of children can be found in
the document entitled “European Community responses
to the World Summit for Children”, which has been
distributed at this session.
We welcome this special session and the
important draft outcome document that the Assembly is
about to adopt, which is aimed at creating a world fit
for children and youth, who, after all, represent 35 per
cent of the world’s population and who one day will
inherit and build on our investments. The future cannot
wait. It must be tackled hands-on, now and every day,
in order to create an enabling environment for the
fulfilment of the potential of millions of children in the
world. When we leave this evening, it will be our
responsibility and duty to translate the concrete and
focused objectives of the outcome document into an
inclusive world fit for all children, whatever a child’s
point of departure in life may be. That is the goal
towards which we must strive with determination.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Mokhtar Lamani, Chairman of the
observer delegation of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference.
Mr. Lamani (Organization of the Islamic
Conference) (spoke in French): The Secretary-General

61

A/S-27/PV.6

of the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC),
Mr. Abdelouahed Belkeziz, has charged me with
reading out the following message.
(spoke in Arabic)
“At the outset, I should like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your presiding over this special
session of the General Assembly on children. It is
a pleasure for me to address this important
question, which has such important ramifications
for future generations throughout the Islamic
world, since the percentage of children in our
populations is high, exceeding that of many other
countries of the world.
“Since Islam is concerned with the entire
realm of reality, in both its spiritual and its
material aspects, and since children grow to
adulthood within the context of the family, which
must ensure every aspect of their education, we
view the family as the basic unit of society. For
that reason, Islam has established laws to
eliminate elements that have negative effects on
the family and to define elements that are
cohesive.
“The OIC has particular interest in the fate
of children. It has participated, together with the
United Nations, in special efforts on behalf of
children’s welfare since 1989. It has acted to
enhance the World Declaration on Children,
issued in 1990. It has held numerous conferences
in that regard, attended by representatives of
many international organizations. Moreover, it
has adopted a series of resolutions and
recommendations
and
is
engaging
in
consultations with the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF) to hold a ministerial conference
on children’s social welfare and prosperity.
“The international community has come to
the conclusion that the main objective of
development should be improving the human
condition. Any development that fails to place the
human being at the forefront of its priorities
would be a failure. Since children constitute 40
per cent of the present world population, we
cannot ignore the fact that, for many reasons, the
improvement of children’s welfare has become an
imperative for human societies throughout the
world. I shall name a few of those reasons.

62

“First, children are the vanguard of the
future and the shapers of tomorrow. Preparing
them adequately for that mission is like preparing
ourselves adequately, for our own sake and for
that of future generations. Secondly, children are
the weakest and most vulnerable sector of our
society and the most prone to disease and
epidemics. They are also the sector most affected
by famine, war and other natural catastrophes.
Thirdly, they suffer the most from human
exploitation, such as cheap child labour, besides
being the most vulnerable to deviance and
temptations. For all those reasons, special care
needs to be devoted to children with a view to
helping them in their childhood journey so that
they can enjoy conditions that are natural,
including protection, security and safety.
“It augurs well that this important session is
taking place to review which objectives have
been achieved among those adopted by the World
Summit for Children, held in New York more
than a decade ago. Among the most important
goals set at that Summit were lowering the level
of malnutrition, fighting disease and decreasing
the incidence of disability among children, as
well as improving educational conditions in
developing countries.
“A review of the situation of children
worldwide over the past decade shows real
progress, chiefly in the areas of health, education
and social services. However, millions of children
in the developing world still fall victim to disease
and malnutrition, and some 100 million of them
have no chance to acquire an education. That
reflects the fact that the funds pledged at the
World Summit for Children were never actually
disbursed and that the proposed investments in
social services never materialized.
“It is worth noting that the large number of
States for which I have the honour to act as
spokesman today continue on the path towards
development. During the previous two centuries,
they were prey to colonialist forces and were
regarded as a sort of war booty. Their wealth and
natural resources were exploited and plundered
by colonial imperialist powers, and their peoples
were rendered ever more illiterate. They were left
afflicted with the most severe political, economic

A/S-27/PV.6

and social problems, many of which severely
affected their children’s destiny.
“Just as those countries were beginning to
recover, the new trend of globalization emerged.
That new reality has again marginalized countries
that are on the path towards development. Those
countries are asking the wealthy nations to relieve
them of the burden of accumulated debt, but they
are also in dire need of assistance to lower their
infant and child mortality rates and to enable
surviving children to develop in normal
conditions.
“The Organization welcomed the idea of
earmarking 20 per cent of national budgets for
essential social services as well as a similar
percentage from official development assistance.
“The OIC has time and again urged, and
continues to urge, that the necessary measures be
taken to prevent more armed conflicts. In
considering special measures to avoid conflict
and to manage, or better yet, resolve them, it
underlined the importance of devoting special
attention to the needs of children and women, the
principal victims of modern wars. It has called for
truces whenever and wherever fighting is taking
place, as well as peaceful measures that would
allow the safe passage of health services, supply
goods, relief items and vaccines. It has also called
for prohibiting the stockpiling, exporting or use
of landmines.
“Let me touch on the tragic situation of
Palestinian children at this dreadful time of
unceasing Israeli attacks in the Palestinian
territories. Such a situation redoubles our
responsibility towards those children persecuted
in Palestine and elsewhere in the world — our
responsibility to protect their rights and to
guarantee them safe, sound and stable family
conditions, so that succeeding generations can be
equipped with a good and useful education and
can learn strong moral values, based on mercy
and compassion for the weak, respect of others,
sympathy and tolerance.
“Prosperity on earth is closely linked to the
kind of upbringing we provide for our children in
terms of a sound environment and a decent
education, as they are the major hope for
humanity.”

The President: I give the floor to Mr. Jack
Hanning, Head of Relations with International
Organizations of the Council of Europe.
Mr. Hanning (Council of Europe): The Council
of Europe, which today encompasses almost 200
million children and teenagers in 44 countries, warmly
welcomes this special session on children as a valuable
opportunity to renew our commitment to the ideals and
principles agreed at the World Summit for Children 10
years ago.
The Council of Europe has always recognized the
universality and the importance of the standards and
principles enshrined in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. The Council’s own 1950 European Human
Rights Convention and its 1961 European Social
Charter provide legal protection for children.
The Human Rights Convention applies to all
individuals, including children, who may themselves
exercise their rights before national courts, and, if need
be, before the European Court of Human Rights, which
has examined many cases concerning children’s rights,
with profound effects on all member States. In this
particular context, it should also be noted that the
Convention’s sixth Protocol clearly outlaws the death
penalty in the Council’s member countries.
The Social Charter, for its part, defines social and
economic rights and includes a ban on the employment
of children under 15. The Charter also allows for
collective complaints to be taken to Strasbourg by
social partner organizations or international nongovernmental organizations.
Other Council of Europe standards for children
have been drawn up on matters such as protection of
children in the field of biology and medicine,
placement, adoption, custody and family reunion for
migrants’ children, to name but a few.
New standards have recently been prepared to
combat child pornography in the Convention on CyberCrime, which was adopted in Budapest in November
2001 and has already been signed by 33 European and
non-European States. Another new convention on
contact concerning children was adopted by the
Council of Europe’s Committee of Ministers in Vilnius
only last week, on 3 May.
The Council of Europe has also just decided to
set up a group of specialists on the protection of

63

A/S-27/PV.6

children against sexual exploitation. This group is
expected to develop a series of measures working in
close cooperation with the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF), Interpol and the European Union in
order to ensure a common approach to the protection of
children against sexual exploitation.

Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) is grateful to be
able to address this important international meeting.
The ICRC keenly hopes that this special session will
enable States to take energetic and concrete measures
that will truly improve the situation of children
throughout the world.

In the wake of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, the Council of Europe agreed the European
Convention on the exercise of children’s rights, which
ensures their rights are respected, in particular in
family court proceedings. A Standing Committee to
monitor implementation of the Council of Europe
Convention is being established, and it is hoped that
the United Nations will be associated with its work.

The ICRC is determined energetically to pursue
its humanitarian activities, of which children are a
prime beneficiary. The Declaration and Plan of Action
give an important place to the protection of children in
armed conflict. This focus is amply justified, because
war represents a formidable obstacle to the
achievement of the goals set by the international
community in its final document. War means
insecurity, danger and deprivation for countless
children. Responding to their needs is particularly
difficult and requires increased efforts.

Children are the leitmotif of many areas of
Council of Europe activity. For instance, full
employment of human rights, including children’s
rights, requires active participation and autonomy at an
early age. This multidisciplinary approach and the
emphasis on child participation is also apparent in the
new Forum on Children and Families, in which
children and young people are directly involved. It will
focus on priority areas such as participation, children at
risk, poverty and social exclusion.
Inevitably, the main focus of our work is in the
pan-European context, but we believe it important also
to work within the wider international community with
other organizations and other regions on what is, after
all, a common agenda.
That is why we would welcome the organization
of specific interregional forum, jointly with the United
Nations, to examine in depth the interrelationship
between social development and full enjoyment by
children of their rights.
That is why the Council of Europe welcomes this
opportunity to take forward into the new millennium,
with the United Nations and UNICEF, the plans and
commitments made in the course of this special
session.
Children are indeed our future. Children must be
our common cause.
The President: I give the floor to Mr. Jean De
Courten, Vice-President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, Geneva.
Mr. De Courten (International Committee of the
Red Cross) (spoke in French): The International

64

For many years, the International Committee of
the Red Cross has been striving to make a contribution.
It has done so through its activities for the civilian
population as a whole, as well as through measures
targeted at children. Indeed, experience has taught us
that protection and assistance efforts directed at
communities and families is often the best way of
ensuring security for children and of protecting their
physical and mental health. The ICRC intervenes with
the parties to conflict on behalf of civilians and
detainees, as well as working in the areas of nutrition,
health care and orthopaedic and other medical services.
Furthermore, it pays particular attention to
unaccompanied children and promotes family links by
helping families to exchange messages and search for
their relatives, and whenever possible, it facilitates
family reunification.
The ICRC is also determined to carry out its
activities in the area of standard-setting. In this respect,
it should be noted that the current legal regime
provides substantial protection for children through the
State. But regulations must be enforced, and that task is
incumbent first and foremost on States. To ensure
respect for international humanitarian law, States must,
inter alia, disseminate information about existing laws
among the armed forces and, as far as possible, the
general population. The ICRC is contributing actively
to this effort in cooperation with States through its
training and dissemination activities. The ICRC is also
prepared to assist States in drafting national legislation
to implement international humanitarian law.

A/S-27/PV.6

Among recent legal developments, the Optional
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
deserve praise. They highlight two particularly serious
risks to which children are exposed — sexual
exploitation and involvement in conflict. To prevent
these risks, we should not only adopt preventive
measures, but also provide support for or even
reconstitute the social and family context for children.
This is one of the important functions of a successful
rehabilitation process. In the case of child soldiers, this
may be particularly difficult because of their traumatic
experiences in combat, lack of education, separation
from the family environment or the destruction of the
physical and social environment.
In order to provide lasting support for children
traumatized by violence, several national Red Cross
and Red Crescent societies, with the help of the
International Federation and the ICRC, have developed
psychological and social rehabilitation programmes.
Unfortunately, all of this reflects just a part of the
problem. Even as we gather here today, children are
being sent into combat. Others are being mutilated by
landmines. Still others are being raped, tortured,
imprisoned, abandoned, uprooted or condemned to die
of hunger or disease. Let us not forget that it is for
those children that we must act, without waiting one
moment longer.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. José
Linati-Bosch, Chairman of the observer delegation of
the Sovereign Military Order of Malta.
Mr. Linati-Bosch (Sovereign Military Order of
Malta): Thank you very much, Mr. President, for
giving me the floor to address the Assembly at this
special session on children, on behalf of the Sovereign
Military Order of Malta.
The Order of Malta has a deep interest in the
matter that is occupying the attention of the General
Assembly during this special session. Member States
and observers, together with the heads of relevant
entities of the United Nations, are being given the
opportunity to voice their concerns on the future of the
world’s children.
The global context of the problem must be
carefully considered. As with almost all international
issues, those concerning children have social, cultural
and human rights aspects and related economic and
legal consequences. It is necessary to learn from the

past and to project this learning into the future if we
want to adopt not theoretical, but practical solutions
and to transform them into reality — as the SecretaryGeneral has said, to turn our words into actions. As a
result of this special session and of the work of the
United Nations in general, a world fit for children must
be created. The sale of children, child prostitution,
child pornography and the involvement of children in
armed conflict, like many other evils that afflict
mankind, must be eradicated and replaced with the
promotion of life, quality education, child protection
and the fight against AIDS in children.
Such a programme can reach a satisfactory end
only if the international community provides
interaction between Governments, United Nations
entities, international and supranational entities and
organizations from civil society.
Through its humanitarian activities, the Order of
Malta takes care of children in different countries, from
Brazil and the Dominican Republic to the Holy Land.
Our Holy Family Hospital in Bethlehem — a maternity
hospital that conducts over 40,000 medical
examinations a year — was besieged and damaged as a
consequence of the violence in Palestine. This is just
one example of armed conflict around the world, which
results in displaced persons and refugees, among which
children are the group that is most harmed. I myself
was able to witness the problems faced by children in
refugee camps when I visited them.
With the cooperation of its volunteer corps, the
Order of Malta is helping to ensure for children the
right to be born and the right to an education, two
aspects of human rights that we are trying to protect.
The Order of Malta reaffirms its commitment to the
aims of the special session of the General Assembly on
Children.
The President: I give the floor to Mr. Ridha
Bouabid, Chairman of the observer delegation of the
International Organization of La Francophonie.
Mr. Bouabid (International Organization of La
Francophonie) (spoke in French): Mr. President, given
the lateness of the hour and wishing to respond to your
request that each delegation respect the five-minute
limit, I shall limit myself to the main points of my
statement, the complete text of which will be
distributed to participants.

65

A/S-27/PV.6

This special session of the General Assembly
marks the conclusion of a decade of effort for the
implementation of the Plan of Action adopted at the
World Summit for Children of December 1990.
Unfortunately, it does not mark the implementation of
all of the commitments undertaken at that time. Even
less does it mark the disappearance of the inequalities
and injustices which continue to confront us, or of the
crises which continue to arise and to devastate certain
parts of the world. For we must indeed note,
unfortunately, that we are still powerless in the face of
these situations, which prevent children from living
their childhood.
The
International
Organization
of
La
Francophonie, composed of 55 member States having
the French language in common, has from the outset
worked to support the cause of children and to assist
the efforts of the international community for the
survival, protection and development of the child.
Following the 1990 New York Summit, our heads of
State or Government met in Paris in 1991 and decided
to convene a conference of ministers responsible for
children, with the aim of adopting an appropriate
strategy to implement the results of the New York
Summit in French-speaking areas. That ministerial
conference was held in Dakar in 1993 and led to the
adoption of a declaration and a plan of action outlining
the framework for a common francophone policy of
solidarity for children.
The
International
Organization
of
La
Francophonie is convinced that investing in children
and in young people in general is an investment in
peace, stability and the development of tomorrow. That
is why the eighth summit of our heads of State or
Government, held in Moncton, Canada, in 1999 was
devoted to youth. Our leaders undertook to combat, in
particular, the exploitation of children — an objective
of the draft plan of action to be adopted at this special
session. Other common objectives include education;
that is an area in which La Francophonie possesses
solid expertise through the numerous programmes that
it has developed, in particular through its InterGovernmental Agency, in the areas of education and
vocational and technical training. In the same spirit, the
two standing francophone ministerial conferences, one
dedicated to education, the other to youth and sport, are
working to strengthen francophone cooperation on
young people.

66

Likewise, the first women’s conference of La
Francophonie, held in Luxembourg in February 2000,
was another opportunity to show our determination to
contribute to the advancement of women, to young
girls’ access to education and to the elimination of all
forms of violence against women and children. The
conference took decisions on integration in school
programmes and on education for girls and boys on the
subjects of citizenship, a culture of peace and human
rights.
For its part, the Parliamentary Assembly of La
Francophonie met for the first time at Quebec City in
July 2001. A francophone youth parliament adopted the
Charter of the Young Francophone Citizen of the
Twenty-first Century, which deals with five universal
priority themes: education, health, fundamental
freedoms, information and communication technology
and social and cultural questions. None of these actions
will be lasting without the corresponding movement to
ensure the protection and promotion of the rights of
children. Much remains to be done to ensure the legal
framework to protect children and to strengthen the
means of combating the impunity of those who commit
crimes against them.
Therefore, as the Secretary-General of the
International Organization of La Francophonie has
personally undertaken to do, we must strive to improve
the commitment of francophone countries to
international and regional legal instruments for a
broader ratification of those instruments, as well as to
adopt measures to promote compliance with those
conventions at the national level.
In conclusion, the future of children cannot be
conceived without broader reflection on the future of
our planet, whether it relate to the fight against
poverty, to the promotion and defence of cultural
diversity or to the democratization of access to
information and communication technologies. These
are all areas in which our children are involved and in
which La Francophonie is acting and intends to
continue its commitment to contribute to the
implementation of the draft declaration on children,
which will crown the Assembly’s present work.
The President: I give the floor to Ms. Janet
Davidson, Vice-President of the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
Ms. Davidson (International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies): Imagine for a

A/S-27/PV.6

moment being a child whose daily bread depends on
selling bottles she finds on the road. Now imagine the
radical difference a drop-in centre would make to your
life — warm food, chatting with friends, learning new
skills. It would truly be a door opening onto a brighter
tomorrow. The Drop Inn centre for street children
operated by the Namibian Red Cross Society, is just
such a doorway, through which the International
Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies, its 178 member societies and the
International Committee of the Red Cross are working
to change the lives of vulnerable children.
As an organization committed to the principle of
serving the most vulnerable in society, it is easy to
understand why the Red Cross and Red Crescent is so
involved with children. Yet children represent to us not
only particularly fragile beneficiaries requiring extra
protective measures; they also exemplify the
fundamental principles that characterize and inspire our
movement.
For example, 1,000 young volunteers are
participating in the home care programme of the Red
Cross in Bosnia and Herzegovina. They are providing a
vital service to lonely housebound elderly people. In
Cambodia, young Red Cross volunteers help raise
awareness about the deadly threat of landmines. Red
Crescent youth in Bangladesh are involved in the
campaign to eradicate polio. And the immense power
that is generated when children help other children is
nowhere more prominent in the Red Cross and Red
Crescent world than in Africa, where children are
beginning to spearhead the fight against the spread of
HIV/AIDS
and
its
associated
stigma
and
discrimination.
The International Federation has chosen at the
special session on children to focus on the impact of
HIV/AIDS on young people. The pandemic is
compromising the lives and rights of millions of
children around the world. They are deprived of the
right to grow up: 4.3 million children under the age of
15 have lost their lives to AIDS. Children are deprived
of their right to social and economic security. Thirteen
million children have lost the love and care of one or
both of their parents. Perhaps worst of all, children
affected by HIV/AIDS are robbed of the right to
innocence because they are subjected to stigmatization
and discrimination. And when children are so
stigmatized, it is up to us, the adults, to intervene.

That is why, two days ago, on World Red Cross
and Red Crescent Day, the International Federation,
along with the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS and the Global Network of People Living
with AIDS, launched a global action to reduce
HIV/AIDS-related stigmatization and discrimination.
Across the world, from Azerbaijan to Zimbabwe,
our 97 million members and volunteers are helping
pass on the truth about AIDS, breaking down stigma,
confronting discrimination, opening eyes and opening
minds.
Ensuring that the rights of children become a
reality requires a global political commitment. The
International Federation calls on Governments fully to
endorse the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS,
signed last June by the leaders of the 189 States
Members of the United Nations.
We call on Governments to put the care and
protection of children at the forefront of their policies,
their legislation and their development plans. As
signatories of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, they have made a commitment to ensure that
children’s rights are not compromised. We in the Red
Cross and Red Crescent movement are prepared to
collaborate with them and with other concerned actors
in society to ensure essential care, protection and
education for all the world’s children.
We in the International Federation believe that
collaborating with others is essential in combating the
HIV/AIDS pandemic, and we have taken action to
strengthen these collaborations. At the 106th meeting
of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) last September,
through resolutions adopted, the IPU gave recognition
to the contribution of Red Cross and Red Crescent
volunteers to turning back the tide of HIV/AIDS. They
urged States to ensure that all necessary measures are
taken to protect children against all forms of
discrimination.
We believe that the goals of the Global Action for
Children agenda — promoting healthy lives, providing
quality education, protecting children from abuse,
exploitation
and
violence,
and
combating
HIV/AIDS — are achievable within the global
community.
By harnessing the leadership of Governments to
the power of humanity of the International Red Cross

67

A/S-27/PV.6

and Red Crescent movement, we can make a
difference. The novelist Graham Greene put it well:
“There is always one moment in childhood when
the door opens and lets the future in”. (The Power
and the Glory)
Please let that moment be now.
The President: I give the floor to Mrs. Ndioro
Ndiaye, Deputy Director-General of the International
Organization for Migration.
Mrs. Ndiaye (International Organization for
Migration) (spoke in French): It is a distinct privilege
for me to address this General Assembly special
session on children on behalf of the International
Organization for Migration (IOM). For an international
humanitarian organization dealing with vulnerable
populations, there is no more heart-rending subject
than that of the abuse and exploitation — in all of their
tawdry manifestations — of children, the most
vulnerable victims.
This is a subject close to my heart, but I will limit
my comments to two tragic situations that affect the
daily lives of these children: that of children who are
victims of war and conflict, and that of children who
are victims of trafficking.
In countries involved in armed conflict, millions
of children are deliberately targeted, and millions more
are either transformed into soldiers or forced to serve
the combatants. During periods of strife, children are
the first victims of forced displacement, malnutrition,
disease and sexual violence. This is something that
IOM always keeps in mind when developing and
carrying
out
post-conflict
interventions
and
demobilization programmes.
Allow me to cite a few examples.
In its demobilization activities in Angola between
1994 and 1996, IOM placed special emphasis on the
needs of child soldiers, assisting hundreds of minors
from the Angolan armed forces and almost 5,000 child
combatants from UNITA to return home safely and to
reintegrate into civilian society. In Cambodia, from
1994 on, IOM has been coordinating the psychosocial
rehabilitation of children and adolescents in rural
communities with high concentrations of internally
displaced persons who have been exposed to intense
civil strife over the past two decades.

68

In Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Kosovo, IOM
arranged the evacuation of children for medical
treatment abroad when health care was unavailable
locally. More recently, in Colombia, IOM has been
continuing its efforts to improve and expand existing
local infrastructures and to set up a decentralized
network of organizations to respond to the needs of
recently demobilized child soldiers.
In brief, IOM assists children in armed conflict
through the provision of emergency relief assistance to
demobilized child combatants and their families,
training and access to proper health care. IOM arranges
for the voluntary return of children to their families —
especially war-affected children — in coordination
with various governmental and non-governmental
partners. IOM also helps in the development and
implementation of post-conflict support programmes
through, for instance, psychosocial rehabilitation
services.
Although progress has been made, and there are
some encouraging signs that more effective measures
have been taken at the local, regional and international
levels to help children in armed conflict, it is clear that
much remains to be done.
Allow me now to turn briefly to the issue of
children as victims of trafficking. As in all forms of
trafficking of human beings, economics is the primary
cause of the trafficking of children. This trafficking has
many objectives. Children are trafficked for labour, for
participation in armed conflicts, for adoption, marriage,
and sexual exploitation. The basic human rights of
trafficked children are thus violated daily, and they live
in virtual bondage.
The exact number of trafficked people remains
unknown. In Asia alone, it is estimated that over the
past 30 years, 30 million women and children have
been trafficked for sexual exploitation. In Guatemala,
according to UNICEF estimates, some 1,000 to 1,500
babies are trafficked abroad every year for adoption by
foreign couples in North America and Europe. Asian
and Eastern European girls as young as 13 are
trafficked as “mail-order brides”. In West and Central
Africa, large numbers of children are trafficked for
domestic work, sexual exploitation, to work in shops or
on farms, or to be scavengers or prostitutes.
IOM’s objective is to reduce trafficking in
migrants, and in children in particular, and to protect

A/S-27/PV.6

the rights of those who are its victims. Our actions
focus on prevention and on assistance.
To help prevent trafficking, IOM organizes
seminars and international dialogues. Research is
conducted, and the results are widely disseminated.
IOM also provides training to increase the capacity of
governmental and other institutions to counteract
trafficking and to harmonize the necessary policies to
combat this scourge.
In the area of assistance, IOM also provides
direct assistance as well as legal and medical
counselling to trafficked children in transit and
receiving countries. We also offer voluntary return and
reintegration assistance that is tailored to the individual
situation of the children. Moreover, support solutions
for children who cannot go back to their own families
are identified.
Since today we are saying that investing in
children is the only way we can ensure the peace,
stability, security, democracy and sustainable
development of tomorrow, let us all work to see that
the world’s children can live in dignity, health and
happiness, to guarantee their — and our — tomorrow.
The President: I give the floor to Her Excellency
Sila González Calderón, Chairperson of the Observer
Delegation of Puerto Rico.
Mrs. González Calderón (Puerto Rico) (spoke in
Spanish): Any country that genuinely aspires to the
progress and development of its society understands
the need of producing complete individuals, citizens
capable of creating a better life for themselves and for
others and capable of creating a future and modernity
for their fellow citizens. Sustainable human
development, which includes the social, economic,
political, cultural and environmental aspects of human
potential, is undoubtedly one of the greatest priorities
of any society aspiring to progress. Certainly, no stage
is more vulnerable and crucial in the comprehensive
development of a human being than childhood and
adolescence, during which the foundations of the future
individual are formed, as is his or her ability to become
a complete human being and builder of a better society.
Governments
and
international
financial
institutions contributing to that process have
recognized that spending on human development is a
sound investment, creating the conditions necessary for
each individual’s full enjoyment of his or her rights as

a human being. The process therefore involves much
more than merely satisfying the most basic needs; it
includes health, education, work and protection from
abuse. It also involves efforts for prevention and for
instilling the basic values and principles guiding
behaviour and life in free and democratic societies.
One of the principles of the Constitution of the
Free Associated State of Puerto Rico is to ensure the
human rights of each individual in our society. The
Charter of Rights states quite clearly that human
dignity is inviolable and that all individuals are equal
before the law. It also declares that there shall be no
discrimination for reasons of race, colour, sex, birth,
place of origin or social condition, nor because of one’s
religious or political beliefs. It further states that both
legislation and the public education system shall
embody those principles of fundamental human
equality.
Nevertheless, the ongoing violation of those
rights occurring in some sectors of our society has
made it necessary to adopt greater legal safeguards to
guarantee respect for and protection of the basic rights
of childhood. The inability of the Free Associated State
of Puerto Rico to ratify or sign international
agreements such as the Convention on the Rights of the
Child has led our government to use other mechanisms
to incorporate those rights into our legislation.
As part of those initiatives, the Charter of the
Rights of the Child was approved in 1998, and the
Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Minors, their
Fathers, Mothers or Tutors was approved in 2000.
Complementing each other, the two acts of legislation
establish the State’s responsibility to protect minors
against all forms of abuse, mistreatment or physical,
sexual or emotional violence by family members, tutors
or any other person in a position of responsibility. Such
protection
includes
the
development
and
implementation of effective programmes for prevention
and treatment, as well as social programmes giving
special attention to this problem.
The current administration of the Free Associated
State of Puerto Rico is conscious of our children’s need
for protection and care. That is why, in response to
those necessities, the most important sections of the
national budget are those of social welfare, education
and health.
Much remains to be done. The reality of the
situation overwhelms us with tragic news of children

69

A/S-27/PV.6

caught up in regrettable circumstances that weaken our
society and do not do justice to us as a people and as
human beings. The current administration of the Free
Associated State of Puerto Rico is committed to
improving the situation of children in all its aspects,
including education, the lack of supervision, abuse,
mistreatment, the loss of values and the lack of
awareness of one’s rights and the rights of others. The
youth not only of Puerto Rico but of most nations
represented here urgently require greater attention to
the circumstances they face in modern life. Though
modern life has brought a great number of innovations
and so-called material progress, it has also brought
about a number of conditions directly affecting the
education and future social behaviour of our young
people.
It is certainly a commitment of the State to
provide basic security for our young people. However,
it is undoubtedly also up to the families — particularly
the fathers and mothers of young people, who are an
active part of civil society — to organize themselves,
to watch out for themselves and for the State and to
offer their children a basic foundation in social
behaviour. The Free Associated State of Puerto Rico
adheres to the principles discussed by the Assembly on
the protection of children’s human rights. It joins other
nations in condemning any entity, whether public or
private, that violates those rights. Puerto Ricans are
ready to wage this battle.
The President: I give the floor to Mrs. Najma
Akbarali Heptulla, President of the Council of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union.
Mrs. Heptulla (Council of the InterParliamentary Union): I am pleased to have this
opportunity to address the special session of the
General Assembly on children on behalf of the InterParliamentary Union (IPU), a union of 140 parliaments
of the democratic world — with which, Mr. President,
you were very closely associated.
IPU’s commitment to the well-being of children
and protection of their rights has been longstanding.
We have spoken out against violence, child exploitation
and the scourge of AIDS and have spoken in favour of
financing education, health and other programmes for
the development of children.
The IPU has strongly supported the ratification
and implementation of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. We have also consistently encouraged

70

parliamentary action to implement the Plan of Action
of the World Summit for Children.
At its conference in Ouagadougou in September
2001, the Inter-Parliamentary Union issued a
comprehensive resolution recognizing the need for
protecting and caring for children, the driving force of
future society, and reaffirming our support for the
objectives of this special session. This resolution
provided a blueprint for parliamentarians everywhere
to take decisive action in support of children and
formed the basis for our discussion in the
parliamentary forum that the United Nations Children’s
Fund and IPU jointly organized on 9 May here at the
United Nations, when 13 critical areas were discussed.
The IPU mobilized parliaments and their
members. More than 200 members of Parliament from
over 70 countries participated in that event. Their
interventions
focused
on
follow-up
and
implementation,
in
other
words:
action.
Parliamentarians listened to the children’s point of
view.
Parliaments and their members have a very
special responsibility. We ratify international
conventions and agreements. We legislate, adopt
budgets and allocate funds. We oversee the action of
Governments and are in constant contact with the
people so that we can express their views. We also
build popular support for action, both nationally and
internationally. It is therefore only natural that many of
the suggestions made focused on what we members of
parliament can do to build a world fit for children. I
will share some of them with you in the short time at
my disposal.
Legislation should take a rights-based approach
to addressing children’s issues. The rights of the child
should be enshrined in every national constitution.
There is also a need for fundamental laws relating to
children. The children who participated in the IPU
meeting asked parliamentarians to consult them
whenever such laws are being made.
In addition, we recommend a children’s rights
audit of all legislation that we pass to ensure that we
know how it will affect children and that it will affect
them in a positive way. We should take a similar
approach to the national budget. The budget is more
than a financial document; it is a major social policy
document. We need to know how the budget affects
children, directly and indirectly. We believe that can be

A/S-27/PV.6

achieved by analyzing the budget from a children’s
rights perspective.
The overall institutional framework could also be
improved. Recommendations were made to establish a
commission or an ombudsman for children who would
report to the parliament. Other proposals included
establishing a parliamentary committee with the
specific mandate of addressing children’s issues.
Moreover, Governments should be invited — some say
obliged — to make an annual report to the parliament
on its policies, programmes and actions with regard to
children. The parliament should hold an annual debate
on the issue, during which it would also examine the
report.
As I said earlier, those were only the highlights of
proposals from the parliamentary meeting of this
special session. They call for actions, not just words. In
the coming months, the Inter-Parliamentary Union and
UNICEF will work towards a joint strategy to mobilize
further parliamentary support for children. We
parliamentarians will remain committed to ensuring a
world fit for children, and we pledge to do so. But I
hope that the commitments made here by world leaders
will be implemented and will not remain mere words,
and that we, the parliamentarians, will pursue that goal
in our Governments and in our parliaments, back home
in our respective countries. That is my commitment on
behalf of the representatives of 140 parliaments who
met with great resolve in Burkina Faso last September.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms.
Mayerly Sánchez of the Hague Appeal for Peace.
Ms. Sánchez (Hague Appeal for Peace) (spoke in
Spanish): What a joy and what a great honour to be
here at this session today.
My name is Mayerly Sánchez. I come from
Colombia, a land of excellent landscapes, animals,
fruits and varied climates — a beautiful country that
has been affected and destroyed by the situations of
violence that we have had to confront for more than 50
years.
All of us young people who participated in the
Children’s Forum thank the Assembly for giving us the
opportunity to share our experiences. Thanks to that
opportunity, we noticed that many adults are listening
to us and that although our voices are few, they have
echoed in the hearts and in the lives of those present
here.

This opportunity given to us for our participation
at the United Nations leads me to believe that the child
representatives of the world have known how to benefit
from it. That will be reflected in the results we have
presented here. This has not been a parade or a game,
as is thought by people who do not trust us and who
might cover their ears at the sound of our voices. Our
work was reflected in the faces of all the children
participating, because it was not only that our voices
were listened to, but that the ideas came from various
countries, from all the children who are afraid, who
suffer hunger, who are uneducated, who have been
marked by violence. We had to express and to reflect
the cries of all the children who do not understand why
there is so much pain in the world.
There are many of us children who were born into
and witnessed the most terrible situations of violence,
poverty and lack of affection, but that has not led us to
give up or to join groups that do harm to the world. We
continue to work on behalf of peace and for our rights,
because we are sure that it is we who can build the
paths whereby the world can detach itself from the
great cords of evil and hatred. After that happens,
violence will sleep so deeply that it will never wake
again, or that the next morning the people who have
done wrong will reflect on all their bad deeds and will
get up ready to make amends for their errors and to
work so that such horrible things will not happen again.
Colombia’s national movement of children for
peace is already cutting the first strands of that great
cord in our country. We are making children’s rights
known so that we will know when our rights are being
violated and will ensure that they are respected,
without forgetting our own duties. We are creating
awareness and seeking the participation of children and
of adults, working with our families, our churches, our
schools, our communities and our institutions. Out of
those, solutions are coming from people who have
directly experienced conflict and do not want others to
experience the hardships that they have suffered.
The adults who still do not believe in us cannot
continue to cover their ears while they cover children’s
mouths, because now there are people like those here
participating in this session, who can use authority to
lead the world in a better way and can help our dreams
to flourish in reality. On behalf of all the world’s
children, we should like to thank the adults who are in
this Hall today for making us aware that their ears and
their hearts were opened to us. We thank them because

71

A/S-27/PV.6

they said yes to children and because we know that
from now on, we will be able to work hand in hand
with them to change the world so that children’s tears
will not be ones of sadness or pain, but of happiness,
because they will feel supported by people who truly
appreciate, respect and believe in them. Thank you for
believing in children.

the help of the Supreme Court of India, we rescued her
family and 27 others, and brought them to my office,
her health suddenly deteriorated and she collapsed. I
cannot forget her last words. She said to her mother,
“Mum, I want to live”. Her poor mother had to tell her,
“No, my child, the world is too cruel for you. I cannot
save you”.

The President: I now give the floor to Mr.
Kailash Satyarthi of the South Asian Coalition on
Child Servitude.

The world is not fit for such children, not because
Gulabo and other children are sinners, but because the
ruling elites, with their vested interests, have
monopolized all of the opportunities and deliberately
left no space for the world’s poor children.

Mr. Satyarthi (South Asian Coalition on Child
Servitude): In a few minutes’ time, we shall adopt a
new document to make the world fit for children.
But I should like to say that the world has never
been unfit for the children of kings and queens and of
those who had control over power and wealth for ages.
The world has never been unfit for the people and the
children who have been in the mainstream of life and
of education. The world was always fit for the children
in our holy teachings. Jesus said, “Suffer the little
children to come unto me”. The Vedas proclaimed that
children are sacred souls, and Islam taught us to see the
glow of God in the face of an innocent child. I do not
think that the world is too bad for the children of most
of us who are present here.
It is not fit, however, for those millions of
children of a lesser god who are bought and sold like
animals, confined to mines and brick kilns as slaves,
locked inside factories and houses, trafficked for
domestic labour, or forced into beggary, where
sometimes their tiny bodies are mutilated to gain
greater sympathy. Nor is it fit for those who are victims
of armed conflict, ethnic violence or developmentrelated displacement.
It is not fit for the young girls trapped in the flesh
trade or for the kids who are tied down on the backs of
camels as jockeys in some gulf countries so that, when
the children cry out loudly, the camels run faster,
thereby making the master happy. It is not fit for those
who are denied basic education or compelled to leave
school due to poverty.
The world was not fit for a 14-year-old girl,
Gulabo, who died in my lap a couple of years ago. She
was born and brought up in bonded labour. Her family
and others had to work day in and day out, without
wages, at a brick kiln. Eventually, she began to suffer
from malnutrition and severe tuberculosis. When, with

72

Freedom and learning are the birthright of every
human being. Any activity that takes away those rights
is a crime against nature and humanity. If a child is
compelled to work at the cost of her or his freedom and
education — for whatever reason — it brings shame on
those who exploit the child, and greater shame on those
who offer only nice words and empty promises.
The year 2002 will be a historic year for the
world’s children if we are simply honest with them.
This is the year when more than 100 Governments,
which have signed the International Labour
Organization Convention to ban the worst forms of
child labour, must show what results they have
achieved in combating child slavery, bonded labour,
prostitution and the engagement of children in
hazardous work. This is the year when each country
must draw up a concrete and time-bound national
action plan to ensure education for all, as agreed in
Dakar in 2000. This is also the year when the wealthier,
developed countries must keep their promises to
mobilize additional resources for education.
I strongly recommend that the world community
take five steps: end child labour and provide free,
quality education for all, as the key to social justice,
equity and combating poverty; ensure for the poor a
greater share of the world’s income; engage in global
trade with fairness; work towards sustainable
development to sustain humanity; and promote peace,
not as a privilege, but as everyone’s right.
We in the Global March Against Child Labour
have been campaigning and demanding that at least 0.1
per cent of the gross domestic product of the rich
countries be devoted to the cause of children. That
meagre amount adds up to $25 billion to $30 billion a
year — a sum which is more than sufficient to make
this word fit for children.

A/S-27/PV.6

Last month, the world’s finance and development
ministers endorsed an Education for All (EFA) action
plan to mobilize the additional resources needed to
provide every child with a free, quality education. We
demand that the leaders of the North unite behind that
plan, rather than adopting a fragmented approach,
imposing conditions or finding new excuses. We
commend the Governments of the Netherlands,
Germany, Britain and Norway, and the World Bank, for
their announcement that they will back the EFA action
plan, and we appreciate the commitment of Canada and
the United States to increase aid for education. We look
with great expectation to President Bush, who has
shown great support for education in the domestic
context, to take the lead on education at the
forthcoming Group of Eight (G8) summit.
Finally, I would like to say that although,
unfortunately, the leaders of the North are not here
today, we know that they will be in Canada next month,
at the G8 summit. We in civil society will follow them.
The children of the South will also be watching them
carefully. The success of the G8 summit will depend
not on promises and words, but on concrete figures for
additional resources for education.
I am not prepared to believe that the world is so
poor that it cannot ensure freedom and education for its
children. As little as 25 cents for every $1,000 of
global income — the equivalent of 4 days of military
spending — can help in making this world fit for every
child. What we need is the global political will. What
we demand is action — action today, action now.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms.
Christiana Thorpe of the Forum for African Women
Educationalists.
Ms. Thorpe (Forum for African Women
Educationalists): After the war in my country, Sierra
Leone, the Global Movement for Children campaign
there chose the seventh element of the 10-point rallying
cry as its clarion call: educate every child.
Since we came here, we have learned that in most
of the 94 million pledges signed to say “Yes” for
children, the demand to educate every child was
paramount. In 1990, education for all — children,
adults, male and female — was declared a Summit
goal. Yet 12 years on, we are still talking about over
100 million children of primary-school age not being in
school. Some 39 per cent of these children are in subSaharan Africa, 38 per cent in South Asia; 53 per cent

are girls and 47 per cent are boys. The relationship
between gender and economic disparity speaks for
itself.
The 2000 World Education Forum in Dakar,
Senegal, left us with the Dakar Framework for Action,
in which Governments and non-governmental
organizations pledged to meet our collective
commitments for the education of our children. The
sub-Saharan regional Framework for Action included,
inter alia, the need to pay special attention to street and
working children, nomadic communities, children in
remote regions and areas of conflict, minority groups,
HIV/AIDS orphans, child prisoners and disabled
children.
My country has just come through 10 years of
armed conflict, and I would like to share with the
Assembly a couple of lessons that we learned from our
children during the conflict. After the coup of 25 May
1997, thousands of us found ourselves in the
neighbouring Republic of Guinea, where we were to
become unregistered refugees for the next 10 months.
The Forum of African Women Educationalists
(FAWE) organized a non-formal education programme
for our children, in which 3,392 children registered.
They all displayed one characteristic syndrome:
violence. By then the war was only five years old, and
already at that stage our children had imbibed a culture
of violence. Yes, violence does beget violence. It
dawned on us that we needed to put in place, as a
matter of urgency, a strategic plan and systematic
programme on education for a culture of peace. That
was the first lesson we learned, and now that the guns
are silent it is time to effect such a programme.
However there is a major constraint. This
morning, 35,310 children took our national primary
school examinations. The age range of those children
was from 10 to 17 years. Under normal circumstances
that exam is taken by 12-year-olds, but we have a
surplus of 18,000 children who, because of the war,
have had no access to the exam before now. Come the
new school year, in September 2002, 50 per cent of
those children will not get into school simply because
there are no schools. The schools are destroyed and
need to be rebuilt. I am saying that as many as 17,000
boys and girls will be out of school six months from
now. Will that constitute a foundation for sustainable
peace? The Sierra Leone chapter of the Global
Movement for Children is focusing on education, and

73

A/S-27/PV.6

the non-governmental organizations concerned are very
worried about this phenomenon.
The second lesson I would like to share has to do
with girl child combatants and rape victims. I just want
to tell the story of Zainab, who said the following.
“I was among the school children captured
by the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) in
1995. When we were captured, we were all taken
to a remote base. Then, I was 15 years old and a
virgin. I was gang-raped the very night I was
captured, as an initiation to the RUF community.
We spent three months in military training in the
hills there. We were drugged whenever we were
to go on mission. On coming back to the base,
three particular rebels would ask me for sex. If I
dared refuse, I would be forced at gunpoint and
gang-raped. They did not want us to escape and
join our relatives. They were so cruel to us
then — I mean, to most of the girls. I seized the
opportunity to escape when we attacked Freetown
in January 1999. By then I was eight months
pregnant. Barely two months after my escape, I
delivered twins, two boys.”
Since March 1999, FAWE has worked with 725
girls of between the ages of 12 to 18 years. Their
educational needs are enormous: basic education,
reproductive health education and motherhood skills.
But, above all, they need training in sustainable
livelihood skills for self-reliance.
The end of conflict is not synonymous with
attaining peace. Sustainable peace must be built on a
bedrock of quality basic education for all our children,
no matter the circumstances in which they find
themselves.
The President: I call now on the Reverend
Takeyasu Miyamoto, President of the Arigatou
Foundation.
Mr. Miyamoto (Arigatou Foundation) (spoke in
Japanese; English text furnished by the speaker): I
thank the General Assembly for giving me this
opportunity to speak today on the role of people of
faith in building a world that is truly fit for children.
With religious people from around the world, the
Arigatou Foundation inaugurated the Global Network
of Religions for Children (GNRC) to promote interreligious cooperation for the well-being of children.
The statement adopted by the first GNRC forum began

74

with the words of the poet Rabindranath Tagore:
“Every child born comes with a message that God has
not yet despaired of humankind.”
The statement included the conviction that each
child bears in her or his very being the hope and
promise of the future, as well as remorse over the fact
that religious people have often failed to put into
practice the deepest insights of their traditions. In that
statement we also offered concrete proposals for action
for children.
The child has a local context. But in the global
dimension it is the child who sustains our hopes and
keeps alive the potential for peace. But the horrors of
last September and the events that have followed would
reject the precious future of the child. Indeed, they
have threatened the very foundation of human dignity.
The current deterioration of our children’s environment
is a warning to all the Earth.
With grave and heartfelt concern, we, the GNRC,
commit ourselves to pursuing three courses of action.
First, we will establish a council on global ethics
education for children, consisting of people of faith,
educators and others to work in cooperation with the
United Nations to help children develop ethical values,
faith in the divine and esteem for people of different
religions and civilizations. Secondly, we will further
strengthen our efforts to eradicate poverty, the root
cause of the deteriorating environment that children
face, giving attention not only to external causes but
also to those that stem from the human heart. Thirdly,
we will do our utmost to generate a universal moral
force for the implementation of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and to mobilize all people in the
Global Movement for Children.
As people of faith, we see the divine presence in
every person. It is our obligation to encourage each
person to realize the highest potential of the human
heart. This divine presence is the eternal wellspring of
the dignity of every child and of everyone of us. In
conclusion, I would like to repeat, on behalf of the
GNRC, our profound commitment to devote ourselves
to bringing about, through prayer and practice, this
global, silent spiritual revolution for the future of
children.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Mary
Diaz of the Non-Governmental Organizations
Committee on UNICEF.

A/S-27/PV.6

Ms. Diaz (Non-Governmental Organizations
Committee on UNICEF): My name is Mary Diaz and I
am Executive Director of the Women’s Commission for
Refugee Women and Children. I am also the Co-chair
of the Non-Governmental Organizations (NGO)
Steering Group of the NGO Committee on UNICEF. I
am speaking here this evening on behalf of the
Committee.
More than 1,700 representatives from nongovernmental organizations have attended this week’s
special session. They are from more than 116 different
countries; nearly half are from the developing world.
This is a big difference from the World Summit for
Children, when very few NGOs were invited to listen.
This General Assembly special session is different; we
think we have broken a record.
The United Nations has recognized the important
role that civil society organizations play. The presence
and participation of children invigorates our work. It
affirms the call made in the Convention on the Rights
of the Child for children’s participation. In partnership
with Governments, United Nations agencies and others,
non-governmental
organizations
provide
vital
services — including health care, education and
protection. Perhaps even more importantly, NGOs are
critical to monitoring and advocacy for social and legal
reforms promoting equality, freedom and justice.
We are able to reach the millions on the margins
and provide much-needed assistance to the
underserved. Many of the lifesaving achievements for
children over the last decade have been accomplished
in partnership with NGOs. In many ways great and
small, we are responsible for changing the world for
children.
For example, NGOs have led the work to rid the
world of landmines. This is thanks to the dedication
and commitment of the International Campaign to Ban
Landmines, a network of more than 1,300 NGOs in 90
countries. Just five years after it was founded, 122
countries signed a treaty to ban the use, production,
stockpiling and transfer of anti-personnel mines. To
date, 122 countries have ratified the mine-ban treaty.
The Global March against Child Labour, the
Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers, the Child
Rights Caucus, the Global Health Council, the Global
Movement for Children, the new Watchlist on Children
and Armed Conflict — these are just a few of the NGO

groups linking with others to provide leadership on
issues affecting children.
NGOs helped found the United Nations and are
mentioned in its Charter. They are mentioned also in
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. NGOs
embraced the idea of the Convention and did not rest
until it became a reality. The NGO community had
hoped that the special session final document would be
a manifesto for the further implementation of the
Convention. Unfortunately, these efforts have not been
wholly successful. What message does this send to
children about the world’s commitment to child rights?
NGOs will continue to work to achieve our
common goals, such as attaining equality for girls and
women, protecting children against HIV/AIDS, ending
the exploitation of children, and protecting them from
war and other violence. We are committed to working
together to monitor national plans of action as well as
the commitments made here. I hope participants have
had an opportunity to see the NGO Committee’s
Commitment Chart outlining Government, United
Nations and NGO pledges during this special session.
NGOs did have limited access to the negotiation
process. Governments must recognize that civil society
needs to be present and consulted. Citizens are asked to
participate in building strong societies and to hold their
Governments accountable. In order to do that, we must
have access to policy-making work and negotiations
such as the ones at this session.
NGOs have helped give life to the idea of an
international community. It is vital to respect and
defend their work and to remain vigilant when that
work is threatened. We will continue to use information
technology as well as meetings like this one to build
networks and coalitions. Our partnerships with each
other create powerful coalitions that no government
can ignore.
The last decade has shown the great things that
civil society can contribute. Hundreds of children this
week are working on, and learning how to be guardians
of, democracy and good governance. We look forward
to continuing to work with all present and to break the
boundaries of what we can achieve together for
children worldwide.
The President: I give the floor to Mr. Burkhard
Gnarig of Save the Children Alliance.

75

A/S-27/PV.6

Mr. Gnarig (Save the Children Alliance): Over
the last decade considerable progress has been made in
advancing the rights of millions of children around the
world. These advances mean that many more children
than ever before do not have to go to bed hungry, do
not need to miss school in order to help make ends
meet at home, and do not need to suffer ill health and
disease.
So it is right at this time, at the first-ever United
Nations special session devoted to children, to
highlight the fact that progress for children is not only
a possibility, it is a reality — a reality that must be
built on and strengthened, given the huge challenges
that remain. For despite the improvements made, the
balance sheet remains unjustly weighted against
children.
But what are the key priorities for global action to
create a world fit for children? For Save the Children
and other civil society groups, the principles and
standards of the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of the Child must be upheld and applied
rigorously. The Convention must act as the cornerstone
for all follow-up action from the special session at all
levels. It is essential that all future policies and
strategies be based on the recognition of children as
holders of rights, as participants and social actors — as
part of the solution to the challenges that they face, not
part of the problem.
This means in practice that, first, the 21 goals of
the outcome document are important practical steps
towards realizing children’s rights in key areas of
children’s lives. However, these goals will not be
achieved unless the global community supports them
with conviction, sustained political will and the
necessary resources.
Secondly, the protection and enjoyment of
children’s rights must be properly integrated into trade
negotiations and other economic policy-making that
affects children’s lives. We need to recognize that all
economic policies — however distant they seem from
children — have an impact on them, whether for good
or ill.
Thirdly, poorer countries must be guaranteed the
additional resources to realize children’s rights, for
example, through faster and deeper debt relief and
high-quality development assistance. Such resources
should be particularly focused on those countries that
are prepared to use them to promote and fulfil

76

children’s rights. Recent offers of significant increases
in official development assistance are welcome but do
not come close to the estimated $70 billion required to
reach the goals in health and education alone.
Fourthly, long-term investments in basic services
must be prioritized to provide universal, quality health
and education systems which give every child the
possibility of reaching his or her full potential.
Protecting children’s rights should be a front-line
concern during emergencies.
Fifthly, the process of involving children and
listening to their needs must become institutionalized
in public policy-making and programme delivery.
Children and young people must become a central
resource in decision-making on issues which have an
impact on their lives. The preparatory process for the
special session has shown what can be achieved with
commitment and goodwill. Save the Children has been
proud to play a leading role in supporting the
involvement of children and young people in the
special session process and will continue to support the
active participation of children in the development,
implementation
and
monitoring
of
national
programmes of action in the coming years.
Finally, the Committee on the Rights of the Child
should be strengthened to enable it to perform its role
more effectively. We urge States parties rapidly to
authorize the expansion of the Committee and to
provide it with resources that are commensurate with
the significance of the task with which it has been
charged.
In conclusion, the best route for dramatically
transforming the situation faced by children is through
the consistent application of children’s rights norms
and standards for all children, at all times and in all
places. To do that, the plans of action for children to be
developed at the national level after this special session
will need to become practical implementation
strategies for the Convention during the next decade.
They will also provide a tool through which children
themselves can play an active part in building more
child-friendly societies.
The President: I now give the floor to Mrs.
Marjorie Kabuya of the Christian Children’s Fund.
Mrs. Kabuya (Christian Children’s Fund): My
name is Marjorie Kabuya, and it is a great honour for
me to address this special session on children on behalf

A/S-27/PV.6

of the Christian Children’s Fund and other nongovernmental organizations that work for children and
families affected by HIV/AIDS.

Governments must not wait until more people die
before recognizing this pandemic as one of the most
urgent crises of our time.

In the short time that is available to me, I will
focus my attention on the greatest threat to the gains
made thus far in the survival, development, protection
and participation of children. It is the threat of
HIV/AIDS, especially in Africa. Statistics which
appear daily in the media do not adequately convey the
human tragedy at the individual and community levels
that this epidemic has created. Therefore, I have chosen
to explain it through Baraka’s story.

Secondly, we must redefine HIV/AIDS as a
problem of young people, especially adolescent girls.
The spread and impact of HIV/AIDS are
interconnected with other fundamental problems of
development. Governments must recommit themselves
to serious and sustainable actions to address the issues
of poverty, reducing and preventing conflicts — which
cost a lot of money — and improving the status of
women. Those issues must be addressed in a holistic
and integrated manner which includes children’s
opinions and contributions. We must invest in children,
since they are the foundation of sustainable
development. Providing for children must be
prioritized as a political issue and must be seen as
investing in the basis of future economic and social
development.

Baraka is a 7-year-old girl in a rural project in
Kenya. She is sitting in a classroom where the
assignment is, “Draw your community today, and then
draw your community 10 years from now”. In her first
drawing, she draws herself, her parents, children
playing outside, even a few cows and goats. In her
second drawing, projecting 10 years later, she draws
herself and some other children, but there is not a
single adult in the picture. When a social worker asks
her why there are no adults in the picture, she says,
“They are all dead”.
It is now 10 years later, and Baraka’s picture has
become a reality for her. She dropped out of school to
care for her sick parents. She was a caregiver without
information, without skills and without supplies. She is
now the head of her family of four siblings. Often, they
have neither food nor the money to buy it. The three
children are malnourished, and their attendance in
school is erratic. They are stigmatized, they are
excluded from social activities, and they are referred to
as AIDS orphans. In catering for them, she is exposed
to abuse, to exploitation and to hazardous labour. She
herself is in danger of being infected.
What can Governments, in partnership with nongovernmental organizations and other interest groups,
do to improve this situation? I will mention three
things. First, HIV is preventable. We must prevent new
infections. HIV/AIDS knows no borders. We call upon
all Governments to declare HIV a disaster, to prioritize
it and to make specific commitments and allocate funds
to prevention efforts. In determining their prevention
approaches, Governments must set aside their own
political agendas and philosophies and subordinate
them to the best interest of children. The lesson of
Africa must be learned by other parts of the world —
Latin America, Asia, Central Europe and others.

Thirdly, we must support AIDS orphans. Baraka
and her siblings are now in danger of losing their home
and their land to their uncle, who claims ownership
because of the customary inheritance system. Where
can she go for help? Governments must make those
who are infected and affected by AIDS a priority for
policy and legal protection. Children must be protected
from abuse, neglect, disinheritance and premature
withdrawal from school through child-friendly and
enforceable laws and through the provision of
education on the legal rights of children to
communities. There is a need to provide legal
assistance to children in property disputes or to modify
dispute resolution procedures so that reliance on legal
assistance becomes unnecessary. Following the
example of community health as a response to a lack of
doctors, we now need an equivalent and appropriate
response to a lack of lawyers.
Fourthly, as we enter the third decade of the
pandemic, we call upon Governments and nongovernmental organizations to make commitments to
identify, develop, support and scale up successful
prevention strategies and care models. Governments,
non-governmental organizations and other donors must
focus more funding on building the capacity of
communities to handle the problems of Baraka and of
her peers. The extended family structure should be
assisted, and where it is overwhelmed, alternatives
need to be supported. For example, the Christian
Children’s Fund is supporting neighbourhood groups

77

A/S-27/PV.6

that are helping Baraka and her siblings to keep their
home, to stay together as a family and to remain in
school. Innovative strategies and models need to be
documented, replicated and shared as widely and as
quickly as possible. The time for action is now. We
have discussed the problem; we know the magnitude of
the problem, and we must not allow it to prevent us
from acting. We need to act now on what we know.
In conclusion, the leaders represented here today,
and all other adults, are responsible for addressing the
crisis of hope represented in Baraka’s picture. We
appeal to all participants, to all interest groups and to
all Governments to make commitments and to allocate
funds and people to those commitments so that children
can again believe that they can live longer and
healthier lives and can have better chances in life than
their parents did. Let us put more people and more
hope in Baraka’s picture.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms.
Marija-Dubravka Uzelac of the Mali Korak Centre for
the Culture of Peace and Non-Violence.
Ms. Uzelac (Mali Korak Centre for the Culture of
Peace and Non-Violence): It is a privilege for me to
address this special session of the General Assembly
on behalf of non-governmental organizations
passionately and devotedly working at the grassroots
level on children’s rights.
I would like to begin with the following pledge:
there shall be no more children in armed conflict;
peace is every child’s right. This special session of the
General Assembly on children presents an opportunity
for world leaders, agencies and civil society actors to
mobilize all their efforts to create a world with
children. That means conditions that will enable all of
our children to live a full and dignified life.
At the beginning of the twentieth century, legal
efforts were made to protect children in wartime. At
the end of twentieth century in Europe, in the region of
the former Yugoslavia, as the consequence of war
activities, children’s rights were violated in disastrous
proportions. Children were killed, wounded, forcibly
displaced or separated from their families. It is
assumed that 10,000 unaccompanied refugee children
from Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina were either
forcibly displaced or sent outside war zones by their
parents in order to save their lives.

78

Conflicts throughout the world have caused
unacceptable suffering to children. Around the world,
there are tens of thousands of children who, because of
wars, are denied their rights to life, safety and
education. War destroys everything: our homes, our
families, our schools, our communities, our bodies and
our physical and mental well-being. War destroys
childhood. War-affected children are at greater risk of
growing into a generation of adults who are more
committed to violence than to peace. One of the tragic
impacts of war in the region of the former Yugoslavia
was the distortion of values. The culture of peace had
turned into a culture of war.
World leaders have made strong commitments to
their children’s well-being. They must now move
beyond those promises to concrete actions. It is as the
Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF) has said: “Investing in children is
investing in a more prosperous and stable world”. Or,
as Graça Machel said, “children should be considered
‘the zones of peace’”. Or, as a 16-year-old girl, one of
the 4,000 unaccompanied refugee children who fled
from Bosnia and Herzegovina and found refuge in
Croatia, said, “I am not a prophet. I can’t foresee the
future, but I hope for a future without war, illness,
hunger and powerlessness”. This message, and the
many other powerful messages that young boys and
girls have addressed to the world of adults in the last
few days, has to be respected by all of us.
This is not only a pledge to stop war, with its
horrific levels of violence and brutality that abandon
all human standards. It is much more: it is a call to
build a new culture of peace and a new paradigm of
culture where no international emergency relief for
victims of conflict will be needed any more. It is not
only the United Nations that has increasingly become
involved in peacekeeping, peacemaking and peacebuilding efforts. There are already thousands of peace
educators all around the world making huge efforts to
introduce a culture of peace.
We should be able to do more for children’s rights
in the new millennium. In the next decade, the Global
Movement for Children should also be used as a
powerful tool to make changes in our global cultural
paradigm. Power and greed can never be an excuse for
sacrificing children. No one — not the United Nations,
not regional organizations, not Governments, not civil
society groups — has moved quickly enough or done
enough. The international community, in all its

A/S-27/PV.6

manifestations, must adopt a new sense of urgency. The
Global Movement for Children could perhaps be one of
the forces and one of the ways for change, involving
each and every one of us — involving every citizen of
every nation, every public and private entity, every
national leader and, above all, every child and every
adolescent.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on agenda items 8 and 9.
Agenda item 3 (continued)
Credentials of representatives to the twenty-seventh
special session of the General Assembly
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee
(A/S-27/18)

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
S-27/1).
The President: Before giving the floor to the
delegation wishing to speak in explanation of vote,
may I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Alaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation would like to express its reservation on
those parts of the resolution contained in document
A/S-27/18, paragraph 13, which may be construed as
recognition of Israel.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of position.

Draft resolution (A/S-27/18, para. 13)

We have thus concluded our consideration of
agenda item 3.

Amendment (A/S-27/L.2)
The President: I give
representative of South Africa.

The Credentials Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Following your
appeal, Mr. President, to make this special session on
children a memorable occasion, and after consultations
among the sponsors of the amendment to the draft
resolution of the Credentials Committee, we have
decided not to insist on a vote on our amendment,
contained in document A/S-27/L.2.
For the record, we wish to state that this
amendment was in line with the declaration of the
Foreign Ministers of the Non-Aligned Movement, who
met from 27 to 29 April 2002 in Durban, South Africa.
It is based on, and reflective of, international law and
relevant United Nations resolutions.
In that light, we intend to raise this matter during
the fifty-seventh session of the General Assembly,
which will begin on 10 September 2002. We request
that our letter in this regard be distributed as an official
document of the General Assembly at its twentyseventh special session, under agenda item 3.
The President: Members have noted the
statement made by the representative of South Africa.
The Assembly will now take action on the draft
resolution recommended by the Credentials Committee
in paragraph 13 of its report (A/S-27/18).

Agenda items 8, 9 (continued) and 10
Review of the achievements in the implementation
and results of the World Declaration on the Survival,
Protection and Development of Children and Plan of
Action for Implementing the World Declaration on
the Survival, Protection and Development of
Children in the 1990s
Renewal of commitment and future action for
children in the next decade
Adoption of the final document
Draft resolution (A/S-27/L.1)
Report of the Ad Hoc Committee (A/S-27/19)
The President: In connection with the draft
resolution contained in document A/S-27/L.1, I have
been informed by the sponsors that there is an
agreement not to take action on this draft resolution in
the light of the consensus reached in the final
document.
For the text of the report of the Ad Hoc
Committee, representatives can turn to document
A/S-27/AC.1/L.1 and addenda 1-3, as well as
document A/S-27/AC.1/L.2.

79

A/S-27/PV.6

I now request the Rapporteur of the Ad Hoc
Committee of the Whole of the twenty-seventh special
session, Ms. Lidija Topic of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
to introduce the report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the
Whole.
Ms. Topic (Bosnia and Herzegovina), Rapporteur
of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole: It is my great
privilege and great personal honour to introduce to the
plenary of the twenty-seventh special session of the
General Assembly the report of the Ad Hoc Committee
of the Whole contained in document A/S-27/19.
The Committee held two meetings, one on
Wednesday, 8 May, and one on Thursday, 9 May, the
latter of which was suspended and later resumed on
Friday, 10 May 2002. Members of the Committee also
conducted round-the-clock informal consultations
which cleared the way for the adoption of the report.
The report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the
Whole is composed of three chapters. Chapter I,
“Introduction”, covers the proceedings of the Ad Hoc
Committee. The Committee had the opportunity to
listen to presentations by Member States, United
Nations agencies and representatives of nongovernmental organizations. The Committee also heard
statements from a number of child representatives that
brought a fresh perspective to the debate in the
Committee.
All of these statements highlighted commitments
and experience in promoting healthy lives, providing
quality
education,
protecting
against
abuse,
exploitation and violence and combating HIV/AIDS.
Chapters II and III reflect the decision by the
Committee to recommend to the twenty-seventh special
session the draft resolution contained in document
A/S-27/AC.1/L.2 for its adoption.
Here I should like to draw the attention of
representatives to revisions required to the last line in
document A/S-27/AC.1/L.2. The words in parentheses
“to be issued” should be deleted and the numbers 2 and
3 should be inserted. These three addenda to document
A/S-27/AC.1/L.1 incorporate the agreed text to all the
pending paragraphs in document A/S-27/2/Add.1 (Part
II).
Before concluding, I should like to pay tribute to
all of the delegations, including those of the United
Nations system and of non-governmental organizations
for their active participation in the deliberations of the

80

Ad Hoc Committee. Their tireless efforts to help the
children of the world, our most precious resources, will
be noted by future generations. I should like to express
my heartfelt gratitude to the Chairperson of the Ad Hoc
Committee for guiding the Committee’s proceedings
with such skill and diligence.
I should also like, on behalf of the Committee, to
extend our most sincere gratitude also to the ViceChairpersons of the Committee, and particularly to
Ambassador Hanns Schumacher of Germany, for their
invaluable contributions to the successful conclusion of
the work of the Committee.
Finally, permit me to express our gratitude to the
staff of the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
and to the United Nations Secretariat, who have
provided vital assistance to the Bureau and to the Ad
Hoc Committee.
With these remarks, I present to the twentyseventh special session of the General Assembly the
report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole for its
consideration and approval.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the Assembly will not
discuss the report.
I hear none.
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly will now proceed
to take a decision on the draft resolution recommended
by the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the twentyseventh special session in document A/S-27/AC.1/L.2.
The draft resolution is entitled “A world fit for
children”. The text of the annex to the draft resolution
is contained, for the time being, in documents
A/S-27/2/Add.1 (Part II) and corrigenda 1 and 2, and
A/S-27/AC.1/L.1/Add.1, 2 and 3.
The draft resolution was recommended by the Ad
Hoc Committee of the Whole of the twenty-seventh
special session for adoption.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
S-27/2).
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of

A/S-27/PV.6

position on the resolution just adopted. May I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Interiano (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of El Salvador would like to express its
satisfaction at the consensus achieved in the
negotiations that led to the adoption of the outcome
document, “A world fit for children”. We are sure that
this will contribute to the strengthening of national
policies and to the advancement of children and young
people.
Nevertheless, with respect to the chapter entitled
“Promoting healthy lives”, in which goals and
commitments concerning sexual and reproductive
health are established, the delegation of El Salvador
wishes to reaffirm the position adopted in the context
of the Declaration and Programme of Action of the
International
Conference
on
Population
and
Development, held at Cairo in 1994. With regard to
reproductive rights, sexual and reproductive health and
family planning, El Salvador clearly understands those
concepts not to embrace or include in any way the
promotion of abortion as a method of regulating
fertility or as a health service, since, in its Constitution
and in secondary legislation, El Salvador recognizes
and protects the human being from the moment of
conception, and prohibits abortion.
Accordingly, the delegation of El Salvador
reserves the right to apply this interpretation in all
present and future discussions on the issue of sexual
and reproductive health. Thus we should be much
obliged if this interpretive statement were to be
recorded in the final report of the twenty-seventh
special session of the General Assembly on children.
Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, as
well as Ambassadors Durrant, Chowdhury and
Schumacher, on your outstanding efforts in the difficult
endeavour of conducting our work, both during the
session and in the preparatory meetings.
Speaking in my capacity as Chairman of the Rio
Group, I should like to make the following statement.
The countries of the Rio Group reaffirm their
commitment to the development of their peoples, in
particular to the advancement of the rights of the child
and the well-being of children and adolescents. The
countries of the Rio Group joined the consensus on the

outcome document, convinced that its implementation,
together with respect for the international standards
established in the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its Optional Protocols and in the agreements
reached at United Nations conferences — in particular
those held at Cairo, Copenhagen, Beijing and
Monterrey and their follow-up — will ensure a better
future for the world’s children and adolescents. In
reaffirming the consensus of Lima of 1999, that of
Kingston of 2000 and that of Panama of 2001, the Rio
Group reaffirms its conviction that our region’s future
is based on advances and policies for children and
adolescents.
I shall now speak in my national capacity. The
Government of Costa Rica wishes to place on record
that, in conformity with its constitutional provisions
and with the fundamental principles governing its
foreign policy, nothing in this text may be interpreted
as an explicit or implicit endorsement of abortion.
Costa Rica considers that the text must be interpreted
in conformity with children’s fundamental right to life
from the very moment of conception and with the
family’s fundamental role as the basic unit of society.
I should be much obliged if this statement were to
be included in the report of this special session and in
the record of this meeting.
Mr. Liwski (Argentine Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your outstanding work to secure the approval of the
important document that we have just adopted. In
joining the consensus on that text, my delegation would
like to make the following statement.
With regard to the latter part of paragraph 29 of
the outcome document, “A world fit for children”, the
Republic of Argentina understands that the reservations
expressed and the interpretive statements made by our
country in acceding to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child do not restrict, but rather broaden, the rights
proceeding from the Convention. Thus they cannot be
considered incompatible with its object and purpose.
Moreover, my delegation wishes to state that the
capacity to formulate reservations with regard to
international treaties constitutes a sovereign power of
States, recognized in the Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties. Therefore, States considering such
reservations should not withdraw from treaties
peremptorily. My delegation is aware that the
possibility of formulating reservations encourages

81

A/S-27/PV.6

many accessions to international treaties, thus enabling
those treaties’ basic principles to be embraced.
Our country wishes also to reaffirm the
interpretive statements made at the International
Conference on Population and Development, held at
Cairo in 1994; with respect to the Beijing Declaration
and Platform of Action of the Fourth World Conference
on Women, held at Beijing in 1995; at the second
United Nations Conference on Human Settlements,
held in 1996; and at the World Food Summit, held at
Rome in 1996.
With respect to paragraph 15 of the outcome
document just adopted, the Republic of Argentina
would like to state that the concept of the family to
which it refers is understood as the institution whose
origin is the union of a man and a woman whereby
children are born, nourished and educated, in
conformity with article 16 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and with article 23 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
which form part of Argentina’s constitutional law.
Concerning the document’s references to gender
perspectives, our country interprets them as the equal
opportunity of boys and girls, in accordance with their
natural differences, to accede to the full exercise of the
rights enshrined in the Convention on the Rights of the
Child.
Mr. Casco Fortin (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of the Republic of Honduras, with due
respect, asks the President of this special session of the
General Assembly on children that the following
interpretive statement be incorporated in its entirety
into the final report of the special session.
The delegation of Honduras welcomes the
adoption of the outcome document entitled “A world fit
for children”. It does so with the intention, as a
sovereign country, to continue to make its best efforts
to contribute to the creation of a better and more
appropriate environment for the children of Honduras
and of the entire world. It takes this opportunity to
reaffirm its intention to strengthen the institution of the
family, to improve substantially our children’s health
and education and thus to contribute to reducing the
poverty in our country, always bearing in mind that
motherhood and childhood are social rights enshrined
in our Constitution and protected by the State.

82

In that regard, this interpretive statement
reaffirms the content of the reservations expressed by
the Republic of Honduras at international conferences
at past special sessions of the General Assembly and at
meetings of its specialized agencies. Those
reservations shall be taken into account with respect to
words, terms, concepts or paragraphs in this outcome
document, wherever they may be applicable.
The Republic of Honduras will therefore endorse
today’s commitment to the children of the world on the
basis of the following considerations. First, we will do
so in accordance with the moral, ethical, religious and
cultural principles that govern our society, taking into
account the fundamental pillars provided by the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the American
Convention on Human Rights, the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, the Constitution of the Republic
and other related legal instruments.
Secondly, we will do so with respect for the
inviolable rights and dignity of all human beings and
the right to life from the moment of conception until
natural death, reaffirming our recognition of the current
and universal validity of those and other human rights.
Thirdly, we recognize the family as the natural
and fundamental unit of society, the means by which
values are transmitted, the meeting point for
generations and an indispensable framework for the
holistic development of children.
Fourthly, we uphold the right of a man and a
woman to enter into matrimony or a de facto union.
Fifthly, we reaffirm the importance of teaching
children values and sexual abstinence as essential
elements for promoting responsible sexual behaviour
and parenthood and as a means of preventing sexually
transmitted diseases, especially HIV/AIDS, as well as
adolescent pregnancy, while respecting the inalienable
right of parents to choose the type of education that
their children will receive and to provide them with
care, support and protection.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): The
European Union warmly welcomes the agreement
reached this evening. We believe that it will promote
the rights of children and adolescents throughout the
world. A long preparatory process, lasting for almost
two years, has culminated in the adoption of this
document. Successive presidencies of the European
Union have worked on the Declaration and Plan of

A/S-27/PV.6

Action, always seeking the greatest possible degree of
consensus.
We acknowledge that the language of the text
does not fully reflect international commitments in the
important area of reproductive health services for
adolescents. However, we have all had to make
concessions during the process. The European Union
would have liked the document to reflect the progress
made at the International Conference on Financing for
Development, held in Monterrey less than two months
ago.
We would like in particular to highlight the
significant level of agreement reached on a series of
issues affecting the current and future status of boys,
girls and adolescents: the commitments reached with
regard to reducing infant mortality, protecting children
from violence and exploitation, providing access to
education, eradicating poverty and eliminating child
labour. These are Millennium Development Goals, to
which we committed ourselves in 2000. We reaffirm
our commitment to attaining these goals for our
children.
Furthermore, we welcome the clear-cut references
to capital punishment contained in the document that
has just been adopted, as well as the affirmation that
our actions to benefit children must be guided by
respect for the rights of the child.
Finally, the European Union would like to thank
the Chairperson of the Preparatory Committee, the
Bureau and all who were involved in the negotiations,
as well as the facilitators and the Secretariat, for their
patience, understanding and invaluable contributions to
the creation of a just world for all.
Mr. Sevilla Somoza (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): Nicaragua endorses and supports the
consensus decision reached on the final document of
the twenty-seventh special session, entitled “A world
fit for children”, and joins in the global commitment to
children. We reaffirm all of the reservations that we
have expressed in the past with regard to the outcomes
of other United Nations conferences and special
sessions, and we would like to make the following
interpretative statement.
It is the understanding of Nicaragua that this
document is not legally binding and that the
commitments agreed to are recommendations, their
implementation being the sovereign right of the State

of Nicaragua. We believe that the concept of sexual and
reproductive health should be applied within a holistic
health context that implies personal maturity and
responsibility. Nicaragua reaffirms and recognizes that
the right to life, from the moment of conception until
natural death, is the inalienable and fundamental right
of a human being. In this context, we understand that
the term “sexual and reproductive health” does not
extend to abortion. Nicaragua recognizes marriage and
de facto stable unions between a man and a woman,
and understands the term “various forms of the family”
to refer only to those families shaped by procreation
proceeding from the union of a man and a woman, the
extended family and single-parent families.
I request that this interpretive statement be
included in the final report of the special session.
Mr. Siv (United States of America): On behalf of
the United States delegation, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this immensely successful special
session on children. We salute the tireless work of
Ambassadors Patricia Durrant of Jamaica, Hanns
Schumacher of Germany and Iftekhar Ahmed
Chowdhury and Anwarul Chowdhury of Bangladesh.
Their outstanding leadership made possible a strong
consensus outcome document, which will serve as an
agenda for action on behalf of children in the coming
years. We express our appreciation to Carol Bellamy
and the United Nations Children’s Fund for putting
together this extraordinary event. The special session
will mean greater hope for children around the world.
The United States reaffirms its commitment to work for
their well-being everywhere, recognizing that children
are best nurtured in a stable, loving family
environment.
We also wish to include the following explanation
of position in the official record of this special session.
First, concerning references in the document to United
Nations conferences and summits and their five-year
reviews, the United States does not understand any
endorsement of these conferences to be interpreted as
promoting abortion.
Secondly, the United States understands the terms
in the document relating to basic social services, such
as education, nutrition, health care, including sexual
and reproductive health, quality health-care services,
reproductive health care, family planning, sexual
health, reproductive health and safe motherhood, in no
way to include abortion or abortion-related services, or

83

A/S-27/PV.6

the use of abortifacients. The United States does not
include the treatment of injuries or illnesses caused by
illegal or legal abortion — for example, post-abortion
care — among abortion-related services.
Thirdly, the United States fully supports the
principle of voluntary choice in family planning, and
reiterates that in no case should abortion be promoted
as a method of family planning and that women who
have had recourse to abortion should in all cases have
humane treatment and counselling provided to them.
The United States emphasizes its commitment to
programmes that address greater male involvement in
pregnancy prevention and in voluntary family planning
efforts. It emphasizes the need to stress the practices of
abstinence, delaying sex initiation, monogamy, fidelity
and partner-reduction in order to, inter alia, prevent
HIV infection.
Fourthly, the United States stresses the
importance it attaches to universal access to primary
and secondary education, particularly for girls, as an
essential and integral part of women’s sustainable
social and economic development.
Fifthly, the United States reaffirms that “the
family is the natural and fundamental group unit of
society and is entitled to protection by society and the
State” (Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
resolution 217 A (III), article 16.3); that “the right of
men and women of marriageable age to marry and
found a family shall be recognized” (International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, resolution
2200 A (XXI), article 23.2); and that “motherhood and
childhood are entitled to special care and assistance”
(Universal Declaration of Human Rights, article
25.2)”.

rights, duties and responsibilities of parents, who have
the primary responsibility for their children’s education
and well-being. In this regard, the United States
emphasizes the importance it attaches to the
involvement of parents in decisions affecting children
and adolescents in all aspects of sexual and
reproductive health and in all aspects of their lives and
education, for which they have the primary
responsibility.
Ms. Limpias (Bolivia): My delegation joins this
consensus as a triumph for the right of children and
adolescents everywhere. The reaffirmation of prior
United Nations agreements and the furtherance of
commitments we have made here at the special session
provide us with a strong action plan to make the world
more fit for children. The outcome document
essentially covers all key aspects of children’s lives,
from the fundamental right to survival, safety and
protection to love and support from their families and
communities, to education and health, to freedom from
all forms of abuse, violence and exploitation.
One fundamental set of human rights, however,
continues to be ignored, neglected, resisted or rejected:
the reproductive rights of adolescents. This is so even
seven years after 179 countries of all the world adopted
the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development, which
explicitly recognized reproductive rights, including
those of adolescents, as human rights.

The United States stresses the need to further
address the importance of family stability, the role of
fathers and parent-child communication on responsible
sexual behaviour, especially on abstinence and on
delaying sexual initiation. With regard to the phrase
“various forms of the family exist”, the United States
understands this to include single-parent and extended
families. It reaffirms that Governments can support
families by promoting policies that help strengthen the
institution of marriage and help parents raise their
children in positive and healthy environments.

In Bolivia, which has one of the highest maternal
mortality rates in the Americas — many of the deaths
being those of poor young women who begin childbearing early — I can affirm that the issue of
adolescents’ reproductive rights is about a young
woman’s very right to life. The majority of the
Bolivian population is indigenous, with multiple
cultural and linguistic traditions. A large proportion of
the people of my country live in poverty and are
marginalized, with limited access to health services,
especially in rural and more remote areas that are
difficult to reach, not only geographically or financially
but in terms of gender, culture, language and class
boundaries. Young women suffer due to all those
factors, especially when such factors are compounded
by their age, sex and ethnic origins. This is our reality,
and it would be irresponsible to ignore it.

Sixthly, the United States understands that
children’s rights are seen at all times in relation to the

The Government of Bolivia joins the consensus
reflected in the outcome document with the special

84

A/S-27/PV.6

significance attached to the recognition of every child’s
right to unbiased and full information, knowledge,
skills, health services, well-being and development.
My delegation would very much appreciate this
statement being reflected in the records of this meeting.
Mr. Laurin (Canada): The outcome document we
have adopted today makes a number of key advances
on priority issues for children, including indigenous
children and affected children, and child and youth
participation. The document is an important step
forward in relation to the Plan of Action of 1990 with
regard to the promotion and protection of child rights.
We believe that these and other advances will make a
real contribution to the lives of children worldwide.
While we supported consensus, we would like to
register our dissatisfaction with the debate that ensued
over the issue of sexual and reproductive health. This is
a critical issue to the health, survival and well-being of
children and adolescents around the world. This
document falls significantly short.
We reiterate our strong support for ensuring the
right to the highest attainable standard of health,
including the right to make informed choices about
one’s own sexual and reproductive health. Services
which include safe, reliable and high-quality family
planning methods, as well as information, education
and counselling, are an essential part of a
comprehensive health care programme. Access to these
programmes and services should be equitable and
responsive to diversity.
Recent conferences and summits, in particular the
1994 International Conference on Population and
Development, held in Cairo, and the 1995 Fourth
World Conference on Women, held in Beijing, as well
as their five-year reviews, were significant steps
forward in the understanding of the issues and of what
is needed for implementation and action. It is
regrettable that attempts were made during the
negotiations to retrench on previously agreed and longstanding language. We therefore stress that the
outcomes of Cairo, Beijing and other conferences and
their reviews will continue to serve as our benchmark
for future action. We request that this statement be
made part of the official record of the special session.
Mr. Alaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation joined the consensus on the outcome
document of this special session of the General

Assembly on children. We consider the outcome
document of this special session to be of great
importance in the promotion and protection of the
rights of children, as well as in securing their wellbeing in the years ahead.
We would, however, like to emphasize that we
will interpret those parts of the outcome document
which relate to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child in line with our position, as defined and
enunciated by my Government upon its ratification of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
In conclusion, I would like to express my
delegation’s sincere appreciation to Ambassador
Durrant of Jamaica, Ambassador Schumacher of
Germany and Ambassador Chowdhury of Bangladesh,
and their able teams, for their dedication, devotion and
hard work during the preparatory process.
Mr. Jaló (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French): I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
remarkable work that you have accomplished.
I would like, on behalf of my country, GuineaBissau, to say that we are prepared to implement all the
decisions and recommendations of this special session
on children. But I would also like to say that we
reserve the right not to implement any decision or
recommendation that would be incompatible with our
Constitution or laws or with the ethics of our people.
The President: I give
representative of the Holy See.

the

floor

to

the

Ms. De Souza (Holy See): The Holy See
expresses its appreciation to the General Assembly and
the Preparatory Committee for the work carried out
over the past two years — work that contributed to the
success of this twenty-seventh special session of the
General Assembly, devoted to children. My delegation
also expresses thanks to Ambassador Durrant,
Ambassador Chowdhury and Ambassador Schumacher
for their tireless efforts in leading and directing the
discussions, as well as to the staff of the United
Nations Children’s Fund, which acted as the
substantive secretariat throughout the preparatory
process.
My delegation welcomes the consensus decision
of the Assembly to adopt the document entitled, “A
world fit for children”. While welcoming its adoption,
the Holy See, in conformity with its nature and its
particular mission, would like to state its understanding

85

A/S-27/PV.6

of the document. Nothing that the Holy See has done
during this process should be understood or interpreted
as an endorsement of concepts that it cannot accept for
moral reasons. This should in no way be interpreted as
constituting a change in its well-known position
concerning those subjects about which the Holy See
has made reservations during past United Nations
conferences and summits. Those reservations and
statements of interpretation remain in effect, and relate
to issues regarding fundamental human rights and
dignity, protection, the provision of basic social
services, education, health, sexuality and the family,
the rights, duties and responsibilities of parents, and
especially the right to life from the moment of
conception.
The Holy See is convinced that the best interests
of the child are best served in the context of the family.
The Holy See interprets references to family or
families in terms of the duty to strengthen the family,
the basic unit of society, and in terms of marriage as an
equal partnership between man and woman — that is,
between husband and wife.
The Holy See requests that this statement be
included in the report of the special session, as well as
in the verbatim record of this meeting.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Benin, who wishes to make a statement on behalf of
the Group of African States.
Ms. Ayemona (Benin) (spoke in French): Despite
the fact that some States have made interpretative and
explanatory statements, the African Group welcomes
the outcome of this special session. By adopting the
final outcome document, entitled “A world fit for
children”, the international community has committed
itself once again to working for the well-being of
children in all spheres.
On behalf of the African Group, Benin, which is
chairing the Group this month, would like, through me,
sincerely to thank all the participants who have made
an effective contribution to the formulation and
adoption of this historic document. We offer our warm
congratulations to Ambassador Patricia Durrant for her
tireless efforts during the preparatory stage, helping us
to meet the challenge of producing this valuable
document for the benefit of children.
We would also like to express our sincere
gratitude to Secretary-General Kofi Annan and to Ms.

86

Carol Bellamy for their ongoing concern for children,
as well as for the invaluable support they provided to
the experts during the negotiations.
I cannot conclude without thanking all the
facilitators for their determination, as well as all those
who, directly or indirectly, helped to make this second
world summit for children a success. Let us always say
“Yes” for children.
The President: We have thus concluded our
consideration of agenda items 8, 9 and 10.
I give the floor to Ms. Carol Bellamy, Executive
Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund, who
will make a statement on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral.
Ms. Bellamy (United Nations Children’s Fund):
It is my honour to be here on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral, who has been such an advocate and supporter
of children’s central role in achieving global peace and
development.
I would like to begin my remarks by expressing
appreciation to the members of the Preparatory
Committee, the various negotiating groups and the very
long-serving and excellent members of the Bureau:
Ambassador Durrant, Ambassador Schumacher,
Ambassador Anwarul Chowdhury, Ambassador
Iftekhar
Chowdhury,
Ambassador
Topic
and
Ambassador Tall.
I would also like to express my thanks to the over
60 summit-level participants and the other
representatives from 170 countries, to the nongovernmental organizations, to the representatives of
the private sector, to the religious leaders, to the
parliamentarians, to the paediatricians and to the
children and young people themselves. I also express
my thanks to the conference services staff, to my
wonderful, extraordinary colleagues at the United
Nations Children’s Fund and, Mr. President, to you as
well.
In his opening statement, the Secretary-General
mentioned that this special session had to be truly
special. Indeed it has been. We have had three days of
extraordinary meetings. This has been the first session
of the General Assembly in which children were not
only seen, but were heard. They captured our hearts;
they captured our minds. They inspired us with their
energy and their enthusiasm. They reminded us of our
past promises, and they asked for action now. “We are

A/S-27/PV.6

not only the future, we are also the present”, they said.
“We are not an expenditure, we are an investment”,
they said. The Secretary-General has repeatedly
recognized not only that children are an investment but
that investing in children is the first, essential step
toward breaking the cycle of poverty.
The Assembly has just approved a strong, actionoriented document so appropriately called “A world fit
for children”. The goals for children that members have
just committed to are at the very heart of the
Millennium Development Goals. On behalf of the
Secretary-General, I would like to take this opportunity
to congratulate you, members of the General Assembly.
On behalf of the Secretary-General, I would like to
remind you that now is the time for action.
Closing statement by the President
The President: I wish to congratulate all
participants on the quality of the debate over the last
three days, on their commitment and, above all, for the
adoption of a new agenda for children: a framework for
action to ensure the well-being of every child in every
country.
This special session would not have been so
highly productive without the invaluable contributions
of Member States, many of whom were represented by
heads of State or Government, the full commitment of
civil society and, above all, children and young people
themselves.
A record number of side events have taken place,
in which Member States, United Nations agencies,
inter-governmental organizations, religious leaders,
parliamentarians, non-governmental organizations and
the private sector met together with children to share
their experience and vision and, above all, to discuss
how to translate words into action at all levels. The
discussions were lively and interactive, which enriched
this special session in a most profound way. I wish to
thank all the participants.
Building on the lessons learned since the World
Summit for Children in 1990 and taking into account
the emerging challenges and opportunities of today’s
world, we have adopted a Plan of Action that
establishes new goals for children, key actions to be
taken to meet those goals and strategies to monitor our
progress. The Plan of Action sets out specific targets to
be achieved in the fields of health, education,

protection against abuse, exploitation and violence, and
combating HIV/AIDS among children.
In that regard, the special session should not be
seen as an end in itself. It is a milestone in a long
journey that began in 1990 with the World Summit for
Children, that gathered momentum during the 1990s
and that has brought us all here to plan our course for
the future.
And what have we agreed? We have agreed to
build a world fit for children and to make it a better
place for them to grow up in, a place where their basic
needs will be met, where their rights will be respected
and promoted. That sounds ambitious, but we have
adopted a Declaration that very clearly describes the
steps we must take to build a new world fit for
children. It does so in a clear, concise and robust
manner. It is a practical and achievable checklist, not
only for a better future but also for immediate action
that will improve child well-being today. Significant
national efforts, including the mobilization of human,
financial and material resources, are essential for
achieving the targets in the outcome document. The
leadership of each Member State should show its
commitment to this end.
At this juncture, it is crucially important to
recognize that chronic poverty remains the biggest
obstacle to promoting the welfare of children in many
developing countries. The international development
goals and strategies agreed upon at major United
Nations conferences, in particular the Millennium
Summit, should be continuously pursued by the
international community in order to assist developing
countries in eradicating poverty and promoting the
well-being of children.
In closing, I wish to give special recognition and
thanks to Her Excellency Ambassador Patricia Durrant
of Jamaica, who served as Chairperson of the
Committee of the Whole, and to the other members of
the Bureau for their excellent work which has
contributed to the success of this special session. I
should also like to thank Ms. Carol Bellamy, Executive
Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund, and
her staff for their tireless efforts and wholehearted
dedication to ensuring the success of this historic
session. Last but not least, I wish to thank members of
the Secretariat, including the Department of General
Assembly Affairs and Conference Services and all

87

A/S-27/PV.6

other departments that devoted exemplary service to
the special session.

The President: I invite representatives to stand
and observe one minute of silent prayer or meditation.

The real work of creating a world fit for children
has only just begun. But our achievements thus far
should give us the confidence to face the arduous
challenges ahead. On behalf of the world’s children, I
call upon all participants to commit themselves fully to
this most imperative of tasks.

The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silent prayer or meditation.

Agenda item 2 (continued)
Minute of silent prayer or meditation

88

Closure of the twenty-seventh special session
The President: I declare closed the twentyseventh special session of the General Assembly.
The meeting rose at 12.55 a.m., Saturday, 11 May
2002.
