United Nations

S/PV.6528

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6528th meeting
Wednesday, 4 May 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Araud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Amieyeofori
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mashabane
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-32142 (E)

*1132142*

S/PV.6528

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, to participate in this
meeting.
I give the floor to Mr. Moreno-Ocampo.
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: I am honoured to report
to the Council on the activities of the Office of the
Prosecutor in furtherance of resolution 1970 (2011).
The Council adopted resolution 1970 (2011)
unanimously on 26 February, referring the situation in
Libya to the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
stressing the need to hold to account those responsible
for attacks, including by forces under their control, on
civilians.
My report, submitted for the Council’s
consideration in advance of this meeting, describes in
detail the factual and legal analysis conducted by the
Office in order to implement that resolution. Based on
that analysis, we decided to open an investigation on
3 March. In carrying out the mandate given it by the
Council under resolution 1970 (2011), the Office must
apply the norms established by the Rome Statute. It
must establish the truth about crimes alleged to have
been committed in Libya through an independent and
impartial investigation. This is what we are doing.
To investigate the crimes committed in Libya, the
Office has conducted more than 15 missions to 10
different States. As of 26 April, 45 interviews of
individuals with direct knowledge of the crimes
committed had been initiated or completed. More than
569 documents, including videos and pictures, had
been collected and reviewed. The Office has taken no
statement inside Libya in order to fulfil its duty to
protect witnesses.
The cooperation received from States and
regional and other international organizations, in
accordance with paragraph 5 of resolution 1970 (2011),
was a critical component of the fast progress of the
Libyan investigation.

2

The Commission of Inquiry created by the
Human Rights Council has also been cooperating with
the Office since its creation, and has indicated its
willingness to continue to do so. The Commission of
Inquiry is in the process of preparing its report to the
Human Rights Council, which is to be completed by
the end of May. We are looking forward to its report
and to having access to the data compiled by the
Commission, which will be very useful to the
Prosecution for future action. We have discussed with
the Commission Chair the difficulties involved in
unveiling the truth while an armed conflict is ongoing,
and the importance of the Commission’s field
activities.
The evidence collected has confirmed the fears
and concerns expressed in resolution 1970 (2011). Two
months ago, the Security Council expressed grave
concern at the situation in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
condemning the violence and use of force against
civilians, and deplored the gross and systematic
violation of human rights, including the repression of
peaceful demonstrators and the deaths of civilians.
Resolution 1970 (2011) rejected unequivocally the
incitement to hostility and violence against the civilian
population made from the highest level of the Libyan
Government, and considered that the widespread and
systematic attacks currently taking place in the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya against the civilian population could
amount to crimes against humanity.
The evidence collected by the Office of the
Prosecutor confirms that assessment. It establishes
reasonable grounds to believe that widespread and
systematic attacks against the civilian population,
including murder and persecution as crimes against
humanity, have been and continue to be committed in
Libya. In additionally, since the end of February there
has been an armed conflict in Libya. In this context,
there is also relevant information on the alleged
commission of war crimes. The work of the
Commission of Inquiry will be crucial to fully
understanding the crimes committed during the armed
conflict.
Let me start by describing the incidents of crimes
against humanity that the Office investigated. The
evidence shows that security forces have been
systematically shooting at peaceful protesters,
following the same modus operandi in multiple
locations. The evidence shows that events in
neighbouring Egypt and Tunisia prompted Libyan

11-32142

S/PV.6528

security forces to begin preparations for the possibility
of demonstrations in Libya. As early as January,
mercenaries were being hired and brought into Libya.
The incidents started on 15 and 16 February.
Security forces arrested two lawyers who were
requesting justice for the 1,400 victims of the 1996
Abu Salim prison massacres. On 17 February,
thousands of peaceful demonstrators protesting these
arrests congregated in the square around the High
Court of Benghazi. Security forces entered the square
and reportedly fired live ammunition into the crowd,
killing numerous demonstrators. This was the
beginning of a series of similar incidents in different
cities across Libya.
The efforts to cover up the crimes have made it
difficult to ascertain the precise number of victims, but
there is credible information suggesting that, merely as
the result of such shootings, 500 to 700 persons died in
February alone. It is difficult to estimate the total
numbers because dead bodies were removed from
streets and hospitals. Doctors were not allowed to
document the number of dead and injured admitted to
hospitals after the violent clashes began. Security
forces were allegedly stationed in the hospitals and
arrested injured individuals who sought medical
treatment. Being injured became evidence of opposing
the regime, and challenging the authority of the regime
is a crime under Libyan law. To avoid punishment and
risk of death, many protestors sought medical attention
in private homes and did not bring injured or dead
persons to the hospitals.
In addition to such incidents, information
collected by the Office shows that civilians in Tripoli
and other areas under the control of the regime are
reportedly subject to different forms of persecution.
Systematic arrests, torture, killings and enforced
disappearances have been reported in Tripoli, Zawiyah,
Zintan and the area of the Nafusa Mountains. The
victims are civilians who have participated in
demonstrations, are considered to be disloyal to the
regime, or have talked to international media, activists
or journalists. In addition, citizens of Egypt and
Tunisia were arrested and expelled en masse because of
their perceived association with the popular uprising.
The mosques where they prayed were destroyed.
There is also relevant information concerning the
alleged commission of rape. Victims of rape have
reportedly been arrested and subject to harassment. In

11-32142

one high-profile case, a woman gave a report to the
international media of how she had been raped by
security forces because of her suspected association
with the rebels. The Office is investigating these
allegations.
Several sources have also reported the unlawful
arrest, mistreatment and killing of sub-Saharan African
civilians wrongly perceived to be mercenaries.
Reportedly, angry mobs of protesters assaulted subSaharan Africans in Benghazi and other cities and
killed dozens of them. The new authorities in Benghazi
allegedly arrested a number of sub-Saharan Africans,
and it is unclear whether they were innocent immigrant
workers or combatants, become prisoners of war.
In addition, specific allegations of war crimes
committed include the use of imprecise weaponry such
as cluster munitions, multiple rocket launchers and
mortars, and other forms of heavy weaponry, in
crowded urban areas, in particular Misrata. There are
also reports of forces blocking humanitarian supplies.
Some sources have also reported the use of civilians as
human shields and the torture of prisoners of war or
civilians in the context of the armed conflict.
The total number of persons who have died since
the beginning of the conflict is in the thousands. The
number of those displaced, according to the United
Nations, includes approximately 535,000 migrant
workers, refugees and asylum seekers, and 327,342
internally displaced Libyans.
Ms. Navi Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights; Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict;
and Ms. Margot Wallström, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
have all spoken clearly about alleged crimes.
Let me conclude by referring to the next steps. In
accordance with the Court’s Statute, my duty is to
focus investigations and prosecutions on those who
bear the greatest responsibility for the most serious
crimes, based on the evidence that emerges in the
course of the investigation. That includes those who
ordered, incited, financed or otherwise planned the
commission of the alleged crimes.
On that basis, in the coming weeks, in
implementing the mandate established by resolution
1970 (2011), as Prosecutor I will present a case before

3

S/PV.6528

the Pre-Trial Chamber of the International Criminal
Court. I will request the judges to issue arrest warrants
against three individuals who appear to bear the
greatest criminal responsibility for crimes against
humanity committed in the territory of Libya since
15 February.

“Now we have the International Criminal
Court — permanent, increasingly powerful,
casting a long shadow. There is no going back. In
this new age of accountability, those who commit
the worst of human crimes will be held
responsible.”

In all the incidents to be presented to the judges,
the victims who were shot at by security forces were
unarmed civilians and there is no evidence of any
attack against security forces. To prove the case, my
Office has collected different types of evidence. There
are least two eyewitnesses for each incident,
documents and, in many cases, corroboration of details
by pictures or videos. Further cases will be opened as
necessary, taking into account the full scope of
criminality, including war crimes allegedly committed
by different individuals in the context of the Libya
situation. Before proceeding, I will inform the Council
in advance.

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo for his briefing.

Following my request, the Pre-Trial Chamber
may decide to accept the application, to reject it or to
ask my Office for additional information. Should the
judges decide to issue arrest warrants, the primary
responsibility to execute them will lie with the
territorial authorities.
My Office still awaits any response on the
question of arrests from representatives of the regime
in Tripoli.
The Interim National Council has committed
itself to implement any arrest warrants and has
requested the cooperation of the international
community.
Arresting those who ordered the commission of
crimes will contribute to the protection of civilians in
Libya. If those who ordered crimes are not stopped and
arrested, crimes will continue unabated. Judicial
activity will deter crimes by removing those who
ordered the crimes and by sending a clear message to
other potential perpetrators, in Libya and elsewhere,
that the international community will not condone such
crimes.
Arrests cannot be successfully conducted without
serious planning and preparation, which takes time.
The international community should take steps now to
assist with such practical planning.
As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon stated in
Kampala,

4

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank the Prosecutor for his report and
briefing this morning. I would also like to take this
opportunity once again to commend him and his staff
for their tireless efforts to bring justice to the victims
of international crimes. The serious risks they take in
the cause of international justice were brought home
recently by the death of Alain Lubamba Kongolo, a
member of the Office of the Prosecutor who died in a
plane crash while pursuing investigations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Our condolences
go to his family and colleagues.
We have heard this morning about Libya and the
actions of the Al-Qadhafi regime in attacking civilians.
When the Security Council adopted resolution 1970
(2011) (see S/PV.6491), it stressed the need to hold to
account those responsible for attacks on civilians. We
are grateful to the Prosecutor for the swift action he
has taken to implement resolution 1970 (2011). The
report he has presented describes a situation that
demands such decisive action. To quote from his
report: “the shooting at … protesters was systematic”;
“War crimes … [were] committed as a matter of
policy”; many hundreds, or thousands, of protesters
have died; and “massive crimes are reportedly
committed upon instruction of a few persons who
control the organizations that execute the orders”.
Despite repeated promises of a ceasefire from the
regime, we continue to see appalling attacks and
excessive use of force. Last week, as the Libyan
Deputy Foreign Minister announced a withdrawal from
Misrata, we saw intensified rocket attacks, with
hundreds of rockets landing in civilian areas over the
following three days. Together with disruptions to the
water and electricity supplies, this is conduct that
demonstrates an ongoing campaign to target civilians
in Misrata. Similar attacks have occurred in other
cities.

11-32142

S/PV.6528

Others, including the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, have highlighted the deliberate
targeting of medical facilities and civilians, the use of
children as combatants, the denial of humanitarian
access and the use of sexual violence as a weapon.
Given those indications of dreadful criminal acts,
we as the international community must continue to
support the Prosecutor in thoroughly investigating
these allegations and holding those responsible to
account.
The United Kingdom will continue to assist the
Prosecutor’s investigations wherever possible. All
United Nations Member States, whether parties to the
Rome Statute or not, should do the same.
Those holding power in Libya must fulfil their
obligations under resolution 1970 (2011) to cooperate
with the International Criminal Court and to swiftly
hand over any individual who may be indicted.
We welcome the cooperation that the Interim
Transitional National Council has given to the
investigation so far, and encourage it to continue.
As a State party to the International Criminal
Court, and therefore subject to its jurisdiction, the
United Kingdom strongly supports the Court’s mandate
to fight impunity, in Libya and elsewhere.
The deteriorating situation in Syria is of
increasing concern in that regard. The violent
repression there must stop immediately. The Syrian
Government has a responsibility to protect peaceful
protesters, not to attack them. Those responsible for
this violence should be held to account. There can be
no impunity. We strongly support the SecretaryGeneral’s call for an independent, transparent and
effective investigation into the killings. We must be
prepared to consider the appropriate avenues, including
the International Criminal Court, to bring justice to the
victims of these crimes. But it is not too late for the
Syrian Government to decide against more violent
oppression and bring about the radical reforms
necessary for peace and stability.
Mr. Wittig (Germany) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to thank Ambassador Osorio
for his outstanding work as President of the Council for
the month of April and to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency for the month of
May. I will speak in French, in a tribute both to you
and to the French language.

11-32142

I should like to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, for
his briefing and for the information that he provided on
developments in connection with his investigation in
Libya. We are aware of the heavy responsibility falling
to the Prosecutor, as an independent organ within the
International Criminal Court, with respect to the
carrying out of the investigation in Libya.
Germany strongly supports the work of the Court
in Libya. I should like to take this opportunity to thank
the Prosecutor and his team for having swiftly opened
an investigation. The perpetrators of crimes against
international law in Libya must be made to answer for
their actions as soon as possible, and justice must be
done for the victims.
In unanimously adopting resolution 1970 (2011)
and deciding to refer the situation in Libya to the
International Criminal Court, the Security Council was
far-sighted. The resolution focuses on the protection of
civilians; each State is responsible for protecting its
people against the most serious crimes. That is the
second message implicit in resolution 1970 (2011). Its
importance is not limited to Libya but goes beyond that
country.
Violence must end as soon as possible in Libya
and a solid ceasefire must be reached in order to allow
for a redoubling of efforts in the quest to achieve a
political solution. The Doha and Cairo meetings
contributed to a large extent to giving concrete
expression to the objectives that the international
community is pursuing beyond military action.
We deem it important to involve all interested
parties in a political process, in particular the
protagonists in the region. The Al-Qadhafi regime
gambled with its legitimacy and lost. It must yield to a
Government born of the will of the people, one that
will endeavour to bring democracy and openness to
Libya. That will also require a process of reconciliation
in the country as well as a systematic clarification of
the acts of injustice that have been committed. Hence
Germany welcomes the fact that the investigation of
the situation in Libya is being carried out not only with
determination but also with the requisite caution, in
particular with respect to the protection of witnesses.
The initial swift progress that has been made in the
investigation, which the Prosecutor has told us about,
is encouraging. We deem it of the highest importance
that justice be done as quickly as possible for the

5

S/PV.6528

victims of the conflict in Libya and that those who bear
specific and serious responsibility for any crimes
against humanity or other serious crimes under the
Rome Statute answer for their actions. Those who are
continuing to commit serious crimes in Libya must
know one thing: the Security Council and the
International Criminal Court, together if necessary or
separately, will ensure, within their respective spheres
of competence, that crimes against international law
shall not go unpunished.
Cooperation on the part of the international
community with the International Criminal Court is
essential in order to shed as much light as possible on
the serious crimes alleged to have been committed in
Libya. Germany welcomes the high level of
cooperation with the Prosecutor that many States and
organizations have already displayed. However, the
primary responsibility in that respect falls on the
Libyan authorities. We urge them to respect the
commitments incumbent upon them pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) and to cooperate swiftly and
fully with the International Criminal Court and the
Prosecutor. The Libyan authorities must allow the
Prosecutor to commence an investigation on Libyan
territory as soon as possible.
We are extremely concerned at the suffering that
is still being inflicted on the civilian population of
Libya. Serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law remain the order of the
day. We are deeply concerned at the instances of rape
and torture as well as the use of cluster weapons and
heavy weapons against the civilian population, as
described by the Prosecutor in his report. We condemn
in the strongest terms the continuation of the violence
and urge all the parties to the conflict to put an end to
those crimes and to respect human rights and
international humanitarian law.
The efforts deployed by the United Nations, in
particular by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, to relieve humanitarian suffering
and coordinate humanitarian aid are exemplary and
welcome. However, the situation in Misrata in
particular remains of concern. Germany recently made
available substantial funds for the delivery of
humanitarian aid to Misrata. My country has already
provided considerable humanitarian aid to the civilian
population affected by the crisis in Libya, and we stand
ready to continue to provide assistance.

6

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Germany for his very clear statement.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of May and to express gratitude
to the delegation of Colombia and to Ambassador
Osorio for their outstanding work during the month of
April. Unfortunately, my statement was prepared in
English, so I will speak in English.
(spoke in English)
I wish to thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, for his
report and for his comprehensive and informative
briefing today. I wish also to commend him and all his
staff for the significant investigative work he was able
to carry out in such a short period of time, under
difficult circumstances.
We are very troubled by the humanitarian
situation in Libya, with persistent violence against
civilians and serious violations of international
humanitarian law. We wish to express our serious
concern at the information on crimes against
humanitarian, further acts of violence and continuation
of war crimes, as described in the Prosecutor’s report
and highlighted here today by Mr. Moreno-Ocampo.
We are also disturbed at recent statements by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict pertaining to serious violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law,
widely echoed in the international press.
Under these circumstances, a political solution is
becoming all the more pressing. In that sense, it is
indispensable to reach a ceasefire that is both verifiable
and sustainable. We thus commend and fully support
the role and the endeavours of Special Envoy
Al-Khatib in reaching an agreement on a ceasefire and
on the launching of an inclusive political process.
However, we cannot forget the importance of
justice as a fundamental value of human society and as
an inherent part of the process to achieve a sustainable
peace and bring confidence to the affected
communities victimized by the persistent violence.

11-32142

S/PV.6528

The International Criminal Court has an
important role to play in this regard not only in
investigating the most serious crimes and in judging
and punishing the perpetrators most responsible, but
also in preventing the escalation of violence as a
dissuasive instrument for potential perpetrators and
sometimes the only source of hope for endangered
civilians and communities in conflict zones. We
therefore express our full support for the continuation
of the efforts made in the context of the investigation
and commend the support provided to the Prosecution
by States and organizations in these endeavours.
Cooperation with the Prosecutor and the Court is
essential to the success of the criminal investigations
and judicial proceedings.
We also wish to highlight the importance of the
protection of victims and witnesses, and commend the
prosecution for exercising the utmost caution in this
phase in order to avoid putting at risk persons and
humanitarian personnel who have given testimony.
We see an important role in this context for the
United Nations International Commission of Inquiry
established by the Human Rights Council, which
recently started its investigation in Libya, and we
welcome the Prosecutor’s intention to liaise closely
with it. However, we are worried about the impact of
the work of the Commission on the situation on the
ground. We hope that the Commission can conclude its
work soon.
Finally, we would like to seize this opportunity to
express Portugal’s support for the ICC and its
fundamental role in fighting impunity and promoting
peace and security.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, for his
briefing today. I have also taken note of his report to
the Security Council submitted pursuant to paragraph 7
of resolution 1970 (2011).
India, as members know, is not a signatory to the
Rome Statute or a member of the International
Criminal Court, for reasons that are well known. In our
explanation of vote on resolution 1970 (2011) on
26 February (see S/PV.6491), I noted that of the 192
States Members of the United Nations only 114 are
members of the ICC. Five of the 15 members of the
Security Council, including three permanent members,
are not parties to the Rome Statute. But we voted in

11-32142

favour of resolution 1970 (2011) because several
members of the Council, including our colleagues from
Africa and the Middle East, believed that the referral of
the situation in Libya to the ICC would have the effect
of causing the immediate cessation of violence and the
restoration of calm and stability.
Unfortunately, the situation in Libya has
continued to deteriorate, and widespread violence
continues. We remain seriously concerned at the
developments in Libya and condemn the use of force
against civilians. We reiterate our call on all parties to
immediately cease attacks on civilians and engage in
political dialogue to resolve the crisis. The longer the
conflict continues, the greater the harm caused to the
Libyan people, their economy and society.
We have noted that, after his preliminary
investigation, the Prosecutor, on the basis of available
information, has decided that are reasonable grounds to
believe that crimes against humanity and war crimes
have been committed and continue to be committed in
Libya. We have also noted that the Office of the
Prosecutor will submit its first application for an arrest
warrant to a pre-trial chamber in the coming weeks.
The Prosecutor should carry out a thorough and
impartial investigation and not be influenced by any
non-judicial considerations. All those responsible for
committing crimes covered under the Rome Statute
should be held accountable, irrespective of which side
of the conflict they may belong to and even if they
have changed sides. Political considerations should not
exonerate anyone from prosecution for crimes
committed. Any action by the ICC should fall strictly
within the ambit of resolution 1970 (2011), particularly
paragraph 6, which concerns States that are not parties
to the Rome Statute.
Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): We
wish to thank Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo for his
initial report pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolution
1970 (2011). My delegation read the report with great
interest and appreciates its concision, the quality of its
analyses and the clear conclusions it reaches on the
three main criteria for determining the Court’s
competence to investigate and prosecute the
perpetrators of the crimes committed in Libya since
15 February.
We note the difficulties involved in any
investigation in a conflict situation. We reaffirm
Gabon’s commitment to combating all forms of

7

S/PV.6528

impunity. That is a position of principle to which we
remain devoted and is the basis of our accession to the
Rome Statute. We are also attached to the fundamental
principles of the protection of civilians, international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
We recall our serious concern over the situation
prevailing in Libya. We support all Security Council
decisions to put an end to the violence in the country.
We therefore call on all parties to the conflict to cease
fire immediately. We urge once again that all means be
deployed to reach a political solution to the conflict.
That said, Gabon believes that the spirit and letter
of all resolutions adopted by the Security Council must
be observed. Their implementation must fully cover
criminal acts by whomsoever committed in this crisis.
The political efforts under way must not affect the
requirements of justice regarding crimes committed
against humanity. We therefore urge the Libyan
Government to cooperate and refrain from hampering
the investigations under way.
We affirm the need for the Security Council to
support all efforts to shed light on the crimes
committed throughout Libya, including against foreign
migrant workers, including those from sub-Saharan
Africa. We deplore the attacks on civilians who are
peacefully protesting to express their desires for a free
and democratic Libya.
We also stress the need for the Prosecutor to have
all the means necessary to carry out an impartial
investigation. My delegation therefore welcomes the
close cooperation between the Prosecutor and the
International Commission of Inquiry set up by the
Human Rights Council at its special session of
25 February.
Gabon assures the Prosecutor of its full
willingness to cooperate with him in his efforts to fully
achieve his objective. We encourage and urge all
parties to the conflict in Libya to cooperate
unconditionally with the International Criminal Court
in this process in order to shed light on the nature of
crimes so that perpetrators can be brought to justice.
In conclusion, we wish to emphasize that the way
in which this matter is addressed and the conclusions
reached will, in our view, contribute to bolstering
efforts to put an end to impunity and to reasserting the
authority and impartiality of the Court in this crisis.

8

Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank Prosecutor MorenoOcampo for his briefing and for the first report of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011). We are concerned at the
continuation of hostilities in Libya. An immediate
ceasefire and the establishment of an inclusive political
process that can address the aspirations of the Libyan
population and bring about durable peace in Libya are
more urgent than ever.
Brazil is deeply concerned by the ongoing
violence and the use of force against civilians. We are
troubled by the reports of killings of civilians, unlawful
arrests, torture, forced disappearances and rape. The
referral of the Libyan case to the ICC, mandated by
resolution 1970 (2011), underscores the concerns of the
international community at the aggression committed
against the civilian population in Libya. Those in
control of military capabilities, and their subordinates,
must cease all violence against civilians.
As developments in Libya unfold, we hope that
the ICC investigations can have an impact on the
desired goals — a cease to violence and the restoration
of calm. In the post-conflict stage, the ICC’s role will
continue to be essential in helping to ensure
accountability and justice, which are so important to
achieving durable peace.
In order for the ICC to help achieve these vital
objectives, the ongoing investigations leading to
possible future proceedings must be thorough,
transparent and impartial. We urge all parties to the
conflict to fully cooperate with the ICC.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for
presenting his initial considerations about prospects for
an investigation into the situation in Libya and for
briefing us on the work carried out by his Office
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). The Council
adopted that resolution unanimously based on its
serious concern at the widespread use of violence
against participants in peaceful demonstrations in
Libya, which led to casualties among the civilian
population.
What the Prosecutor has said today is
encouraging. We have, with deep regret, heard
information about the escalation of violence in Libya.
It is clear that violence can be effectively halted only
by the implementation of the measures called for in

11-32142

S/PV.6528

resolution 1973 (2011), namely, an immediate ceasefire
and the necessary efforts for a political settlement.
We are deeply alarmed by the growing number of
civilian casualties and the destruction of civilian
facilities as a result of the actions by opposing Libyan
parties, in particular as a result of the use of
indiscriminate weapons.
Unfortunately, it must be noted that actions by the
NATO-led coalition forces are also resulting in civilian
casualties, as was seen in particular during recent
bombings in Tripoli. We emphasize once again that any
use of force by the coalition in Libya should be carried
out in strict compliance with resolution 1973 (2011).
Any act going beyond the mandate established by that
resolution in any way or any disproportionate use of
force is unacceptable.
We support the efforts by the International
Criminal Court to carry out a fair and impartial
investigation into the actions of all parties to the
conflict in Libya and to bring to justice individuals
involved in possible crimes against humanity and
serious violations of international humanitarian law in
Libya.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to thank Prosecutor Luis MorenoOcampo for his presence at this meeting and for his
valuable, precise and detailed briefing to the Security
Council on the activities carried out by his Office
pursuant to the relevant section of resolution 1970
(2011).
The drafters of the Statue of the Court, among
whom Colombia is pleased to count itself, were aware
that the new judicial body being created could not
operate in a vacuum and that, in certain circumstances,
the task of maintaining international peace and security
could overlap with the implementation of the principle
of international criminal responsibility and the need to
bring to justice those responsible for serious crimes of
an international nature. That is why the Statute grants
the Security Council the right to refer a situation to the
Court in which one or more crimes under its
jurisdiction are alleged to have been committed.
In resolution 1970 (2011), the Council reaffirmed
several important concepts that are relevant to today’s
debate, including a determination that the widespread
and systematic attacks carried out against the civilian
population in Libya may constitute crimes against

11-32142

humanity. The investigation has uncovered evidence of
systematic armed repression resulting in hundreds of
victims, illegal arrests, torture and sexual violence. The
Council also stressed that all those responsible for, or
complicit in, attacks against the civilian population,
including aerial and naval attacks, must face the
consequences of their actions.
My Government believes that much of the added
value of the Security Council as the body bearing the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security lies in its credibility,
which is necessarily dependent on the effective
implementation of its decisions. In this context, we
believe that the work being carried out by the
International Criminal Court with regard to the
situation in Libya is of the utmost importance for
ensuring the full and effective implementation of
resolution 1970 (2011), and thus deserves our full
support. We are here owing to a decision adopted by
the Council under Article 40 of the Charter, which
clearly is binding in nature vis-à-vis all States
Members of the Organization.
I wish to emphasize that the report provided to
the Council last week and the additional information
provided today by Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo show
that the Court and the Prosecutor’s Office have been
particularly diligent with regard to the practical
implementation of resolution 1970 (2011).
Respect for international law, international
humanitarian law and human rights provide the basic
channels for consolidating democratic societies
governed by the rule of law — societies acting within a
system guided by the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and the standards of
international law.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I,
too, would like to thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for his
briefing.
The Chinese position on the International
Criminal Court remains unchanged. We attach great
importance to combating impunity and achieving
justice. China has always believed that the pursuit of
justice should be premised on the core values of
safeguarding peace and security and maintaining
international peace and harmony.
At present, the crisis in Libya shows no signs of
abating, and efforts to end it have reached a stalemate.

9

S/PV.6528

At the same time, the humanitarian situation continues
to deteriorate and the civilian population continues to
suffer grave consequences. China expresses its serious
concern in this regard.
China calls for the complete and strict
implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. The international community must
respect the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Libya. The internal affairs and
fate of Libya must be left up to the Libyan people to
decide. We are not in favour of any arbitrary
interpretation of the Council’s resolutions or of any
actions going beyond those mandated by the Council.
China believes that the priority for the time being
must be to achieve a complete and unconditional
ceasefire, as called for by the Council, and to establish
a ceasefire monitoring system under the auspices of the
United Nations.
Peaceful dialogue and negotiations are the best
way forward towards a political solution to this crisis.
We endorse the efforts made by all interested parties,
especially the African Union. We endorse the fivepoint road map proposed by the African Union.
The United Nations and the Security Council
must play a leading role in properly resolving the
Libyan crisis. We would like to see the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Al-Khatib, playing a
stronger role on the political track. At the same time,
we would like to ensure that the International Criminal
Court properly assesses the requirements to resolve in
crisis in Libya appropriately in its efforts to implement
resolution 1970 (2011) and to play a positive and
constructive role in promptly restoring peace, security
and order in Libya.
Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting to consider the work of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in relation to the situation in
Libya. We are also indebted to Mr. Moreno-Ocampo,
Chief Prosecutor of the ICC, for his insightful briefing.
The fight for justice and the battle against
impunity are at the heart of the values shared by most
Member States, including those committed to the aims
and objectives of the ICC. As a State party to the Rome
Statute, Nigeria reaffirms its support for the work of
the ICC in ensuring accountability for the most serious
crimes of international concern. The situation in Libya

10

presents an immediate test not only for the ICC as an
indispensable tool in our collective conflict resolution
efforts, but also for our collective determination to
maintain international peace and security. Indeed, the
very first Article of the United Nations Charter charges
us to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to peace and to
achieve peace through pacific means.
In that respect, we welcome the Chief
Prosecutor’s first report to the Security Council. The
report shows a measured, logical and comprehensive
approach to the conduct of preliminary examination of
allegations of human rights violations in Libya and the
subsequent launching of an investigation, in
accordance with resolution 1970 (2011). The initial
factual analysis, in line with the thresholds of
admissibility, gravity and jurisdiction, provides us with
a better understanding of the nature and extent of the
violations that the people of Libya have endured and
continue to endure.
The prima facie evidence of crimes against
humanity makes the case for an ICC investigation even
stronger and demonstrates that such a step is necessary
to satisfy the interests of justice. In addition, the
systematic nature of the attacks on civilians, the
routine use of imprecise weaponry and the evidence of
attempts to conceal crimes warrant rigorous
investigation to establish criminal responsibility.
However, the political situation in Libya is
complex and the security environment fragile and
mutable. In resolving the Libyan crisis, resolutions
1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011) must be read and
implemented
together.
The
resolutions
are
complementary and mutually reinforcing. Indeed, they
are anchored in the desire for a peaceful and politically
based solution to the Libyan conflict. That is why the
efforts of interlocutors, such as the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Al-Khatib, the Libya
Contact Group and the African Union Ad Hoc HighLevel Committee on Libya are recognized. All such
activities are central to facilitating dialogue between
the parties with a view to cementing a lasting peace.
For those reasons, it is important that the
activities of the Prosecutor be carefully calibrated to
support the ongoing political efforts to find a peaceful
solution. Ignoring that pivotal dimension may threaten
the prospects for peace not just for Libya, but also for
the region at large. Thus, it is essential that justice be

11-32142

S/PV.6528

pursued in a manner that does not jeopardize efforts
aimed at promoting lasting peace and stability in the
country.
That observation underscores the need for the
prosecuting team to uphold high standards of evidence
and to remain impartial in the face of compelling and
disturbing evidence. In that regard, I would highlight
the fate of those sub-Saharan Africans detained by the
authorities in Benghazi and stress the need to ensure
that their cases are handled according to due process.
We must not underestimate the heavy
responsibility that the Prosecutor bears in that regard.
It is difficult to see how the interests of justice can be
served without the cooperation of the international
community. As is clear from the report, the
Prosecutor’s work thus far has benefited from
international cooperation, which must be encouraged to
continue. It is our firm belief that the ICC’s
involvement should further our collective efforts to
achieve lasting peace in Libya and to see the
aspirations of the Libyan people realized.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): I thank you,
Mr. President, for calling this meeting and for
providing us with an opportunity to interact with the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
on the situation in Libya. I also wish to thank the
Prosecutor, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, for his briefing to the
Security Council. We are particularly impressed by the
speed with which the investigations were completed.
Our delegation not only supported resolution
1970 (2011), but indeed co-sponsored it. Our support
for referral to the ICC was based, inter alia, on South
Africa’s support of the international community’s fight
against impunity and the concern that we had voiced
over the escalation of violence in Libya. As a State
party to the Rome Statute, South Africa will continue
to support the Prosecutor in relation to the conflict in
Libya. As we stated in our statements during the
adoptions of resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011)
(see S/PV.6491 and S/PV.6498), South Africa has been
and remains concerned about the crimes against
civilians and the human rights violations committed in
the context of the conflict in Libya.
As a starting point, we note that the standard of
proof for the decision to initiate an investigation is far
lower than that required for a successful prosecution.
Therefore, we encourage the Prosecutor to leave no
stone unturned in the search for further evidence to

11-32142

strengthen the cases against those who may have
committed atrocities. We hope that the Prosecutor will
look at all atrocities committed on either side of the
conflict.
As the report of the Prosecutor notes, the current
situation in Libya now amounts to an armed conflict.
Crimes may have been committed by Government and
opposition forces alike. To protect the Court’s integrity
and to ensure that all who were caught in the crossfire
of the conflict are protected, all crimes, regardless of
the perpetrators, should be considered. Of course, such
a statement is without prejudice to the Prosecutor’s
determination of who bears the greatest responsibility
for the most serious crimes.
Finally, a number of delegations have asked
questions about the implementation of resolution 1970
(2011). In particular, questions have been asked about
whether the actions of the implementing States have
been consistent with the letter and the spirit of
resolution 1970 (2011). We are aware that paragraph 6
of the resolution establishes a caveat designed to
exclude the jurisdiction of the Court in such cases.
Nonetheless, we would recall that the caveat in
paragraph 6 is limited to actions established or
authorized by the Security Council. Therefore, any
actions that fall outside the scope of resolution 1973
(2011) should not benefit from the protection offered
by the caveat. It is our sincere hope that, in considering
the evidence, the Office of the Prosecutor will also
consider any actions that may have been committed in
the purported implementation of resolution 1973
(2011).
Let me conclude by assuring the Prosecutor that
South Africa will continue to cooperate with the
activities of the ICC. We look forward to hearing from
the Prosecutor in the next six months and hope that, by
then, the ICC will have issued indictments against
those most responsible for the atrocities committed in
Libya. We are pleased that the Council intends soon to
present a case to the ICC, seeking arrest warrants
against three individuals. We hope that, in time, the net
will be cast even wider.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me
begin by thanking the Prosecutor for his very important
and very informative briefing.
In resolution 1970 (2011), this Council
unanimously decided to refer the situation in Libya to
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court

11

S/PV.6528

(ICC). By doing so, the Council reflected the
importance that the international community attaches
to ensuring that those responsible for the widespread
and systematic attacks against the Libyan people are
held accountable.
The Prosecutor has highlighted the deeply
troubling actions of the Libyan Government and its
security forces, including incidents in which
Al-Qadhafi forces fired on civilians, reports of torture,
rape, deportations, enforced disappearances, the use of
cluster munitions and heavy weaponry against targets
in crowded urban areas, and the blocking of
humanitarian supplies. All of that underscores the
gravity of what we are witnessing in Libya today.
New reports make clear that the Al-Qadhafi
regime continues to directly target civilians, so the
need for justice and accountability persists. Those
reports further underscore the message, which we have
repeated in our statements and in our diplomatic
efforts, that Al-Qadhafi has lost any and all legitimacy
to lead Libya.
As the ICC process continues, it is important that
the international community remain united in its
commitment to protecting civilians and civilianpopulated areas under the threat of attack, to ending
violence against the Libyan people, and to defending
the universal rights that all of us share.
My Government welcomes the swift and
thorough work of the Prosecutor. He has said that he
plans to submit an application for an arrest warrant in
the coming weeks. The spectre of ICC prosecution is
serious and imminent, and should serve as a warning to
those around Al-Qadhafi of the perils of continuing to
tie their fate to his. The Prosecutor has also indicated
that further cases may be opened, as would be
appropriate against individuals involved in further
crimes that may be committed in the days ahead.
Tomorrow, members of the international
community will gather in Rome to examine ways of
supporting a political process that will advance the
rights and aspirations of the Libyan people. Several
proposals have been put forward to resolve the crisis.
We continue to discuss those and other potential
solutions with our allies and partners, including United
Nations Special Envoy Al-Khatib.
We believe in the potential of the Libyan people.
We believe that they deserve leaders who share and

12

support their aspirations to freedom, democracy and
dignity. Through his brutal oppression, Al-Qadhafi has
demonstrated time and again that he is not interested in
a Libya that honours his people’s hopes and rights.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my gratitude to
Prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo for his briefing. We
highly appreciate his efforts and those of his Office,
which contribute to the protection of Libyan civilians
and the implementation of the rule of law.
Lebanon recalls that, on 22 February, in a special
emergency meeting, the Council of the League of Arab
States condemned the acts committed against Libyan
citizens as constituting grave violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. We also
recall the letter dated 26 February from the Permanent
Representative of Libya to the United Nations, in
which he requested that those responsible for killing
Libyan civilians be held accountable to the
International Criminal Court (ICC).
Lebanon is deeply concerned over the
deteriorating situation in Libya and the ongoing
behaviour of the discredited and delegitimized Libyan
regime, especially in Misrata, Zintan and elsewhere.
The regime is also involved in the use of heavy
weapons and cluster bombs against civilians. We were
even more alarmed by what we heard recently from
Ms. Navi Pillay, United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights.
Lebanon welcomes the report on the activities of
the Office of the Prosecutor over the past two months
concerning the situation in Libya. We commend the
cooperation of Member and non-Member States, as
well as other organizations, as mentioned in the report.
That cooperation, extended in response to Security
Council resolution 1970 (2011), sends a clear message
from the international community concerning the
protection of Libyan citizens from the violations to
which they have been subject since 15 February.
Lebanon also commends the work of the Office
of the Prosecutor in protecting witnesses and ensuring
that their contributions and revelations of fact do not
place their lives in danger. The conduct of the Office
has been characterized by a high level of professional
responsibility.
Lebanon emphasizes the importance of holding
accountable those responsible for horrific crimes

11-32142

S/PV.6528

against the Libyan people, who are eager to win their
freedom. We also believe that the success of the ICC in
those efforts will act as a deterrent in the future and
serve as a tool to end the era of impunity in Libya.
Here, we commend the Prosecutor’s comments on the
imminent issuance of arrest warrants.
In conclusion, Lebanon looks forward to justice
that will help to lessen the frustration and grief of the
families of the martyrs in Libya, reduce the suffering
of the injured and tortured, return internally displaced
persons and refugees to their homes, and restore peace
and security in Libya.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me to welcome the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court to today’s meeting and thank him for
his extensive briefing. I also wish to thank the
Prosecutor for preparing the report that has given us a
further overview of and insight into the situation in the
field. In no uncertain terms, it outlines the rather grave
and serious situation, providing facts that unfortunately
have been confirmed from briefing to briefing.
Unfortunately, the report of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) provides further
evidence of serious and constant violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
and of the deterioration of the situation, including
systematic violence against the civilian population. We
strongly condemn such violence and find it to be
unacceptable.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is gravely concerned by
the reported crimes and the manner in which they have
been committed, which have only further reinforced
our conviction that the referral of the situation in Libya
to the ICC was true to our commitments and
obligations.
After only two months of investigation, the report
of the Prosecutor already contains evidence of
incidents constituting alleged war crimes and crimes
against humanity. We firmly believe that addressing
these crimes and punishing those responsible is,
beyond any doubt, the main precondition for
reconciliation, sustainable and long-lasting peace and
stability. Impunity is not an option, and I am certain
that all of us agree on that.
For those precise reasons, and on the basis of our
own strong and unwavering belief in the justice
system, we believe that the full implementation of

11-32142

resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011) is of utmost
importance. Obligations derived from those resolutions
are not optional.
Finally, it is our firm belief that condemnation of
the grave atrocities and crimes under the Court’s
jurisdiction is unanimous and unwavering. My country
remains committed to the ideas and goals of the ICC,
and to its own obligations. Furthermore, the Prosecutor
of the ICC has our full support for his work.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I thank Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo for his report
and his briefing. When a Government attacks civilian
populations instead of protecting them; when the
atrocities committed sear the human conscience; and
when the stability of an entire region is affected, the
international community has a responsibility to
intervene and to protect civilians. That is what we done
in Libya.
Since mid-February, faced with the atrocities
committed by Libyan leaders, the Arab League, the
African Union and the Secretary General of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference have
condemned the grave violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law. The Security Council
also reacted quickly, by unanimously adopting, on
26 February, resolution 1970 (2011), which referred the
situation in Libya to the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court.
In his report, the Prosecutor confirms the fears
expressed by the Council. Attacks by security forces
against peaceful demonstrators were, as of
17 February, systematic and widespread. Civilians
suspected of being associated with demonstrations
were arbitrarily detained, abducted and tortured.
The Prosecutor also lists the war crimes
committed in the context of the armed conflict. In
Misrata and elsewhere, it is not military targets that are
the priority targets, but rather the civilian
population — through the use of fragmentation shells
and snipers, attacks against hospitals and the mining of
ports to hinder the evacuation of civilians. The
Prosecutor also indicated that he will examine any
allegation of attacks against African migrants.
By referring the situation in Libya to the
International Criminal Court, we took an important

13

S/PV.6528

decision and we took it unanimously. It was an
informed decision aimed at ensuring that those mainly
responsible for these crimes were prosecuted, judged
and imprisoned. The judicial process is under way and
must run its course.
As the Prosecutor explained, the International
Criminal Court will prosecute only the leading
perpetrators: those who organized, ordered or financed
crimes. There is still time for those who were misled
into becoming involved in the criminal campaign led
by Al-Qadhafi against innocent civilians to dissociate
themselves from it. There can be no political or other
kind of solidarity with those who order or commit such
crimes.

France welcomes the fact that, in accordance with
resolution 1970 (2011), States and regional
organizations have offered their full cooperation to the
Prosecutor, thus enabling his investigation to make
rapid progress. In the future, whatever the decisions
taken by the judges, the Council, united and
determined, will have to support them.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

14

11-32142
