Re&olutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Assembly in its resolution 1991 B (XVIII) of 17 December 1963, came into force on 31 August 1965,
Bearing in mind that in the election of members of
the Economic and Social Council at the twentieth session of the General Assembly effect must be given to
the increase in the membership of the Council and
to the transitional provisions regarding terms of office
provided in Article 61 of the Charter as amended, and
that rule 146 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly,
as amended by the present resolution. will apply for
the first time at the election to be held at the twentyfirst session,
Decides, with effect from 1 January 1966, to amend
rule 146 of its rules of procedure by replacing the word
"six" by the word "nine".
1391st plenary 111ceti1117,
8 Deccmbcv 1965.

2099 (XX). Technical assistance to promote the
teaching, study, dissemination and wider
appreciation of international law
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1816 (XVII) of 18 December 1962 and 1968 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on Technical Assistance to Promote the Teaching. Study, Dissemination and \Vider Appreciation of
International Law, 3
Having also considered the relevant paragraphs of
the report of the Technical Assistance Committee 4 and
of the report of the Economic and Social Council, 5 the
reports of the Secretary-General, 6 the communication
by the "Cnited Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,7 as well as the replies received from
Governments of Member States and from interested
international organizations and institutions, 8
Recognizing the need for the strengthening of the
role of international l;iw in international relations,
Having noted the valuable work which is being undertaken by some institutions and other bodies in the
promotion of the teaching, study, dissemination and
wider appreciation of international law,
Considering nevertheless that much remains to be
done in this field,
Noting that a large number of Member States have
expressed the view that a programme of assistance
and exchange should be established and administered by
the United Nations and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for the
purpose of furthering the objectives of the United
Nations and of assisting Member States, in particular
developing countries, in the training of specialists in
the field of international law and in the promotion of
3 Ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 89, document A/5887.
4 A/5791. For the printed text, see Official Records of thr
~conomic and Social Council, Thirty-seventh Session, Anne:res,
agenda item 19, document E/3933, paras. 54-60.
5 Official Records of the General Assembly, Nineteenth Session. Supplement No. 3 (A/5803), para. 346.
6 Ibid., Eiqhteenfh Session, Annexes, agenda item 72, document A/558.'i; ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda item
89, document A/5790.
7 Ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 89, document A/C.6/L.565.
8 Ibid., Eighteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 72, documents A/5455 and Add:l-6; ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes,
agenda item 89, documents A/5744 and Add.1-4.

89

the teaching, study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international law,
Bearing in lllind the limited financial means available
fur this purpose and the desirability of avoiding any
dttplication of programmes established and carried out
by States and by other international and national
organizations,
Considering that even a limited programme will contribute towards meeting some of the most pressing
11ecds for a better knowledge of international law as a
means of strengthening international peace ancl security
ancl of promoting friendly relations and co-operation
;m1ong States,
1. Frtrcsses its atprcciation to the Special Committee on Technical Assistance to Promote the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and \Vider Appreciation of International Law and to the United 'Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization for the work accomplished in the preparation of the programme of assistance ;md exchange in the field of international law:
2. Decidrs to establish a programme of assistance
and exchange in the field of international law consisting
of:
(a) Steps to encomagc and co-ordinate existing
international law programmes carried out by States and
by organizations and institutions, such as those proposed by the Special Committee in part I, section A,
of its report to the General Assembly;
( b) Forms of direct assistance and exchange, such
as seminars, training and refresher courses, fellowships,
advisory services of experts, the provision of legal
publications an<! libraries, and translations of major
kgal works:
3. A11t'1orizr.1 the Secretarv-General to initiate the
preparatory work for this programme in 1966 within
the total level of appropriations approved for that year;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to publicize the
above-mentioned programme and invites Member
States. interested national and international institutions
;111d organizations. and individuals to make voluntary
rnntributions tow:1rds the financing of this programme
or otherwise towards assisting in its implementation and
possible expansion. in accordance with the report of the
Special Committee:
S. Requests the Secretary-General. taking into considrration the voluntary contributions which may have
been received in terms of paragraph 4 above and in
consultation with the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, to make in the
lmclget estimates for 1967 and 1968 such provisions as
may be necessary to carry out the activities specified in
the annex to the present resolution;
fi. Tnvitrs the United Nations Educational. Scientific
and Cultural Organization to participate in the implementation of the programme established in paragraph 2
above and requests the Secretary-General to reach
agreement with the Director-General of that organization, subject to any necessary approval hy the competent
authorities of the two organizations. as to which parts
of the programme are to he financed and administered
hv each organization :
7. Requests the Board of Trustees of the United
:-J at ions Institute for Training and Research to consider
the ways in which international law is to be given
its proper place among the activities of the Institute in
the light of the report of the Special Committee and
of the views expressed on the subject in the Sixth
Committee;

90

General Assembly-Twentieth Session

8. Decides to establish an Advisory Committee on
Technical Assistance to Promote the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International
Law-composed of ten Member States to be appointed
every three years by the General Assembly-which shall
meet at the request either of the Secretary-General or
of a majority of its members, shall advise the SecretaryGeneral on the substantive aspects of the programmes
contained in the report of the Special Committee and
on the implementation of the present resolution and
shall report, as appropriate, to the General Assembly;
a representative of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization and a representative of the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research shall be invited, whenever necessary, to the
meetings of the Advisory Committee;
9. Reiterates the appeal to Member States, made
in its resolution 1968 C (XVIII) of 16 December 1963,
inviting them to offer foreign students fellowships in
the field of international law at their universities and
institutions of higher education and to consider the inclusion, in their programmes of cultural exchange, of
provision for the exchange of teachers, students and
experts, as well as books and other publications in
that field;
10. Calls the attention of Member States to the
existing arrangements whereby, apart from the programme me1tioned in paragraph 2 above, requests may
be made:
(a) Under part V of the regular budget for assistance with respect to any international legal aspects
involved in development projects, and under the human
rights advisory services programme for assistance relating to the field of international law;
(b) Under the Expanded Programme of Technical
Assistance for assistance in specific fields of international law related to economic, social or administrative
development, provided such requests are included in
country programmes in accordance with the relevant
rules and procedures ;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the
implementation of the present resolution and decides to
include in the provisional agenda of its twenty-first
session an item entitled "Technical assistance to promote
the teaching, study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international law";
12. Requests the Secretary-General to explore the
possibility of including the topic "The teaching, study,
dissemination and wider appreciation of international
law" among the subjects of technical assistance programmes and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-first session.
1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.
At its 1404th plenar:y meeting, on 2G December 1965, the
General Assembly appointed, on the proposal of the Sixth
Committee,9 the members of the Advisory Committee on Technical Assistance to Promote the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law, established
under paragraph 8 of the above resolution.
The Advisory Conimit!ee will be composed of the following
Member States: AFGHANISTAN, BELGIUM, EcuAnoR, FRANCE,
GHANA,

HuNGARY,

UNION

OF Sov1E1 Soc1A1.1sT REPUBLICS,

9 Ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 89, document A/6136, para. 28.

UNITED KL'IGDO~! ()}- (;REAT BRITAIN ,IN[) NornHimN
UNITED

RFPURLIC

111,

TAKZANI,1

and

UNITJ-:n

]RELAND,

STATE~

OF

A MERK A.

ANNEX
l'rogra111111c for 1967

(a) A regional training and refresher course of four weeks'
duration, which will he given in Africa and which will be
1he first of a series of such courses to be held every two years,
in rotation, i11 ,\frica, Asia an<l Latin America;
( {,) A w11nl uf ten i cllowshiv at the request of Covc111ments
,,[ developing countric,;
(c) Advisory services of up to three experb, if requested
by developing countries;
(d) Provision of a set of United ~ations leg-al publications
to up to fifteen institutions in dl'.\ eloping- countries;
( c) Preparation nf a surv<:y of certain of the prim·ipa I
examples of the codification and progressive development of
intern:,tional law within the framework of the United Nat ions.
Programme for 1968
(11) A regional seminar of three weeks' duration, which will

be held in Latin ,\merica and which will he the first of lL
series of such seminars to be held every two years, in rotation,
in Latin Amc1·ica, :\ft-ica and Asia;
( /,) A ward of fifteen fellowships at the request of Govcrnmenh of developing countril'S:
( ,·) !\d,·isory sen-iccs of up to fi, e experts. if requested by
<lt>veloping countries;
( d) Provision of a sl"t of united Nations lrgal puhlicatiom
to up to twenty imti: utions in developing countries;
(e) Publication of a survey of certain of the principal
examples of the codification and progressive development of
international law within the framework of the United Nations.

2100 (XX). Draft Declaration on the Right of
Asylum
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1839 (XVII) of 19 December
1962 relating to the draft Declaration on the Right of
Asylum,
Having considered, at the twentieth session, certain
procedural ;i.spects of the item with a view to expediting
its future consideration,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to invite those
Member States which have not yet done so to submit
their comments on the draft Declaration on the Right
of Asylum before the twenty-first session of the General
Assembly, and to invite those Member States which
have previously submitted comments to submit supplementary comments if they so wish;
2. Decides to take up the item entitled "Draft
Declaration on the Right of Asylum" as soon as possible at its twenty-first session, with a view to completing the text of the draft Declaration as a whole.
1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.
2101 (XX). Amendment to Article 109 of the
Charter of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Considering that the Charter of the United Nations
has been amended to provide that the membership of
the Security Council, as provided in Article 23, should
be increased from eleven to fifteen and that decisions
of the Security Council should be taken, as provided
