General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

44

1. Reaffirms its endorsement, in principle, of the
concept of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia;
2. Urges once again the States of South Asia and
such other neighbouring non-nuclear-weapon States as
may be interested to continue to make all possible
efforts to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
South Asia and to refrain, in the meantime, from any
action contrary to this objective;
3. Calls upon those nuclear-weapon States which
have not done so to respond positively to this proposal
and to extend the necessary co-operation in the efforts
to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to render such
assistance as may be required to promote the efforts
for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in South Asia and to report on the subject to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session;
5. Decides to consider this item at its thirty-fourth
session.
84th plenary meetin!?
14 December 1978
33/66.

Prohibition of the development and
manufacture of new types of weapons
of mass destruction and new systems of
such weapons
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3479 (XXX) of 11 December 1975, 31/74 of 10 December 1976 and
32/84 A and B of 12 December 1977 on the prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types
of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of
such weapons,
Recalling also paragraph 77 of its resolution S-10/2
of 30 June 1978, by which it decided that, in order
to help prevent a qualitative arms race and so that
scientific and technological achievements might ultimately be used solely for peaceful purposes, effective
measures should be taken to prevent the emergence
of new types of weapons of mass destruction based
on new scientific principles and achievements,
Concerned that the development of modern science
and technology should not lead to the emergence of
new, still more destructive types of weapons of mass
destruction and new systems of such weapons, comparable in effect to those particular weapons identified
in the 1948 definition of weapons of mass destruction, 24
Restating its view that specific agreement could be
concluded on particular types of new weapons of
mass destruction which may be identified, and that this
question should be kept under continuing review,
Taking into account the report of the Conference
of the Committee on Disarmament with regard to this
question, 25
1. Welcomes the active continuation of negotiations relating to the prohibition and limitation of identified weapons of mass destruction;
2. Requests the Committee on Disarmament, while
taking account of its existing priorities, to pursue its
2 4 See S/C.3/32/Rev.1

and Rev.I/Corr.I.

examination of the subject, with any appropriate expert
assistance, with a view to reaching agreement on the
prevention of the emergence of new weapons of mass
destruction based on new scientific principles and
achievements and to the speedy preparation of specific
agreements on individual types of weapons which may
be identified;
3. Urges all States to refrain from actions which
might adversely affect the efforts referred to in paragraph 2 above;
4. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to
report on its consideration of the subject to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3479 (XXX) of 11 December 1975, 31/74 of 10 December 1976 and
32/84 A of 12 December 1977 on the prohibition of
new types of weapons of mass destruction,
Bearing in mind the provision contained in paragraph 39 of its resolution S-10/12 of 30 June 1978
to the effect that qualitative and quantitative disarmament measures are both important for halting the arms
race and that efforts to that end must include negotiations on the limitation and cessation of the qualitative
improvement of armaments, especially weapons of
mass destruction and the development of new means
of warfare,
Recalling the decision contained in paragraph 77
of the same resolution to the effect that in order to
help prevent a qualitative arms race and so that
scientific and technological achievements might ultimately be used solely for peaceful purposes, effective
measures should be taken to prevent the emergence
of new types of weapons of mass destruction based
on new scientific principles and achievements, and
that efforts should be appropriately pursued aiming at
the prohibition of such new types and new systems of
weapons of mass destruction,
Expressing once again, in the light of the decisions
adopted at its tenth special session, its firm belief in
the importance of concluding an agreement or agreements to prevent the use of scientific and technological
progress for the development of new types of weapons
of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons,
Noting, in this connexion, that in the negotiations
between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and
the United States of America the sides have made
h~~dway in reaching agreement on some basic prov1s1ons of the convention on the prohibition of radiological weapons which is being prepared,
Taking note of the discussion at the Conference
of the Committee on Disarmament of the question of
the prohibition of the development and manufacture
of new types of weapons of mass destruction and
new systems of such weapons,
Taking into account the report of the Conference
of the Committee on Disarmament with regard to
this question, 26
l. Requests the Committee on Disarmament, in
the light of its existing priorities, actively to continue

2G See Official Records of the General Assembly,

Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/33/27), vol. I, paras. 188-218.

26 Ibid.

III.

negotiations, with the assistance of qualified governmental experts, with a view to agreeing on the text
of an agreement on the prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types of weapons of
mass destruction and new systems of such weapons,
and to expedite the preparation of specific agreements
on particular types of such weapons;
2. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to
submit a report on the results achieved to the General Assembly for consideration at its thirty-fourth
session;
3. Once again urges all States to refrain from any
action which could adversely affect the talks aimed
at working out an agreement or agreements to prevent
the emergence of new types of weapons of mass
destruction and new systems of such weapons;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Committee on Disarmament all documents relating
to the discussion of this item by the General Assembly
at its thirty-third session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session the item entitled "Prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types
of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of
such weapons: report of the Committee on Disarmament".
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/67.

Reduction of military budgets

The General Assembly,
Noting that, according to the Final Document of
the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,
it should continue to consider what concrete steps
should be taken to facilitate the reduction of military
budgets, bearing in mind the relevant proposals and
documents of the United Nations on this question, 27
Reaffirming its conviction that there is an urgent
need for the nuclear-weapon States and other militarily
significant States to carry out reductions in their
military budgets and that this would increase the possibilities of reallocation of resources now being used
for military purposes to economic and social development, particularly for the benefit of the developing
countries,
Convinced that a reduction of military budgets
could be carried out without affecting the military
balance to the detriment of the national security of
any country,
Conscious that the attainment of the ultimate objectives will require the co-operation of nuclearweapon States and other militarily significant States,
Convinced that the systematic measurement and
reporting of military expenditure is an important first
objective in the move towards agreed and balanced
reductions in military expenditure,
Recognizing the need for the availability of a satisfactory instrument for standardized reporting on the
military expenditure of Member States,
Recognizing also the value of such an instrument
as a means of increasing confidence between States
by improving the information on military expenditure,
27 Resolution

S-10/2, para. 90.

45

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling that in its resolution 32/85 of 12 December 1977 it requested the Secretary-General to
ascertain those States which would be prepared to
participate in a pilot test of the reporting instrument
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
special session devoted to disarmament,
Noting with appreciation the report of the Secretary-General28 submitted to the General Assembly at
its tenth special session in response to paragraphs 2
and 3 of resolution 32/85,
Recognizing that the work set in motion by the
General Assembly on the reduction of military budgets
has reached a decisive stage and that successive
reports of groups of experts, in particular the latest
report issued on 14 September 1977,29 have moved
the whole exercise to a position where practical steps
for testing and refining the proposed reporting instrument could now be taken,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of an ad hoe panel of experienced practitioners
in the field of military budgeting:
(a) To carry out a practical test of the proposed
reporting instrument with the voluntary co-operation
of States from different regions and representing different budgeting and accounting systems;
( b) To assess the results of the practical test;
( c) To develop recommendations for further refinement and implementation of the reporting instrument;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Ad Hoe Panel on Military Budgeting with the assistance that may be deemed necessary;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on
the implementation of the present resolution;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Reduction of
military budgets".

84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978

33/68.

Implementation of the Declaration of the
Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace:io

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as
a Zone of Peace, contained in its resolution 2832
( XXVI) of 16 December 1971, and recalling also
its resolutions 2992 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972,
3080 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, 3259 A
(XXIX) of 9 December 1974, 3468 (XXX) of 11
December 1975, 31/88 of 14 December 1976, 32/86
of 12 December 1977 and S-10/2 of 30 June 1978,
Encouraged by the continued support extended to
the Declaration by the Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Havana from 15 to 20 May 1978,31 and by the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Non2s A/S-10/6 and Corr.I and Add.I.
29 A/32/194 and Add.l.
30 See also sect. X.B.2, decision 33/418.
31 See

A/33/118.
