S/PRST/2006/37

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 August 2006
English
Original: English and French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5505th meeting of the Security Council, held on 7 August 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Côte d’Ivoire”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council affirms its commitment to the implementation of
the peace process and of the roadmap established by the International Working
Group (IWG). It welcomes the initiatives of the Prime Minister, Mr. Charles
Konan Banny, and the ongoing dialogue among President Laurent Gbagbo, the
Prime Minister and all other Ivorian parties.
“The Security Council reiterates its full support for the Prime Minister. It
welcomes his determination to implement the decisions taken by all Ivorian
parties at the high level meeting held in Yamoussoukro on 5 July 2006. It
strongly encourages him to continue his efforts and demands that all Ivorian
parties cooperate with him fully and in good faith.
“The Security Council welcomes the launch of the mobile courts
throughout Côte d’Ivoire and the Prime Minister’s announcement of the
completion of the pre-cantonment of the Defense and Security Forces of Côte
d’Ivoire and of the Armed Forces of the Forces Nouvelles. The Security
Council further welcomes the establishment of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) Monitoring Group, the measures
taken to implement the quadripartite control of pre-cantonment operations and
the beginning of operations to dismantle and disarm the militias. It takes note
of the signing of a Presidential decree allowing the Independent Electoral
Commission (IEC) to propose any technical adjustments to the electoral code
for the transitional elections.
“The Security Council expresses its concern that the IEC’s structures
have not been deployed throughout the country as well as the local offices of
the National Commission of Supervision of the Identification. It urges the
Ivorian parties to settle these issues without delay.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the obstructions to the normal
functioning of the mobile courts which followed the calls for such action made
by political leaders, in particular the Chairman of the FPI and the President of
the former National Assembly. It notes that the procedures of the mobile courts

06-45699 (E) 070806

*0645699*

S/PRST/2006/37

were decided in consultation with President Laurent Gbagbo. It urges all
parties to ensure that the mobile courts function without further hindrance.
“The Security Council expresses its utmost concern and condemns the
acts of violence committed by organized groups, in particular the Young
Patriots, which led to the deaths of civilians, and further condemns the attack
of 24 July against the High Representative for the Elections, despite the
presence of the Republican Guard at the scene.
“The Security Council condemns also the incidents of 15 July at the
premises of the Radio Télévision Ivoirienne (RTI). It calls on the Ivorian
authorities to strengthen security measures at RTI. It underlines the importance
of guaranteeing the independence and neutrality of the media in Côte d’Ivoire.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support for the implementation of
measures against those responsible as provided for in paragraphs 9 and 11 of
resolution 1572 (2004) and underlines that the reports of the events described
above will be examined by the Sanctions Committee established by paragraph
14 of resolution 1572 (2004).
“The Security Council demands that the Defense and Security Forces of
Côte d’Ivoire, including the Republican Guard, act within the law of the land
at all times to ensure full security of the population, including foreigners, and
support the implementation of the roadmap led by the Prime Minister. It
reaffirms in this regard paragraphs 8 and 9 of resolution 1633 (2005). It recalls
that the Defense and Security Forces and the Forces Nouvelles must ensure the
security of the mobile courts hearings in the areas under their control.
“The Security Council demands also that all Ivorian parties cooperate
fully in the operations of the Impartial Forces, in particular by guaranteeing
the safety, security and freedom of movement of their personnel, as well as
associated personnel, throughout the territory of Côte d’Ivoire, and affirms that
any obstacle to their freedom of movement or to the full implementation of
their mandates will not be tolerated. It recalls paragraph 4 of resolution 1643
(2005) in this regard.
“The Security Council reaffirms the importance of the concomitant
implementation of the identification and DDR operations and of the
acceleration by all Ivorian parties of the implementation of the roadmap in
order to create the conditions indispensable for the holding of free, open, fair
and transparent elections within the agreed timetable.
“The Security Council therefore considers that it is necessary to deploy
throughout the territory of Côte d’Ivoire as many mobile courts as possible
towards the objective of 150 mobile courts called for in the Prime Minister’s
plan and to complete the second phase of the DDR programme, the
cantonment of combatants, before the next meeting of the IWG. It encourages
the Prime Minister to take all the necessary actions to this end, with the
agreement of all Ivorian parties, as well as for the organization of the
elections. It calls on the IWG to monitor such progress and to report to it on its
assessment of the progress made.

2

06-45699

S/PRST/2006/37

“The Security Council expresses its full support for the IWG and
endorses its ninth communiqué dated 20 July 2006. It reiterates its full support
for the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the High
Representative for the Elections.”

06-45699

3
