20

General Assembly-Thirty-eighth Session

2. Deplores the death of innocent civilians resulting
from the armed intervention;
3. Calls upon all States to show the strictest respect for
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Grenada;
4. Calls for an immediate cessation of the armed inter­
vention and the immediate withdrawal of the foreign
troops from Grenada;
5. Requests that free elections be organized as rapidly
as possible to enable the people of Grenada to choose its
government democratically;
6. Requests the Secretary-General as a matter of
urgency to assess the situation and to report back to the
General Assembly within seventy-two hours. 24
43rd plenarJi meeting
2 November 1983

38/8. Report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency
The General Assembly.
Having received the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency to the General Assembly for the year
1982, 25
Taking note of the statement by the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency of 4 November
1983, 26 which provides additional information on devel­
opments in the Agency's activities during 1983,
Recognizing the importance of the work of and the rele­
vance for the International Atomic Energy Agency to pro­
mote further the application of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes, as envisaged in its Statute, and to improve fur­
ther its technical assistance and promotional programmes
for the benefit of developing countries,
Conscious of the importance of the work of the Interna­
tional Atomic Energy Agency in the implementation of the
safeguards provisions of the Treaty on the Non­
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 27 and other interna­
tional treaties, conventions and agreements designed to
achieve similar objectives, as well as ensuring, as far as it is
able, that the assistance provided by the Agency or at its
request or under its supervision or control is not used in
such a way as to further any military purpose, as stated in
article II of its Statute,
Welcoming the decision of the General Conference of
the International Atomic Energy Agency of 11 October
1983 to grant membership of the Agency to the People's
Republic of China,
Conscious of the useful outcome of the International
Conference on Radioactive Waste Management, held at
Seattle, United States of America, from 16 to 20 May
1983 by the International Atomic Energy Agency,
Recognizing the importance of the work of the Interna­
tional Atomic Energy Agency on nuclear safety, which
increases public confidence in nuclear power,
Bearing in mind resolutions GC(XXVIl)/RES/407,
GC(XXVIl)/RES/408, GC(XXVIl)/RES/409 and GC'
(XXVIl)/RES/415, adopted on 14 October I 983 by the
General Conference of the International Atomic Energy
Agency at its twenty-seventh regular session.
24 See N38/568.
25 International Atomic Energy Agency, The Annual Report for 1982 (Aus­
tria, August 1983); transmitted to the members of the General Assembly by a
note of the Secretary-General (A/38/346 and Corr. I).
26 Official Records of the General Assemblv, Thirty-eighth SeSSion. Plenar\'
Meetings, 45th meeting, paras. 2-48.

I. Takes note of the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency;
2. Urges all States to strive for effective and harmoni­
ous international co-operation in carrying out the work of
the International Atomic Energy Agency and to imple­
ment strictly the mandate of its statute in promoting the
use of nuclear energy and the application of nuclear sci­
ence and technology for peaceful purposes; in strengthen­
ing technical assistance and co-operation for developing
countries; and in ensuring the effectiveness of the Agency's
safeguards system;
3. Expresses its satisfaction at the prospect of mutual
benefit arising from the membership of the People's
Republic of China in the International Atomic Energy
Agency;
4. Ajjirms its confidence in the role of the International
Atomic Energy Agency in the application of nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency the records of the thirty-eighth session of the Gen­
eral Assembly relating to the Agency's activities.
46th plenary meeting
4 November 1983

38/9. Armed Israeli al'gression against the Iraqi
nuclear installations and its grave conse­
quences for the established international sys­
tem concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, the non-proliferation of nuclear weap­
ons and international peace and security
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Armed Israeli
aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its
grave consequences for the established international sys­
tem concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and international
peace and security",
Recalling the relevant resolutions of the Security Coun­
cil and the General Assembly,
Taking note of the relevant resolutions of the Interna­
tional Atomic Energy Agency,
Taking note also with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General, 28
Viewing with deep concern Israel's continued refusal to
comply with those resolutions,
Reiterating its alarm over the information and evidence
regarding the acquisition and development of nuclear
weapons by Israel.
Recalling Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the
United Nations, which enjoins all Member States to
refrain in their international relations from the threat or
use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State, or in any other manner incon­
sistent with the purooses of the United Nations,
Noting that serious radiological effects would result from
an armed attack with conventional weapons on a nuclear
installation, which could also lead to the initiation of
radiological warfare,
I. Reiterates its condemnation of Israel's continued
refusal to implement Security Council resolution 487
27 Resolution 2373 (XXII), annex.
28 A/38/342.

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

21

The General Assembly,
Recalling Security Council resolution 530 (1983) of 19
May 1983 in which the Council encouraged the efforts of
the Contadora Group and appealed urgently to all inter­
ested States in and outside the region to co-operate fully
with the Group, through a frank and constructive dialogue,
so as to resolve their differences,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations relating to the duty of all States to
refrain from the threat or use of force against the sover­
eignty, territorial integrity or political independence of any
State,
Also reaffirming the inalienable right of all peoples to
decide on their own form of government and to choose
their own economic, political and social system free from
all foreign intervention, coercion or limitation,

Considering that the internal conflicts in the countries of
Central America stem from the economic, political and
social conditions obtaining in each of those countries and
that they should not, therefore. be placed in the context of
East-West confrontation.
Deeply concerned at the worsening of tensions and con­
flicts in Central America and the increase in outside inter­
ference and acts of aggression against the countries of the
region, which endanger international peace and security,
Mind_ti,! of the necessity of promoting the achievement
of peace on a sound basis, which would make possible a
genuine democratic process, respect for human rights. and
economic and social development.
Noting with deep concern that in recent weeks armed
incidents, border clashes, acts of terrorism and sabotage,
traffic in arms and destabilizing actions in and against
countries of the region have increased in number and
intensity,
Noting with great concern the military presence of coun­
tries from outside the region, the carrying out of overt and
covert actions, and the use of neighbouring territories to
engage in destabilizing actions, which have served to
heighten tensions in the region,
Deep/_\' concerned at the prolongation of the armed con­
flict in countries of Central America, which has been
aggravated by increasing foreign intervention,
Bearing in mind the progress achieved in the meetings
that the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Contadora
Group have held with the Foreign Ministers of Costa Rica,
El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua in iden­
tifying issues of concern and proposing appropriate proce­
dures for the consideration of those issues,
Recalling the Cancun Declaration on Peace in Central
America issued by the Presidents of Colombia, Mexico,
Panama and Venezuela on 17 July 1983, 30 which contains
an appeal for political commitments on the part of coun­
tries situated in and outside the region with the aim of
achieving lasting peace in the area,
Bearing in mind the Cancun Declaration and the
endorsement by the States of Central America of a Docu­
ment of Objectives. 31 which provides a basis for an agree­
ment on the negotiations, that should be initiated at the
earliest possible date with the aim of drawing up agree­
ments and adopting the necessary procedures for formaliz­
ing the commitments and ensuring appropriate systems of
control and verification.
Appreciating the broad international support expressed
for the efforts of the Contadora Group to secure a peaceful
and negotiated settlement of the conflicts affecting the
region,
I . Reaffirms the right of all the countries of the region
to live in peace and to decide their own future, free from
all outside interference or intervention, whatever pretext
may be adduced or whatever the circumstances in which
they may be committed:
2. Affirms that respect for the sovereignty and indepen­
dence of all States of the region is essential to ensure the
security and peaceful coexistence of the Central American
States:
3. Condemns the acts of aggression against the sover­
eignty, independence and territorial integrity of the States
of the region, which have caused losses in human life and
irreparable damage to their economies, thereby preventing
them from meeting the economic and social development

29 A/38/337, annex.
30 A/38/303-S/15877, annex. For the printed text, see Official Records of

31 Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-eighth Year, Supplement
/i_,r Octoher. Novemher and De cemher /983, document S/16041, annex.

(1981), unanimously adopted by the Council on 19 June
1981;
2. Notes that the statements made so far by Israel have
not removed apprehensions that its threat to repeat its
armed attack against nuclear facilities, as well as any simi­
lar action against such facilities, will continue to endanger
the role and activities of the International Atomic Energy
Agency and other international instruments in the devel­
opment of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and in
safeguarding against further proliferation of nuclear weap­
ons;
3. Considers that any threat to attack and destroy
nuclear facilities in Iraq and in other countries constitutes
a violation of the Charter of the United Nations;
4. Reiterates its demand that Israel withdraw forthwith
its threat to attack and destroy nuclear facilities in Iraq
and in other countries;
5. Once again requests the Security Council to consider
the necessary measures to deter Israel from repeating such
an attack on nuclear facilities;
6. Reaffirms its call for the continuation of the consid­
eration, at the international level, of legal measures to pro­
hibit armed attacks against nuclear facilities, and threats
thereof, as a contribution to promoting and ensuring the
safe development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes;
7. Expresses its deep appreciation to the Secretary­
General and the Group of Experts on the Consequences of
the Israeli Armed Attack against the Iraqi Nuclear Instal­
lations for their comprehensive study: 29
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Gen­
eral Assembly at its thirty-ninth session on the implemen­
tation of the present resolution:
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-ninth session the item entitled "Armed Israeli
aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its
grave consequences for the established international sys­
tem concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and international
peace and security".
52nd plenary meeting
JO November 1983

38/10. The situation in Central America: threats to
international peace and security and peace
initiatives

the Security Council, Thirty-eighth Year, Supplement for Julv. August and
September 1983, document S/15877, annex.
