United Nations

876th

GENERAL

PLi::!ARY MEETING

.ASSEMBLY

Wednesday, 28 September 1960.
at3p.m.

FIFTEENTH SESSION

Official Records

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Agenda item 9:
General debate (continued),
Speech by Mr. Illueca (Panama) ••••••••
Speech by Mr. Seg.!Ji (Italy)• •••••••••••
Speech by Sardar Mohammed Nairn (Afgha-

195
199

nistan) • ••••••••••••••••• '••••••

203

Agenda item 20.'
Admission of new Members to the United
Nations (continued). • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

205

President: Mr. Frederick H.BOLAND (Ireland).

AGENDA ITEM 9
G..eneral debate (coiltinued)

1,. Mr. ILLUECA (Panama) (translatedfrom Spanish):
'May I say first of all that my delegation greatly apn
preciated the election of Panama to one of the vicepresidencies allotted to Latin America at this session
of the General Assembly. I should also like to eitpress
once again to the Secretary-General our confidence
and gratitude in respect of the work he is doing in the
interests of mankind and of the United Nations ideals.
2. The delegation of the Republic of Panama would.
like-to point to two facts which it considers moet significant and gratifying, as the' fifteenth session goes
into its second week of deliberations.
3. The first, Sir, is your election as President of
the General Assembly-a well-deserved tribute to the
small but energetic country you represAnt and to
the outstanding personal qualities you' have so often
demonstrated in your work with the various organs
of the United Nations.

4. The second fact is the admission to' the United

Nations of fourteen new States-indeed, from this afternoon, sixteen, with the . 'nission of the Republic
of Mali,and the Republic of Senegal, whichto the satisfaction of all of us are to become part of the Assembly
this very afternoon. The creation'of these new States
comes as a climax to the vigorous anduntiring efforts
made by their peoples in their determination to live
their Uves as free andindependent communities. These
youthful nations. com.e to join in the debates and decisions of the General Assembly at a decidedly awkward
juncture in international politics. The cancellation of
the Summit Conference which hadawakenedhighhopes
of bringing to an end, onc~ andfor all, the long, senseless and dangerous period of the cold war, and the
consequent interruption of the talks in the Ten-Nation
Committee on Disarmament at Geneva are unhappy
events that not only stand in the way of an era oHnternational peace and security but also place an ominous
question-mark against the whole future of mankind.

5. The advent of sixteen new Members to the United
Nations is of the utmost import:3.nce for tb~ Organization, since it brings nearer the time when this will
be an Assembly of all mankind and emphasizes the
increasing weight of the, smaller States in the Organ:iozation's deliberations. To whatever part of the world
they belong, these small States are united by a unanimous desire for, peace with justice, and my delegation
is therefore confident that in joiningthe UnitedNations
they will not add to the causes of dissension and conflict,but will rather collaborate inpJ.'eventing the
disputes between the great Powers from degenerating
into a new armed conflict that might well bring with
it the extinction of the human race. Abundant examples
show that the smaller nations are a factor making for
conciliation and mutual understanding in regard to the
disputes between the great Powers.,
6.1 should like merely to mention the recent meeting
of the UnitedNations Disarmament Commission, which
came about through the determination and astuteness
of its Chairman, Mr. Luis Padilla Nervo, the Head of
the Mexica.n delegation. He has earned the gratitude
of all of us, inasmuch as, despite resistance at the
outset from the Eastern countries, he succeeded in
obtain! 19 the agreement of both sides on a number of
points. As we know, the Commission agreed [70th
meeting]-and agreed una$n0usly-that the, breakdow:~ of the disarmament negotiations in the TenNation Committee at Geneva was to be regretted. It
also agreed to recommend that continued efforts for
general and complete disarmament t!.uder effective
international control should be made, and it recommended that the General Assembly give n~arnestcon­
sideration" to the problem, reaffirming at the same
time the "continuing and ultimate responsibility ofthe
United 'Nations in the field of disarmament il • ThusI
feel that I am not overstathg the case if I say that
the primary function of the smaller States in this
Organization" side by side with their endeavours to
secure ,the best, possible safeguards for their oWn.
independence and development, is to make themselVes
a real force for mediation and agreement between the
Eastern and W~stern Power blccs. The reason! feel
this is because the rift between Eastan.dWest casts
an ominous shadow overthelifeofthesesmali nations,
as indeeli of mankind as a whole, besetting withol>stacles and un.certainties the path followed by the
smaller nations in their efforts to solvelmotty problems of social and economic development which Will '
enable vast numbers of .people to enjoy their:fu.I1damental rights and obtain the things they need for a
free and wort1J;y life.
.7. The smaller nations, have a very significant role
to play in the creative tasks of the United Nations.
But inreferl'PJ.g~Q"small nations, we should point out
that theword';j·nsmall ft merely conveys the notion of
size, which prevents us from appreciating the quality
of the work achieved by these coun.tries within our
Organization. In the aggregate. the so-called small

IIlIJltn¥~~~,.-.~,~,.~ ~• • •I!!!• • • • •11915• • •!!!!I• • • • • • • • • • • • •A./.P.V••8!17.6. . . .

196

General Assembly - Fifteenth Session 7"" Plenary Meetinp

nations total hundre0 ..,f millions of people. and in a
number of instances their des:tinies are ruled by. men
who in respect of intelligenc "7. culture and high moral
standards are among the·most outstanding personalities of today. If all these nations can agree that it is
in th(:ir best interests to establish and consolidate a
kind of peace free from the suspicions and rivalries
of the so-called gr.",~t Powers. if they all adopt as
their rule of conduct \rrlthin and without this Organization the principle of not allowing th~mselves to be
used as a pretext or H battleground in any cold war
manreuvring, there Call. be no doubt that the present
rival blocs of Powers will soon find ways and means
of settling their differences in a peaceful manner, and
universal disarm.ament will enter upon a stage ofreal
achievement.
8. It iSl after all, not enough to repeat what we all
know-namely that nu~laar war is not only a monstrous
crime against mankind, but is utter folly. since. whoever is foolhardy enough to start it, with the first
clash the antagonists would botb.liebleedingandprostrate, and any victory there mightbewouldbear bitter
fruit that none would wish to taste. It is not enough to
know this and to repeat it over andoyer again, for, as
we plainly see. this does not-put an end to the tension
and wrangling which keep the world on tenterhooks
and prevent the systematic use of its resources for
the task of ridding mankind of its age-old handicaps.
9. If the small&:r nations can come to an agreement
and adopt a polic.'Y. not of passive neutrality, but of
active mediation designed to put an end to a situation
fraught with dangers and alarming prospects, the
moral force they muster will be overwhelming. But
this implies, first and foremost. that side by side with
the political independence now won by many nations
there must be independence of thought and action,
which will keep them free not so much from economic
and political colonialism-now rapidly disappearing
-as from ideological and spiritual subjugation and
colonialism. whose slender, cunning web can enmesh
us without our realizing it.

1u. These are a few general ideas on the role which.
in my delegation's view, the smaller Powers should
play if their participation in the Organization's activities is to be fruitful for themselves and in keeping

with the paramount interests of all peoples of the
world.
''-

11. With the permission of the Assembly, dedicated
to the task of harmonizing the efforts of the nations of
the world to achieve the common purposes set forth
in the Charter. I should like nov·torefer to a question
intimately bound up with the history, the present and
the fdure of my country, the Republic of Panama. We
emerged as an independent country in company with
the group of Spanish";American peoples which shook
off the Spanish yoke during. the revolutionary periOd
1:Jetween 1810 and 1824. Of.our: own accord we joined
With New Granada, Ecuador and Venezuela in what
was then called Greater Colombia, and we remained
united with the nation which grew out of the former
vice royalty of Santa Fe until the dawn of the present
century. In 1903 we became an independent republic.
which was. promptly· recognized by the United States
of America, and our infant nation negotiated with the
United States Government the Convention which made
posSible the constructioh of the inter-oceanic canal.
We have nothing to conceal in regard to these historical facts,for every nation's history demonstrates

that a country never rejects any help favourable to
its aspirations towards independence. Nevertheless,
the 1903 Conventiollr being the' product of a particular
period in the history of international relations-a
period of ideas. rendencies. and procedures for the
most part, fortunately now no longer current in the
affairs of nations-contained provisions of the most
serious import for our Republic's independent life.
Hence, from the very day of its signature, generations
'of Panamanians have been fighting not only to elimi··
nate such interpretations and applications of the Convention's provisions as they found unacceptable, but
also to secure the amendment or suppression ofthosa
of the provisions which offendedthe national feelings of
Panamanians or impos\"3d an unduly heavy burden on
the Republic. One will, one belief. one aim-this is
what has guided and united all Panamanians, men and
women, yOUD.g and old, governing and governed, in
their endeavour to place on a footing of equality and
justice the relations between their country and the
United States of America based on the construction of
the Canal.
12. As regards Panamanian sovereignty over the
Canal Zone. Panama's position has nevel' varied. "The
strip of land known as the Panama Canal Zone·. as
Mr. Ricardo J. Alfaro put it, lIhas been neither purchased nor conquered nor annexed by. now ceded nor
rented to, the United States. uor has its sovereignty
been transferred by Panama to the United States".
This, incidentally, has been corroborated by distinguished United States citizens in official or private
opinions and statements. Let me quote a few of them.
13. During the negotiations which led up to the Isthmian Canal Convention of 1903, the United States
Government issued an official statement to the en:ect
thtlt it disclaimed any intention to increase its own
territbry at the expense of any of the sister Republics
of Central and South America and desired, on the contrary, to strengthen the power of the Republics of the
continent and to promote, develop and preserve their
prosperity and independence. President Theodore
Roosevelt, dur.w.g whose administration tee Isthmi2.!l
Canal Convention was signed, declared in an official
letter to his Secretary of War, William H. Taft, later
President of the United States, that there was not the
slightest intention of establishing an independent colony
in the centre of the State of Panama, let alone of interfering with the affairs and prosperity of the people of
Panama. Mr. Elihu Root, attending the Third International Conference of American States held at Rio de
Janeiro in 1906 as Secretary of State, said formally,
in an endeavour to allay suspicion and remove misunderstandings that had arisen during the previous
year: ''We [of the United States] wish for no victories
but those of peace; for no territory except our own;
for no sovereignty except the sovereignty over OU1""
selves".' Mr. George W. Goethals, the illustrious
American engineer who completed· the construction
of the Panama Canal, stated bluntly in his book on
the' Canal project that, under the Comrention with
Panama, the United States had only a right of way for
a canal.
14. Despite such categorical statem.ents, conseq1\ences were drawn from the articles of the Gonventiv~ of 1903 that impaired Panamanian interests and
distorted the original purpose ofthatinstru:rnent. Wha;t
was of vital interest to the United States. to Panama
and to mankind generally was that the route should be

opened up so
two great oce
and nothing
life and death
nomic power.
undertakings
detriment of
no way could i
to show favou
Zone while gi
workers. Lik
States that th
collecting tax
with the opera
to Panama; or
in other fiel
fiscal interes
nation, from
proper to tha
of the Canal
ly, it could n
to see L::.~ Re
deprived of th
by virtue cf it
tion of the P
15. The pros
a dramatic st
trations of F
Dwight D. Ei
and hopes. cr
helped, and .
of the proble
the two count
policy pursue
cordiality to i
were taken to
certain practi
colonialism
century. The '
Co-noeration
of the 1903 Co
sive to the P
thus rai'3ed r
dignified level
1942 and the 1
Co-operatio
will of Presid
ways, import
between Pan
in the future,
agreement be
full settlemen
of 1903 gave
16. One fea
oia system:li
basis of meri
benefits of
equality of op
work. Neve
duced in the C
nation in co
not only are
areas but, a
wages-one fo
others. The c
.which bear als
fore justified;
recorded of
manian work

876th meeting - 28 September 1950
opened up so as to allow ships to pass between the
two great oceans, the Atlantic and the Pacific-that
and nothing more. It could in no way be a matter of
life and death for the United States, with its vast economic power, to establish commercial or industrial
undertakings in the zone adjacent to the Canal, to the
detriment of Panamanian commerce and industry. In
no way could it be vital to North American democracy
to show favouritism to American workers inthe Canal
Zone while giving inferior treatment to Panamanian
workers. Likewise it could not be vital to the United
States that the Government of Panama should cease
collecting taxes in respect of activities unconnected
with the operation of the Canal, or other revenues due
to Panama; or that the Panamanian Government should
in other fields be prevented, to the detriment of its
fiscal interests and the economic well-being of the
nation, from performing functions which are no lass
proper to that Government in the ports at either end
of the Canal than in other areas ofthe country. Finally, it could not be a vital matter to the United States
to see ~ Republic of PanwAa, a sovereign nation,
deprived of the various betlP..fits to which it is entitled
by virtue c'f its geographical position and ofthe ope:r-ation of the Panama Canal.
15. The prosecution of Panama's claims is certainly
a dramatic story. After a long struggle, the administrati·:ms of Franklin D. Roosevelt and of President
Dwight D. Eisenhower, against a ba\ckground of facts
and hopes, created conditions which have undoubtedly
helped, and will in the fi.1.ture help, towards the solution
of the problems to which the special relations between
the two countries give rise. With the good-neighbour
policy pursued by the second Roosevelt, who brought
cordiality to inter-American relations, the firs~ steps
were taken towards eradicating in the Caribbean area
certain practices which bore· the odious mark of the
colonialism that had prevailed at the beginning of the
century. The 1936 General Treaty of Friendship and
Co-f\neration modified or annulled someoftheclal.!.ses
of the 1903 Convention which were particularly offensive to the Panamanians' sense of independence, and
thus rai~ed relatioILCJ between the two c'-untries to a
dignified level. Again, the compensation agreement of
1942 and the 1955 Treaty of Mutual Understanding and
Co-operatIon-the latter drawn up thanks to the good
will of President Eisenhower-represented, in certain
ways, important contributions to better COeDstence
between Panama and the United States, and will have,
in the future, to serve a.s a basis for a fundamental
agreement between the two countries, constituting a
full settlement of the problems to which the Convention
of 1903 gave rise.
16. One feature of the 1955 Treaty was the adoption
of· a system for the classification of workers on the
basis of merit, under which they were entitled to the
benefits of the universal standard rules rega.rding
equality of opportunity to work and equal pay for equal
work. Nevertheless, the new scale of salaries introduced in the Canal Zone still involves some discrimination in conneDon with the worker's nationality, for
not only are wages fixed according to geographical
areas but, apparently, there are two categories of
wages-one for United States citizens, and one for the
others. The complaints of the Panamanian workers,
,which bear also·on·equality of opportunity, are therefore justified; for although no sing).e case has been
recorded of treason-or sabotage on the part of Pana..manian workers-who, I must say! performed their

197

duties with exemplaTy loyalty throughout the two great
wars ~"'volving the United States during the present
centw..,..-in the Canal Zone the Panamanians are denied. in peace-time, access to so-called ·securityll
positions which are, in fact. nothing of the kind. This
very broad interpretation which it has been sought to
give to the idea of r.security" posts-ofspecial military
significance in time of war or threat of war-is an
affroI;lt to the dignity of the Panamanians; and p~lic
opinion in my country accordingly denounces this
type of discrlmination, just as it denounces any "post
classificationll that is not based on professional competence and that reflects displeasing criteriawhereby
preferential treatment is given to workers having a
certain nationality or brought in from a certain geographical area.
17. I should. be betraying my own feelings :if I did
not acknowledge, here and now, the efforts made by
responsible people in the United States and Panama
to establish harmonious relations between the two
countries and to improve the social condition of the
Canal workers. We know that much remains to be
done; but we cannot fail to mention the favourable
mea13ures which have recently been adopted for the
benefit of our working class, thanks to the personal
efforts of General Dwight D. Eisenhower, President of the United States, and Mr. Ernesto de la
Guardia, Jr., President of my country. Not only did
President Eisenhower, some little time ago, explicitly
recognize my country's sovereignty over the Canal
Zone, but on 17 "September 1960 he ordered the public
hoisting of the Panamanian flag at a certain spot in
the Zone, as proof of the sovereignty of thG Republic
of Panama over that part of its territory whic~ by
virtue of a public Conventiop, had been allocated for
the special purposes. of the operation of the interoceanic canal. This significant gesture is helping to
create an atmosphere of understanding between the
two nations; but we Panamanians hope that the order
will be applied on a broad and general scale, so that
our country's flag may fly proudly throughout the
length and breadth of the Panamanian Isthmus. Iwish,
in any event, to expre~5 my gratitude to the Head of
State who does such honour to the high responsibilities
of his Government and his country.
18. At the same time, I must reject the insidious
remarks of a certain North American politioian who,
prompted by purely parochial interests, has peen fit
to attribute a deeper meaning to the oivic dem~nstra­
tions designed to ensure thst the Panamanian flag
should occupy its rightful place in the Canal Zone.
To brand all Panamanians who defend the integrity of
their national territory as radicals, agitators and
instruments serving the objectives ofcommunistmentors is to display abysmal ignorance ofpresent"'day
realities. Perhaps he who does so is hoping to revive,
at the international level, the anachronistic fun(.ltion
of the inquisitors, forgetting that it was the founding
fathers of the nations of North and South America who
inspired in the present generations their patriotic
eagerness to enhance the prosperity, di.gnityandprestige of their countrie~ in this hemisphere.
19. I shall now refer to some specific questions appearing on the agenda of this session whic'h, concern
1;he naiions less favoured by the scientmc revolution
thltt began at the end of the last war. The most urgent
of them all is, as we well know, industrialization.
The struggle against poverty, neglect and privation is

198

General Assembly - Fifteenth Session - Plenary 'Meetings

an all"out battle to transform the economic structure
of the baokwar.d countries. 'l'he intel"'dependence of
the nations is a reality which provides the basis for
the plane; for combining the resources of the highly
developed countries in order to increase production
in the countries that are still under-developed. Economic co-operation emerges as the inseparable counterpart of political co-Qperation, and is one essential
means of banishing from the wO:i'ld the cClbflicts by
which it is now shaken. Latin America is among the
regions afflicted hy what it has been agTeed to call
"under-dGvelopmentll-a socialt economic and cultural
condition affecting every aspect of its collective life.
For some years now ths more far-seeing minds of
.America have been calling fnr concerted basic action
on a hemispheric scale and level in order to deal with
this situation. Mr. JuscelinoKubitsch~the President
of Brazilt aroused public opinion in the nations of the
continent when he proclaimedOperation Pan""Amerfca
which gained the support of every Latin Am.eric~
Goyernment and people. The sameideasandintentions
have inspirfild the plan conceived by the President of
the United States to improve the living conditions of
the Latin American peQples-a plan of vast scope that
has won for its author a place not only in history but
~so in the heart of the American common man.
20. The fact that the Eisenhower plan, started with
a fund of $500 mlla0Dt is l·egarded as a new Marshall
Plan for Latin America arouses legi~m~te hopes that
this noble initiative on the part of the United States
Head of state '<'\-ill assume, for the benefit of 200 million Latin Americans. the proportions of the Marshall
Plan for Western Europe. It will be recalled that General Marshall t ae Secretary of state. declared that
the United Sta~eB wouldhave to spendthousands of millions of dollaxs on the economic recovery of Europe,
which had been brought low by the ravages of war;
and that when Congress approvedhis plan it authorized
a first sum. of $5 t430 mUlion, of which $1,150 million
was to be used over a period of two and a half months
and $4,280 million in the following fiscal year. Latin
America did not experience the material and human
ravagm'i of the 'World war but, haVing halr-'ed tu >Yin
the war by contributing its natural basic products t it
still suffers from the sco1!.ttge of povertyt ignorance
and economic, social and political oppression..
21. The Eisenhower plan, acceptad by the American
Economic Conference, was incorporated in the Act of
Bogota. of 11 September 1960 t which made recommendations to the Council of the Organization of American
States on the following points: measures for social
improvement; establishment of a special fund for social· development· (corresponding to the Eisenhower
plan); measures for economic development; multilateral co-operation for economic and social progress.
In this connexion the purposes of the Act of Bogota.
include promoting aid between the countries of the
Western hemisphere as well as between those countries and, extra-continental countries and facilitating
the flow of capital and the extension of credits to the
countries of Latin America, from both Westernhemis_phere and extra-continental sources.
22. The Act of Bogota. is undoubtedly of deep spiritual
significance. Its ideological message, however, can
only be understood by the Latin American masses
through the attainment of its objectives t which ~onsist
in the preserving and strengthening of the free and
democratic institutions of the American Republics

throug~ the expediting of economic and social pl'ogress,

and: counter-char

so that the legitimate aspirations of the Americanman
in his efforts to achieve better living conditions, may
be satisfied. It is therefore essential thatboth the plan
and the promise shallbeim.plemente~bytheexecuticn
of specific projects which will abate the impatience
of the masses and satisfy their increasing desire f01'
help and support.
23. The achievements of the inter-American system
in the social and economic field cannot escape world
scrutiny. Do the plans of the American community of
nations in this field compare favourably with those \\f
other regional or politi\lal groups? A short while ago
in its edition of 31 July-and I mention this as an im.~
portant fact-The New York Times reported that the
Soviet Uni.on and the countries of Eastern Europe had
agreed upon a 2o-year plan to co-ordinate their economic growth. We consider that any systemt which on
the pretext of ensuring tl,le economic development,
well-being and advancsment of a peoplet robs it of
tho~e human and political rights whose conquest has
cost the American man cntel sacrifices is unsuitable
for Latin America and incompatible with its people's
love of liberty. We abhor any material benefitt real
or apparent, whose price is the submission ofthe people to any form of personal t group or class dictatorshipt such as the Latin American peoples have, for
a century and a half, resolutely combated. For this
reason we feel that the American regional organization
should come forward firmly wlth boldplans oUts own,
lest economic and political pl2!ls alien to its spirit
and its history should be imposed upon it.

in international
work effElctive1y
ever:y people in
not represent the
each faoing the 0
means of destru
agreement betwe
ordinate their for
attack on the pliv
of mankind.

24. Our concern with regional affairs does not distr,lct our attention from the international scene. At
its fourteenth session the General Assembly requested
[resolution 1424 (XIV)] the Secretary-General to exam"
inet'in consultation with the Governments of Member
States, ways and means of maldng further progress
towards the early establishment of a United Nations
capital development fund. We all know the excuses put
forward by the great Powers, on the pretext of the
current international tension and the impasse in the
disarmament negotiations. I take this occasion, how..
ever, to emphasize befc:.t:'e the Assembly thatthegreat
Powers will make the most decisive contribution to
fruitful world peace when, independently of any dis·
armament agreements, they unite in setting up a United
Nations capital development fund. They would tuus
build a bridge between East andWestwhichwould help
to save mankind from the snares that beset it.

27. Such is the
new armed clash
of power which
of mutual suspic
must prevent. T
delegation, is th
the United Natio
sants the small
I do not claim
On the contrary.
known facts. On
possibilities of p
disooveries of
against a barri
habits and patte
of formal' stage
kind. The divisio
trations of pow
spirit. is itself
with history. M
systems, whose
of perplexity an
them may claim
for bringing all
denying that they
certain points· of
levels t and that
to orthodoxy malt
of human coexist
fund of possibili
Th.e problem t to
making the attitu
el'S and the peopl
are being broug
our age. We hav
the implications

25. Any attempt to ascertain whYt despite the great
hopes ofunthreatened peace which a.ttended the creation
of the United NationB t the international situation has
deteriorated to the point at which we find ourselves
today would be a waste of time. We should be entering
a controversial field in which it is very difficult to
separate the real facts from subjective assumptions
and deductions t and the only result wouldbe to sharpen
a debate that is already taldngadisquietingturn. What
is important now is that we should agree upon the urgent need for the contending camps to ;recognize things
as they are and to renounce t byword and by deed. any
intention of subjugating each other, so that they may
coexist with the object of solving the problems which
burden the lives of hundreds of millions of human
beings. Inotherwords t iUs imperati"\J'e that this peaceful coexistence about which both sides speak so much
should cease· to be a matter of statements, cha~ges

26. This is not
need of our day.
of our ('entury,
by the capture 0
energy and of th
which man have
turies t has toda:
robbing it of a.U
inevitable, and h
opportunities for
the incalculable
places in our han
of goods that ar
us to overcome
hundreds of mill
hunger and sickn
this immense po
for the manmac
pable of bringin
annihilation of en
extinction of m

876th meeting - 28 September 1960

and: counte1""charges, and should take practical shape
in international conduct. S"l as to m8ke it flasier to
work e!fElctiVely for the progress and well-being of
ever:y people in the world. SUch coexistence should
not represent the hostile restraint ofthe rival Powers,
each faoing the other with distrust and increasing its
means of destruotion, but should take the form of an
ngl'eemant between the large and small n!ltions to coordinate their forces and resou-.:ces in a broadfrontal
attack on the privations suffered by a great proportion
of mankind.

26. This is not a vague aspiration, but an imperative
need of our day. The marvellous sciantific progress
of our century, which has been given gJ:eater impetus
by the ca!'ture of the last entrenchments of' nuclear
energy and of the vast realms of outer space towards
which man have gazed with awe for centuries and centuries, has today turned poverty :into an injustice.
robbing it of aU the traditional reasons which made it
inevita.'ble, and has opened to mankind immeasurable
opportunities for improvement and development. Once
the incalculable sources ofenergythatnuclearscienoe
places in our hands are direoted towards the production
of goods that are useful to mankind. they will enable
us to overcome all the limitationswhichtoday condemn
hundreds of millions of human beings to destitution,
hunger and sickness. Unfortunately, as we well know,
this immense power is at present being used solely
for the manufacture of instruments of destruction capable of bringing about, in fractions of a second, the
annihilation of entire peoples and the degeneration and
extinction of manldnd.
27. Such is the fatal prospect of the possibmty of a
new armed clash between the two great concentrations
of power whioh today confront one another in a state
of mutual suspicion and hostility. And this is what we
must prevent. This~ in the opinion of the Panamanian
delegation, is the l'esponsibility that now weighs upon
the United Nations and. within this Organization, presents the small nations with a task of the first order.
I do not claim that this task will be easy to perform.
On the contrary, it is made difficult by certain well"
lmown facts. One of them is that the immeasurable
possibilities of progress implicit in the revolutionary
disooveries of the last twenty--five years come up
against a barrier of all kinds of interests, mental
habits and patterns of behaviour which are survivals
ef formal' stages, now completed, in the life of mankind. The division of the world into two great concentrations of power, eMh imbued with a missionary
spirit, is itself a sign that we are not keeping pace
with history. Much as the two economic and social
systems, whose antagonism keeps mankind in a state
of perplexity and fear, may differ, much as each of
them may claim to possess the one and only formula
for bringing all human woes to an ~nd. there is no
denying that they baYe oertain features incommon and
certain points of contact at the material and spiritual
levels, and that their mutual exclusivism and claims
to orthodoxy make it difficultfor other workable forms
of human· coexistence to emerge from the inexhaustible
fund of possibllities which lies in the spirit of man.
The problem, to put it in common terms, resides in
making the attitude, mentality and conduct oftne leaders and the peoples synchronize with the changes that
are being brought about by the scientific progress of
our age. We have to .assimilate the consequences and
the. implicationso!the changes which are taking place

199

before our eyes and which, according to an eminent
scientist. consist not merely in the new elements that
are entering our lives but also in a change in the
quality of what has flxisted hitherto. What is new, he
says, is the ohanged rhythm of the ohange itself, the
fact that the ~~ears of our life witness no longer slight
adjustmeI\ts, as did those of our fathers. but verj·
substantial transformations.
28. In the age of nuclear ener~~~ supersonf.c ail craft,
electronic miracles, guided misaUes and space vehicles, it is imperative that the world should draw ever
oloser to the peaceful ideal of a universal order equal
for all and respec,;ed by all-a goal that can only be
reached through the work of the United Nations.
29. Mr. SEGNI (Itsly):l/ I wish first of all to extend
to you, Mr. President. on behalf of the Italian Government and myself, our heartiest congratulations onyour
election as 'President of this Assembly. My congratlllating you on your election to the highest office in the
United Nations is the more gratif:r'1ngformeinasmuch
as your outstanding talents as a diplomat are well
lmOWIt. and highly appreciated in my <Jountry. Just as
universally known 9..."3.d highly regal'ded are the skill
and ability with which you have always handled the
tasks entrusted to yo\:. by the United Nations, It is my
desire to add my roost fervent wish for complete success in your endeavour, which i.s always laden with
great responsibility and which this year appears particularly delicate.
30. The Italian Government recognizes the authority
of this highest international body and to this authority,
at once political and moral, it has always bowed, in
the belief that the relationships among States should
also function in accordanci:i with the democratic principles of equality and liberty. and in compliance with
the law governing international relations.
31. Tile removal of all forms ofviolence from the relationships among peoples, and their peaceful evolution
-in adhel'ence to the continual change ininternational
needs stemming from the ceaseless advancement of
mankind-have been enhanced, this past year, through
the peaceful achievement of independence by many
new States which, in full agreement wi.th the countries
to which they were bound by anachronistio ties, were
able to equipthemselveswithmodel'uinstitutionsmore
adequate to cope with present necessities.
32. The Italian Government has been h~LPPY to give
prompt recognition to all new States emerging from
concrete oompliance with the principles of equality
and liberty. It has likeWise been happy to express its
ready agreement to the admission of all these countries
to our Organization. I wish to express to them at this
point and on this occasion, in the name of the Italian
Government and people, the warmest felicitations on
the attainment of their independence, our most fervent
wishes for their future, and a most cordial and friendly
welcome to the United Nations. At the same time, let
me voice our highest appreciation for the obse:r:vance
of international law shown by them, together with the
States with which they freely negotiated their independence.
33. All of us must be deeply grateful for these major
felicitous '.)ccurrences in the. international arena, as
they· haye shown mankind the immense benefit:;; that
YMr. Segni spoke in !talian. The English version of his statement was
supplied by the delegation.

200

General Assembly - Fifteenth 8eseJ,on - Plenary Meetings

can be derived from mutual comprehension and from
the substitution of the democratic method of respect
for the popular will for the method of force or, worse
still, violence.
34. May I be allowed to recall that Italy has already
given concrete proof of its disinterested and confident
good will towards the peoples on their way to emancipation, and of its ready desire to aid them even by
participating in the burdens involved, by enabling
Somalia to achieve its independence five months in
advance of the date scheduled by this Organization.
35. The tenyears ofItalian trusteeship administration
of Somalia, which passed in an atmosphere of great
friendship and co-operation, came to an end on 1 July
1960, in conformity with a proposal advanced by the
Italian Government to that effect, rather than on
2 December 1960, the time-limit which had been set
for the trusteeship mandate at the time it was given
to my country. The advancement of the time-limit is
a proof of the understanding and concern of Italy to·wards the peoples desirous of setting themselves up
as free and independent States.
36. Together with a particular greeting, I wish to
extend my special praise to Somalia-to its people
and its political figures-for having co-operated with
great int~lligence antl profound wisdom inthe achievement of the targets of the trusteeship administration
to the full satisfaction of all parties concerned.
37. Unfortunately, not all peoples yearning for independence and for the determination oftheir own destiny
have understood to the same extent the superiority
of the democratic method. This is why we still witness
today, to our grief and consternation, acute strife
among opposing contestants who fight for the right to
impose by violence their own particular concept of
international relationships rather than comply with the
will of the majority, as freely determined on the basis
of the principles of the equality of all Citizens, and
then resort to the system ofinternational negotiations.
38. I intend to dwell, in particular, on the Congo
situation, which has recently concerned all Qfus deeply and to which both the Security Council and this very
Assembly have had to devote a great deal of their
activity, the latter having been convened in special
session on the eve of the present regular session.
39. The clouds which gathered over that country early
in July have not yet cleared. Italy's participation in
the painful events in the Congo has been, and still is,
very active and is prompted by a Sincere,. solicitoUEland friendly sympathy for the fate of this young nation,
to which I express my most heartfelt wish that it will
be able soon to enjoy again the benefits of a productive
and fruitful peace.
40. To this end, the Secretary-General, in conformity
with the decisions taken by the appropriate organs of
the United Nations and in difficult and complex circumstances, has already fulfilled his ta~k effectively
and fruitfully, and in this connexion I feel duty bound
toreaffirn here my Government's highest and most
cordial appreciation.
41. In the introduction to his annual report [A!4390!
Add.1], the Secretary-General portrays a picture, with
whfch we thoroughly agree, of the tasks that the United
Nations has been called upon to perform in the Congo.
He outlines the history of a great initiative of inter. national scope, to the success of which we all must

contribute if we really mean to serve the cause of
peace and co-operation.
42. Actually, the assistance that our Organization
decided to give to the Congo has as its sole purpose
to bring about peace and co-operation. IUs, therefore,
difficult to understand how it may have been possible
for someone to attribute different aims to it.
43. The United Nations has already decided to continue the action which it has undertaken with absolute
impartiality and complete disinterestedness for the
sole purpose of restoring law and order, bringing back
stability where uncertainty seemed to prevail, and
warding off the dangers of war which seemedto hover
over this tormented nation. Thes~ are, substantially,
the purposes unequivocally stressed in the resolution
adopted at the special session ofthe General Assembly
on 20 September 1960 [1474 (Ea-IV)] to which the·
Italian Government reaffirms itl3 full support.
\
44. I have chosen to· emphasize the Secretary..
General's prompt, active and imaginative activity
in this connexion. But above all, I wish to pay tribute
to the awareness and to the farsighted concern shown
by him on this occasion and in similar circumstances
for the destiny of our Organization. The Secretary..
General was not selected as the representative of the
Western democracies, the communist world, or the
neutral countries. He was selected, in the spirit of
the Charter, for the personal qualities which he has
shown that he possesses in a high degree and which
reflect complete honesty and impartiality of intention
as well as dedication to the cause·ofthe United Nations.
I believe also that the actual set-up and the machinery
of the Seoretariat should not be altered, because they
have proved to be efficient.
45. Being the host country to the United Nations is
not a privilege, but rather a responsibility. The United
States has shown itself fully aware of and deserving
the responsibility of being the host country to the
United Nations. The most appropriate reply that can
be given to the criticisms that have been voiced in
this hall is that the United States hafJ the shortcomings
of its own virtues inasmuch as the inconveniences
experienced by certain representatives are those
inherent in that very freedom prevailing in our host
country. And none of us is willirg to forego the advantages of freedom in order to eliminate these inconveniences. In sum, Italy can findnoreasonwhatsoever
to modify a situation that meets the requirements of
the moment.
46. In the first months of this year there was much
discussion about "d€ltente", peaceful coexistence and
disarmament. Actually, it is true that the very cO}1.cept
of peaceful coexistence seemed from th.e beginning to
imply a mental reservation in certain minds, a reservation about complete international co-operation. This
reservation notwithstanding, substantial efforts were
made in order to bring about an effective Ild€ltente".
Unfortunately, the hopes that all peace--loving peoples
had rested on the new trend in the relations among
.States were dashed by the complete collapse of the
Summit Conference. .This collapse had its negative
repercussions also in the field of disarmament.Atthe
end of the fourteenth session of the General Assembly,
it seemed warranted to entertain well-founded hopes
that the disarmament· problem might finally be heading, after so many years offruitless attempts, towards
the solutions that all peoples are earnestly wishing
for and looking forward to. Besides the improvement

of the general po
vote of this Asse
was a positive
stitution of a
Committee on D
of resuming, aft
tiations on disa
Committee, in w
cipate, the West
for parity, still k
tively restricted
sary guarantees
negotiations.
47. A very se'V
Chairman Khrus
Nation Committe
the Western Pow
the charges that
tries and their al
what has been a
closely and obje
praisal does not
is well known,
Nevertheless I b
the way of inves
presented, and th
reciprocal under
worthy in themse
48. Mr. Khrushc

of 23 September,
Geneva was not
that:
n••• the new
up with due re
were made duri
discnssion of t
circles of vario
meeting, para. 2
He did not menti
ever, since the
interrupted for tw
to the work of th
standing his negat
in the same speec
nAn identical
proposals as w
military alignm
up agreement 0
armed forces 0
control to be us
by the Security

49. One might wo
ly interrupted, ha,
ments of a gener~
into detail in thls 1
I would like to av
believe, however,
actually have bee
current propagand
Soviet side and if
awareness of the
and of the need for
50. There is no
disarmament unde
was, and still is,
ernments :represe

876th meeting - 28 September 1960
of the general political atmosph~re and theunanimous
vote of this Assembly on resolution 1378 (XIV), there
was a positive factor in the agreement for the institution of a special committee, the Ten-Nation
Committee on Disarmament entrusted with the task
of resuming, after a two-year interruption, the negotiations on disarmament. With the creation of this
Committee, in which Italy was called upon to participate, the Western side accepted the Soviet desire
for parity, still keeping the negotiations withinarelatively restricted organ which provided all the necessary guarantees for such technical as well as political
negotiations.
47. A very severe judgement was pronounced by
Chairman Khrushchev on the Conference of ilie TenNation Committee, particularly on the intentions of
the Western Powers participating in it. I cannot accept
the charges that he has levelled at the Western countries and their alleged sabotage schemes. Further, if
what has been accomplished in Geneva is observed
closely and objectively, a completely negativ~ appraisal does not appear warranted. Unfortunately, as
is well known, no agreements were reached there.
Nevertheless I believe that useful work was done in
the way of investigation and compari~on of the theses
presented, and that certain efforts were made towards
reciprocal understanding and clarification, praiseworthy in themselves.
48. Mr. Khrushchev, on the other hands in his speech
of 23 September, implicitly admitted that the work in
Geneva was not totally fruitless. In fact, he stated
that:
"••• the new Soviet. proposal •.• has been drawn
up with due regard for all the useful points which
were made during the past year in the course of the
discussion of this question by political and public
circles of various countries of the world." [869th
meeting, para. 242.]
He did not mention the Conference at Geneva. However, since the disarmament negotiations have been
interrupted for two years, he could not but refer also
to the work of the Ten-Nation Committee, notwithstanding his negative remarks on it. On the other hand,
in the same speech, he stated:
"An idanticalpoint of view has materializedinour
proposals as well as in those making up the NATO
military alignment regarding the necessity to follow
up agreement on disarmament with the creation of
armed forces of all countri(~s under international
control to be used by the United Nations as decided
by the Security Council." [Ibid., para. 279.]
49. One might wonder why the Conference, so suddenly interrupted, has not yet led to any precise agreements of a general character. It is impossible to go
into detail in thls brief account and, on the other hand,
I would like to avoid fruitless polemic overtones.· I
believe, however, that some poSitive results could
actually have been achieved at Gene\ '. if certain recurrent propaganda attitudes had been avoided.on the
Soviet side and if there had prevailed a unanimous
awareness of the difficulties inherent in disarmament
and of the need for its gradual implementation.
50. There is no doubt that a general and complete
disarmament under effective international supervision
was, and still is, the- target towards which the Governments !'epresented in this Assembly have pledged

201

themselves to proceed with utmost earnestness and
urgency. On my part, I want to state only that the
Italian Government is firmly convinced that we should
proceed in that direction.
51. But it is my opinion that we should approach the
problem with. full awareness of its immense difficulties and that we should not confine ourselves to a
progrmnme of sall or nothing". We should also be
ready to accept with gratification partial results, on
the following two conditions: first, that they meet the
basic requirements of disarnlament which have been
so often stated and onwhich everyone seems to concur,
at least theoretically, in particular that, through the
implementation of such partial measures, the mutual
security of each and all be enhanced, and not diminished; and, secondly, such results should constitute
not final goals, but intermediate ta:::-gets intended to
ensure the quickest advancement towards the ultimate
aim. Furthermore, in our evaluation of the over-all
programme, we must take into account the fact that
there is a wide gap in conventional forces between
East and West and that nnclear disarmament, while
auspicious in itself, involves the concurrent establishment of a bala~ce in conventional forces.
52. Infact, any person who is honest andof good will
cannot help but recognize that even· one initial step,
one early agreement on the road to general and complete disarmament, would represent an invaluable
success not only in itself but also for its favourable
moral and psychologi.cai effects. It would also constitute a precious initial factor in decreasing the mistrust between East and West and in facilitating the
solution of the political problems which are at the
root of the armaments race. That must encourage us
to resume our work with faith, goodwill and perseverance.
53. Several times at the Geneva Conference Italy
made the suggestion that efforts at negotiatioll.E be
concentrated, at. an early stage, on that part of the
plans and on those problems in which some l\\earing
of positions or greater mutual understanding was beginning to be seen, in order to achieve at least some
immediate practical results. Naturally, I am fully
aware that partial solutions. even if looked upon as
initial measures to be further broadened, are always
difficult and that all problems are inevitably interwoven. Yet, I believe that it pays to experiment with
that approach, keeping in our minds a clear vision of
the lofty goal we are striving for. It seems to me that
Marshal Tito included some remarks to that effect
in his recent statement [868th meeting}.
54. At this time, a great responsibility rests with
the As&embly-giving new impetus to the negotiations
on disarmament. The Assembly must assistthemajor
responsible parties with its advice and recomlIlendations in their dealings, and it must encourage them to
resume this all-important conversation. I do not doubt
that the will of the people, which is expressed through
the enlightened advice of your delegations, will point
out clearly the wisest, the most constructive and the
most practicable course in order that this fundamental work should· be resumed immediately and completed successfully.
55. The support and guidance of the Assembly are
necessary now and in the future. I believe that in the
future it will be convenient to bring the United Nations
into even closer contact with the negotiations inorder
l-.-

_

~.~,

202

.......

'

General Assembly - Fifteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

that the Organization, particularly the Assembly, may
gradually be in a bette.r position to follow close~y the
development of thu dealings which must, owing to their
technical aspects, remain entrusted to a rather restricted body. For illstance, the negotiating organ
might send to the United Nations Disarmament Commission periodic reports at intervals establisned in
advance by the Assembly. At the United Nations all
States must be in a position to know and to evaluate,
even better than in the past, the responsibilities, both
negative and positive, resting with each negotiator in
the performance of his tasks. We favour such supervision and l~okforwardto this judgementwith serenity.
56. Recently the Assembly heard a statement by the
President of the United States [868th meeting] which
calls for meditation on the part of all of us. It was
a speech full of common sense and imbued with a
conciliatory spirit which opened the door to concrete
measures of disarmament. But as Mr. Diefenbaker,
Prime Minister of Canada, correctly said [871stmeeting] Mr. Khrushchev has tried to close that door, thus
frustrating our hopes. Mr. Diefenbaker also introduced
a series of proposals on disarmament worthy of the
highest consideration and the closest examination.
What is needed is the earnest desire to arrive at an
understanding. For our 9art, we are ready to make
our contribution in a constructive spirit. We should
be equally willing: to consider the modalities for future
illegotiations which may allow a more fruitful work to
develop.
57. The spirit which has so far led Italy to pu~:sue
these negotiations with the utmost sincerity has often
been solemnly reaffirmed. It is the spirit which corresponds to Italy's ideals of peace. international cooperation, mutual assistance among nations; it is also
a spirit of realistic trust in the soundness of the cause.
This spirit shall never fail; in fact it shall be exerted
with ever-growing vigour in the negotiations which
we feel should be resumed as soon as possible. Similarly, in the framework of the initiatives that mus~
be undertaken by our Organization in order that its
activities may conform to the developments of modern
techniques and to the great strides ofhuman progress,
I cannot fail to mention ilie need to reconsider, within
the United Nations, the problems relating to the peaceful uses of outer space. May I be allowed to note that
a long time has elapsed since it was decided [resolution 1472 (XlV)] to establish a Committee entrusted
with the study of the technical and legal aspects of
the question. TheItalianGovernmentwouldbegratified
to witness an early beginning ofthe Committee's work.
58. Italy is convinced that the key to peace lies not
only in disarmament, but also in getting the problem
of the under-developed countries started towards a
solution, for that is the threshold which civilization
will cross in the next decades. We hold that the course
taken and the means used so far to this end are neither
adequate nor sufficient. Aid to under-developed countries caIlnot be conceived as help aimed solely at the
development of production, but also at the development
of human relations no longer founded on a power scale,
but rather on a sense of a common solidarity-and
not a merely material one-to prevail within the States
as well as in international life.
59. It is necessary that the more fortunate peoples
should feel the greatness of this task which presupposes that the differences in political and economic
power ought to be forgotten in order to operate on a

plane of human solidarity among peoples who feel that
they are on the same level of dignity. The means so
far employed for this aid have been inadequate; it is
necessary to exert every effort to match them more
closely to the dire needs of reality, not vice versa,
after having set up a concrete programme based on
suitable investigations. Therefore, the need is feltfor
an organization with the task of studying and carrying
out a programme. However, an organization willing
to assist all of the under-developed countries of the
world would run the risk of stopping short in the face
of the gigantic tasks beyond the possibilities of any
such arrangement.
60. It is necessary, on the contrary, in Italy's view,
to rely as much as possible on regional organizations.
Effective arrangements of this type are already in
existence within the framework: of the United Nations.
We hold that all the States willing to co-operate in
the implementation of such a programme, both on the
giving and the receiving ends, will in the future be
able to perform their constructive work t-h.rough suitable ties among their regional organizations on a basis
of reciprocal trust and understanding of the means
and needs of each one. The possibilities for concrete
action will thus become greater. For the benefit of
the under-developed countries, the United Nations
should, wherever possible, check on the methods and
the objectives for the promotion and implementation
of such a programme. This is for the United Nations
a task which alone would justify its existence and
actions.
61. I trust that und.er the aegis of the United Nations
the ground-work will be laid for the formation of
aggregations of States which can operate jointly in
restricted and well determined areas so that a concrete, planned acJ;ion may be carried toward successful
completionJ
62. As far as United Nations a.:;tion in favour of the
under-developed countri,es is concerned, I am gratified
to announce that the Italian Government, subject to
parliamentary approval, has decided to double Italy's
contribution to the Special Fund and to the Expanded
Programme of Technical Assistance. Italy's quotaror
both agencies will thus be increased to $2.25 million
starting in the next fiscal year. This will be in proportion to our quota for the ordinary budget of the
United Nations. The Italian Government's decision is
in keeping with the wishes expressed in several resolutions adopted by the General Assembly, emphasizing
time and again the urgent need to make available at
least $100 -million yearly to the United Nations, in
order that it may be enabled to expand its technical
assistance programmes.
63. In addition to the consideration of the great
problems of world-wide scope which this high forum
has to debate and to which I have already referred,
I cannot refrain from saying a few words on a matter
which the Assembly might have been spared andwhich
Italy is now called upon to discuss, namely, the Alto
Adige question.
64. Italy has nothing to fear from this discussion,
and on its own initiative proposed to Austria that there
be recourse,' by mutual consent, to that organ of the
United Nations which is competent in matters pertaining to the implementation of treaties, namely, the
International Court of Justice.

65. Unfortunately,
dramatize a questio
simple and clear t
the General Assem
though we had to as
ing of the item w

66. The Italian Go
.to point to the ste
democratic way of I
wishes to stress i
hearted implemen
Agreement conclud
the German-spe
economy successful
and to enrich their
67. Only in 1956
of a general chara
de Gasperi-Gruber
invited Austria, in
its demands. Nego
channels as a cons
as Prime Minister
Federal Republic
highest level, conviI
in a spirit of good
dispute. The same
my successor as
to Austria recours
national Court of J
Government preferI'
tation, and decided
Assembly.
68. Having said th
as this is only a ma
pulated agreement,
no choille but to op
political ground a q
will on both sides,
by other means in th
of the United Nation
69. It is a charact
gather diverse and
neither discourage
work of the present
more important tha
if everyone were
justice and equa .
among the peoples.
70. Sardar Moh
outset, Mr. Preside
sincere congratulati
portant and respons
present session, and
the aims and purPOI
General Assembly h'
71. It is a source
inauguration of this ,
important and histar
bership of the Unit
extend the sincere
Government to the
nations and, throug
ernments. ,
72. With the incre
ganization is approa
hope that this. forum

876th meeting - 28 September 1960
65. Unfortunately, the Austrian Government chose to
dramatize a question that presents itself in extremely
simple and clear terms and decided to put it before
the General Assembly. We did not oppose this, even
though we had to ask for the rectification of the heading of the item which is now included in tl.le agenda.
66. The Italian Government, while gratified to be able
.to point to the steps taken so far to strengthen the
democratic way of life in the territories ofAlto Adige,
wishes to stress its firm commitment to a wholehearted implementation of the de Gasperi-Gruber
Agreement concluded in Paris in 1946, which allowed
the German-speaking minorities to develop 'their
economy successfully, to safeguard their institutions
and to enrich their cultural traditions.
67. Only in 1956 Austria advanc~d a few complaints
of a general character on the implementation of the
de Gasperi-Gruber agreement, and it was Italy which
invited Austria, in July of that same year, to specify
its demands. Negotiations ensued through diplomatic
channels as a consequence of which, in may capacity
as Prime Minister, I invited the Chancellor of the
Federal Republic of Austria to negotiations at the
highest level, convinced, as I was, that direct dealings
in a spirit of good will could lead to a: solution of the
dispute. The same invitation was extended later by
my successor as Prime Minister, who also proposed
to Austria recourse, by mutual consent, to the International Court of Justice on the matter. The Austrian
Government preferred not to accept the two-foldinvitation, and decided to bring the question before the
Assembly.
68. Having said that, however, I must point out that,
as this is only a mattar of implementing a freely stipulated agreement, the Italian Government will have
no choice but to oppose any attempt to drag on to a
political ground a question that the parties, given good
will on both sides, would certainly be able to settle
by other means in the very framework ofthe principles
of the United Nations Charter.
69. It is a characteristic of all free assemblies to
gather diverse and often differing opinions. This must
neither discourage nor hold us back. I believe that the
work of the present session, which is inmany respects
more important than previous ones, could be fruitful
if everyone were to be pervaded with the spirit of
justice and equanimity which should govern relations
among the peoples.
70. Sardar Mohammed NAIM (Afghanistan): At the
outset, Mr. President, allow me to extend to you my
sincere congratulations on your election to the important and responsible post of the Presidency of the
present session, and to wish you success in achieving
the aims and purposes of the Charter, for which the
General Assembly has been convened.
7L. It is a source of great pleasure for us that the
inauguration of this session has been marked by a most
important and historic event, the increase In the membership of the United Nations. I wish once again to
extend the sincere welcome of the Afghan people and
Government to the representatives of these fourteen
nations and, through them, to their peoples and Governments. ,

72. With the increased number of Members the Organization is approaching the ideal of universality. We
hope that this forum of independent voices of mankind

203

will be completed soon through the attainment of independence by the dependent peoples, and that it will
lead to the realization of a united, free world in the
true sense. It is our fervent hope that the Organization
will thus become a power strong enough to overcome
the difficulties confronting mankind, in the interest
of humanity, on the basis of justice and equality, and
for the preservation. ot a peace founded upon the legitimate rig~~s of inAividuals and nations.
73. III this connexion we believe that the right of the
People's Republic of China to its rightful place in the
United Nations should be implemented without any
further delay. This belief does n.ot emanate only from
the fact that China is our neighbour, and that we have
diplomatic relations with China. It is based also upon
the fact that the Government of the People's Republic
of China is the only legitimate government representing
the Chinese people. The exclusion of this great nation
from the United Nations is in no way in the interest
of the Organization, and is in fact a denial of the principle of universality of the United Nations.
74. The meeting ofthe General Assembly ofthe United
Nations is certainly the most important international
event. At this session special interesthas been demon~
strated by the Member states in the solution of the
great problems confronting the Organization, and
therefore the occasion is more momentous. The significance of such an occasion calls, before everything
else, for an increased sense of responsibility and an
unselfish attitude and approach which would be in the
interest of mankind, The occasion can bring about a
great many constructive and fruitful results, but failure to use such an opportunity for constructive ends
could lead to most discouraging consequences.
75. In the face of the threat.to humanity, the shifting
of blame from one side to another will neither shift
the responsibility for unfavourable consequences nor
save anyone from the destructive results which will
be ultimately universal.
76. Our failures in the past, outside the United
Nations, should in no way deprive us of cherishing
the hope that this Organization, set up for peaceful
negotiations, will provide everyone with the means
of better understanding, particularly the big Powers,
who can better hear the cry of humanity for peace
and prosperity. These failures have been rightly deplored, but. welcoming the most important and indeed
greatly significant fa.ct that the United Nations is the
ultimate repository of world problems, we hope for
the peaceful solution of even the most complicated
problems.
77. There are many issues before us-all of them
the great concern of the United Nations and all its
Members-which will be discussed by the General
Assembly in due course. At this stage, however, I shall
confine myself to a few most urgent points.
78. I speak strictlyforasmall,peace-lovingcountry,
with a most impartial and independent position in international affairs, having the deepest conviction in the
United Nations, the only alliance to which we belong
under its Charter, where our record is well known,
and our friendship With all cannot be questioned. We
are confident, therefore, that our. views will be consideredin the most friendly spirit inwhich we express
them.
79. The greatest and most natural concern of the
small countries is the prevailing international ~ension

b-._

204

.....Ip- . . . .

,~,-

General Assembly - Fifteenth session - Plenarlr Meetings

and the continuation of the "cold war". There is no
doubt that the lessening ofinternational tension, mostly caused by ideological differences and political interests. is in the custody of the big Powers. In the
United Nations, however, that division greatly concerns
the small cmmtries which !Jomprise the majol'ity. The
responsibility of these countries. therefore. cannot
and should notbe underestimated, eitherby themselves
or by the big Powers. Not only are these countries
desirous of making a positive contribution to the cause
of peace. but they are capable of do: ; so and we hope
that they will give to the Assembly the benefit of their
independent judgement of world affairs.
80. In our opinion, tb.e most' urgent task before the

Assembly. in tha present circumstances, is to concentrate on the ways and means of eliminating the fundamental causes which have created the international
problems and on the faclol"13 which have delayed their
solution. rather than to attempt the solution of the
problems directly. without the preparationofahealthy
atmosphere which could mean the end of the cold war.
There is obviously no other way than to address. on
beha}.f of the General Assembly. an urgent appeal to
the big Powers to enter immediately intO peaceful
negotiations to this end.
81. Each day brings with itfurther proofthat peaceful
coeXistence among peoples and nations is imperative~
The failure to recognize this factwouldleadto a complete deterioration of the international situation, with
~ave and even disastrous consequences. The United
Nations is in itself the highest expression that mankind
has given to this principle. after sufferingfrom disastrous experiences~ Therefore, the failure of the United
Nations to implement this principle wouldbe the greatest source of discouragement to all peace-lovingpeopIes of the world.
82. The only position from which it will be possible
to ,realize the peaceful aspirations .of man and. the
security and prosperity of the world is the position
of mutual confidence among all. particularly among
those who otherwise could choose the. position of
strength. While it is certain that the opportunity provided by this session can be used for greater results.
the leaat that can be expected is that everything should
be done to avoid further deterioration of the inter-'
national situation. The .solution of the problem' of disarmament depends solely on the confidence of the big
Powers in~b other and on their good will towards
humanity. The importance of the issue to the small
c01llltries. however. is in no way diminished by this
consideration.

83.. Last year when the question came before the
General Assembly, we stated that we welcom.ed the
proposals advanced for complete disarmament by the
Government of ·th" Union of Soviet SocialistRepublics.
which were referred to as basic and comprehgnsive.
We stated also that we would welcome wholeheartedly
any other initiative, regardless of its source. which
would lead in the direction of disarmament.
84. The proposals .of the United States do not differ
in principle from the course directed to. general anl;l
~lom.plete disarmament. Therefore there is a great
margin of agreement on the basic issues.· It is encouraging that the leaders of the United States and
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics have expressed
their willingness to resume negotiations. ThiS is greatly appreciated. The achievement of this goal will not

only answer the expectations of the smaller countries'
in the United Nations but will respond to the aspirations of millions ofpeople who await the fruitful results
o.f this important gathering.
85. We adhere to our view that. in any measures that
may be taken, the importance of the consideration
that the goal should remain total disarmament. under
effective international control and inspection. should
be stressed, and at the· same time practical steps,
particularly in the field of nuclear weapons, should
not be further dela~·ed.
86. The question of disarmament is essentially and
primarily the responsibility of the United Nations. This
fact is also recog!lized by the big Powers. It can be
sa:ld with hope that the Genera! Assembly could succeed in taking certain measures which would compensate for the failure of efforts that have been made
outside the United Nations.
87. We adhere also to our view that a world without
arms would be a new order in the life of nations. In
any n~ order, the secure position of the small countries themselves is of utmost importance to us. We
highly appreciate the references to the effect that as
a result of disarmament more assistance would be
available to the under-developed areas of tha world,
but we would like to add immediately that, although
our needs are enormous. our prim.ary concern continues to be the maintenance of peace and security,
the only condition in which the under-developed countries can hope for the fulfilment of their desire for a
better life. We believe that, as long as the domination
of one nation by another is not abolished in all its
forms. neither the abolition of arms. nor economic
assistance on any scale will complete the happiness
to which man is entitled by his right to independence
and dignity.
88. This session of the General Assembly. at which
we have admitted a great number ofindependent States,
offers us a unique opportunity to concentrate our efforts on the realization of the aspirations of the dependent peoples. The progress made in this field is
encouraging but by no means satisfactory. No one can
rightly be content as long as there are dependent peoples in this world. The policies of certain countries
must inevitably give way to the right of self-determination and independence for these peoples.

89. The situation in connexion with the problem of
Algerians-one of these peoples-is most deplorable.
It would be ·unnatural to speak of ending the cold war,
and express no concern over the hot war continuing
in Algeria. The deliberate delay in the peaceful solution of this problem, on the part of the French Goveminent. is most alarming. It will be a matter of great
regret if certain major Issues. like the Algerian issue,
are overshadowed by other problems merely because
those problems have arisen more recently. We hope
that· the General Assembly will give high prio~ty, at
this session, to the considerationoftheAlgerianproblem in the light of the most discouraging new developmerits and that it will take appropriate measures to
implement its resolutions. recommendations andhopes
for a peaceful solution of the question. We hope that
this year. whichhas been referred to as the year of
Africa. "'ill have in. it the dawn of the independence
of·Algeria,.without which the African horizon will rEP
main clouded by colonialism.
.

J.

90. The Algerians .
on the r-Ight of seU
French had accepte
hopes that the legit
will be realized.
triumph of self-det
cannot be maintaine
·t.lJ.e peoples of the U
not be fully enjoyed .
and demed in others.
91. The most dis
the Congo. now a M
cern of the United
We supported the r
Assembly at its em
with the hope that th
in the light of the
zation since its invol
young State. would
of law and ol"der in
aures that may be
stress the fact that
zation should giva
significance of Unit
directly involved.
92. The constructi
African States in thi
significance. The c
the spirit of solidar
demonstrated their
African continent
of the peoples of
the people of the Co
sentatives of their .
in the United Nations
93. References hav
peace and tranquilli
which Afghanistan b
countries of their d
source of satisfactio
more ready to resp
neighbourly relation
lowed, and shall foIl
basis of our interna:
particularly with ou
however. I should a
ences cannot be ach
through peaceful ne
problems which have
tries of this region.
94. We wish to ma
with all our neighbo
respond to the spin
tinguished represent

95. Vie have studied1
General [A/4390 and,
ideas;. all of which,
taken up by the Gene'
of its work. There
I should like to refe
the development of
The views of Afgh
~ade known in the
Economic and Social
United Nations in
areas of under-deve
ni.zed. But special
other areas of respo

876th meeting - 28 September 1960
90. The Algerians have agreed to a solution based
on the rIght of self-determination. a right which the
French had accepted in principle. We maintain high
hopes that the legitimate aspirations of all peoples
will be realized. and we are happy to see that the
triumph of self-determina.tion. without which peace
cannot be maintained. is a real source of pride for
'l.lte peoples of the United Nations. But this pride cannot be fully enjoyed if itis recognized in certain cases
and denied in others.
91. The most disturbing events in the Republic of
the Congo. now a Member state, have been the concern of the United Nations in more than one respect.
We supported the resolution adopted by the General
Assembly at its emergency session [1474 (E&-IV>I.
with the hope that the assistance ofthe United Nations.
in the light of the experiences gained by the Organi~
zation since its involvement with the problems of this
young State. would serve the purpose of stability and
of law and ol'der in this unhappy country. In l'!ny meaaures that may be taken in this connexion, we would
stress the fact that all the Members of the Organization should giYo the utmost consideration to the
significance of United Nations prestige, which is so
directly involved.
92. The constructive contribution of the independerlt
African States in this matter is undoubtedly of special
significance. The countries of Asia have always, in
the spirit of solidarity among African-Asian nations.
demonstrated their concern over the situations in the
African continent and have contributed to the cause
of the peoples of Africa. We hope that, before long,
the people of the Congo will be able to have the representatives of their l'ightful Government participating
in the United Nations.
93. References have been made to the maintenance of
peace and tranquillity in the Middle East, a region to
which Mghanistan belongs. The expression by these
countries of their desire for friendly relations !sa
source of satisfaction to us. No country has ever been
more ready to respond to the call of friendship and
neighbourly relations than Afghanistan. We have followed. and shall follow, this policy as the fundamental
basis of our international relations with all countries,
particularly with our· neighbours. In this connexion,
however. I should add that the elimination of differences cannot be achieved except by serious. efforts.
through peaceful negotiations, for the solution of the
problems which have causedfriction between the countries of this region.
94. We wish to maintain good ah<i friendly relaHons
with all our neighbours, and therefore. we sincerely
respond to the spirit of amity voiced here by the distinguished representative of Iran [870th meeting].
95. We have studied the annual report of the SecretaryGeneral [A/4390 and Add.l], containing many important
ideaEi, all of which, as I said at the beginning, can be
taken up by the General Assembly at the proper stages
of its work. There is one point, however, to which
I. should like to refer now~ and that is the question of
the development. of the under-developed countries.
The views of Afghanistan on this. matter have been
m.ade .known in the General Assembly and also in the
Economic and Social Council. The responsibility of the
United Nations in this connexion, regarding the new
areas of under-development, has been rightly recogni.zed. But special consideration as to its effect on
other areas of responsibility is req>..rlred.

205

96. Assistance is still badly needed in the older areas
and. due to the limitation of sources. which are inadequte even there. new developments have created a
huge problem which cannot be solved exceptby great3r
efforts. to find new sources of assistance. In this connexion, we particularly want to draw the attention of
Members to the fact that certain measures have been
suggested which would help the new aI'eas of underdevelopment by putting a greater burden on the other
under-developed countries. which are themselves in
urgent need of assistance. These should be given full
consideration before they are presented for adoption,
for it will be impossible for the needy countries to
make any contribution in this field. About this point
and other points. we shall express our views in detail
as they are brought before the Assembly, in the hope
that these important matters on the agenda will be
dealt with in a better and calmer atmosphere, which
is so essential for the achievement of any constructive
and fruitful results.
,97. In expressing oux wishes for your success in
your important and responsible functions as President
of this session of the General Assembly, we would
add our most sincere hopes to those that you have
expressed that this session, through understanding,
tolerance and co-operation in the interest of mankind,
will truly prove to be the Assembly of humanity.
AGENDA ITEM 20

Admission of new Members to the United Nations (continued)*

98. The PRESIDENT: I should like to invite the attention of Members to two letters from the President
of the Security Council [A/4513, A/4514] transmitting
the texts of resolutions adopted unanimously by the
Council recommending the Republic of Senegal and
the Republic of Mali, respectively, to membership in
the United Nations. Members of the Assembly also
have before them. a draft resolution submitted by
France and Tunisia [A/L.309] l'ecommending the·
Republic of Senegal for admission to membership in
the United Nations and a draft resolution submitted
by Ceylon,France and Tunisia [A/L.310] recommending the admission of the Republic of Mali to membership in the United Nations.
99. I would ask the Assembly to vote on the draft
resolution recommending the Republic of Senegal to
membership in the United Nations [A/L.309].
The draft resolution was adopte::l by acclamation.

100. The PRESIDENT: I ~nw.declare the Republic of
Senegal admitted to membership in the UnitedNations.
The deled,atiotl of the Republic of Senegal was escorted to its place in the Gene.ralAssembly ball.

101. The PRESIDENT: I would nowasktheAssembly
to vote on the draft resolution recommending the ad...
mission of the Republic of Mali to membership in the
United Nations [A/L.3lb].
The draft resolution was adopted by acclama.tion~

102. The PRESIDENT: I now declare the Republic of
Mali admitted to membership in the United Nations.
The delegation of the RepUblic of Mali was escorted
to its plaoe in the General Assembly hall.
"'Resumed from the 864th meeting.

"JiIJllJ\~"~I''r,;;,,·O/~~}j,''''I.\~~~~~:~'~~'·''~.'~
. •. ·.!§!i-~.~'!.. ~~~,!'I!,~,!!Il!.~.~~._.!..~~~ • • • • • •~~• • • • • •_

11+£'&*

206

•

General Assembly - Fifteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

103. The PRESIDENT: Now that the two delegations
have ta..l{en their seats, I am sure that the Members
of ilie Assembly would wish me, speaking from the
Chair and speaking on behalf of the Assembly as a
whole, to express to them a very sincere and a very
cordial welcome, and to assure them of the co:tni')lete
confidence which we all share, that by their efforts
here they will make a valuable andfruitful contribution
to the work of the United Nations.
104. I propose to call now on the sponsors of the two
resolutions which we have just adopted. I call first on
the representative of France.
105. Mr. BERARD (France) (translatedfrom French):
On 20 September [864th meeting], Mr. Couve de Murville, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the French
Republic, expressed regrets atbeing unable to welcome
the Republics of Senegal and of the Sudan along with
the remaining eleven States which, having become
fully independent after a long associationwith France,
had just ·been admitted to membership in the United
Nations. France-he said in so many words-would be
the first to welcome the day-which he hoped would
come soon-when the Assembly would ba in a position
to .act l~pon their admission. The hope expressed on
that day has now been happily fulfilled.
106. Meeting this morning under the Presidency of
Mr. Ortona, the Italian .representative, the Security
Council unanimously decided to recommend to this
Assembly the final admission of the two Republics.
My delegation would therefore like to recall, in support of the unanimous decision just taken by the
ASRembly upon the COunCil'R recommendation, our
long-standing friendly co-operation with the peoples
of these two States.
107. Three centurie.s ago, with the foundation of the
town of st. Louis, my country established continuous
contacts with the Senegalese people. As time went on,
these contacts, became increasingly wider and more
intimate. Nowadays, Senegal is one of Africa's most
highly developed and industrialized countries, with a
most promising 'future ahead of it. Dakar, its capital
with a population of over 300,000, is one of the continent's most thriving centres. In addition to being an
administrative, commercial and industrial city, it is
also an outstanding cultural centre" with its university
which is already attended by more than 1, aoo students,
its arts centre and. its numerous literary and artistic·
groups.
108. The Sudan, which has now assumed the name
of the Republic of Mali. has advanced by leaps and
boUnds in the la:st f:ifty years. Credit for this is due
mainly to its brave, tenacious andhard.-working people, who are renowned throughout WestAfrica. Technological discoveries have opened up for this country
the fairest of prospects.
109. A country's merit is measured not only by its
economic might but also by the quality of its "elite".
All the delegations present in this hall are acquainted
with President Leopold Sedar Senghor and President
Mamadou Dia, whom they had the opportunity ofmeeting 'at previous sessions of the Assembly. All the
delegations have also had the opportunity of meeting
and appreciating the great Mali leaders such as Mr.
ModtboKeita and Mr. Madeira Keita. There can be
no doubt that with such leaders the two young Republics
are in good hands.

110. Since the beginning of the century, and particu..
larly in the last twenty years, France has spared no
effort to lead the people of Senegal and of Mali to full
sovereignty and independence, in a' gradual and carefully prepared manner, in agreement with the peoples
themselves and their leaders, with a view to enabling
them to develop without ... hitch and successfully to
play their part in the international community.
111. The Republics of Senegal and of Mali are two
genuinely democratic States whose people are accuatomed to political life and whose leaders are of proved
experience therein. Not only do, the Constitutions of
the two States provide all the necessary gtlarantees
in that respect, but also the way in which t ':ley will
function will reflect the spirit that animates them. The
two Republics are genuinely peaceful. They have re-peatedly expressed the desire to unite with all African
States that would express the wish to do so. Lastly,
they are thoroughly convinced of the justice of the
principles of :he Charter and are firmly resolved to
respect them. They are therefore bound to make a
valuable cont:t"ibution t,} the work of our Orga.i'lization.
112. In addressing its warmest congratulations to
the representatives of these two Republics who are
present in this hall, the French delegation wishes to
convey to their Coul1tries, on behalf of the French
Government and people, the best wishes of happiness,
prosperity and sUI~cess.
Mr. MatsudairJJ. (Japan),
Chair.

Vice~President,

took the

113. Mr. SLIM (Tunisia) (translated from French):
The Tunisian delegation always deems it an honour
and a pleasure to salute from this rostrum the adomission of ne"" Members to our great Organization.
N~turally, this honour and this pleasure become especially pronounced and intense when, as in the present
case, we are welcoming African sister nations which,
like us, aspired to the same goals of freedom and
dignity and put aU of their strength into realizing these
legitimate aspir~tioJ'.,.s.
114. This explains the joy with which 1 convey to the
two new Members, the Republic of Sel.'legal, and, the
Republic of Mali, the sincerest congratulations of the
Tunisian Government and people.
115. My delegation is convinced that it is expressing
the joy felt at this :;:loment by all the African delegations at seeing the representation of the African continent in the United Nations reinforced and expanded
by the admission of the two Republics of Senegal and
of Mali.
116. In welcoming the two new African Republics, we
are convinced that both of them fully realize the major
responsibilities which their entry into our Organization
entails. There can be no doubt that they will endeavour
to discharge those responsibilities boldly and with the
dignity of fully mature nations, both on an international
scale and, more particularly, iu'relation to Africa's
imperative needs. The two sister Republics are con. sciou8 of the duties which devolve uoon them-and \
upon all of us here-towards the non"self-governing
African.peoples 'Who, for many years, have been,enduring' the· noblest and, 'at the same time, the most
painful sacrifices in order to wrench their freedoIll
from obstinate foreign rule. Senegal and Mali will
certainly not fail to show a constructive African soli"
darity towards those brother peoples, a solidarity

which, for all of us
basis for that bette
for our peoples in
co-operation.
117. I am convinced
Mali fully realize tl
tries, along with th
we had the pleasure
meeting], has taken
tension threatens t
moral. authority of
that the two new Me
countries of Africa,
that they realize wha
young States, what
what attachment they
convinced that the a
Senegal and Mali-w
of freedom, peace f
consoliQate our gre
enhance its prestigE

118. Tunisia, an AJ
African States of its
the hope that, togeth
vent defenders of pe
co-operation.
119. Sir Claude C
was my privilege as
in the Security Coun
sentatives of France
Republic of Mali, tl
to the General Asser
of Mali to member
also my privilege to
draft resolution rec
Republic of Senega
Nations.

120.- It gave us gref
.and it has given m~
in the General Asse
thes.:" two African
body.
121. My delegation
of the Security COUDC
mendation for the
Federation of Mali,
Since that time, this
stances which led t
two constituted coml
of Mali have satis
their futures as two
rate Republics. It i
maturity of the two
shown an appreciati
COnstitutional and pi
amicable methods w:
means other than the
122. Indeed, need w
caI maturity and wil
calibre, ability and
President of the Rep
Sudan, and Mr. Le
RepubUc of Senegal
been added to the li
liberation movement
times. In these circ

876th meeting - 28 Septemoel' 1960
which. for all of us .t\.irican countries, provides the
basis· for that better future which we intend to forge
for oU!' peoples in freedom, dignity. friendship and
co-operation.
117. I am convinced that our brothers in Senegal and
Mali fully realize that the admission of their cotin. tries, along with that of fourteen other States which
we had the pleasure ofwelcominghere last week [864th
mee:ting], has taken place at a time wheninternational
tension threatens to jeopardize the efficiency and
moral authority of the United Na.tions. I am certain
that the two new Membera realize how highly we•. the
countries of Africa, value this Organization. I am sure
that they realize what it symbolizes in the eyes of our
young States, what hopes our people place in it and
what attachment they feel tpwards it. We are therefore
convinced that the admission of. the two RepublicsSenegal and Mali-will not fail to strengthen the camp
of freedom, peace and international co-operation, to
consoliciate our great international Organization, to
enhance its prestige and to preserve its continuity.
118. Tunisia, an African State. assures the two new
African States of its fraternal feelings and expresses
the hope that, together with all of us, they will be fervent defenders of peace in Africa and of internation"al
co-operation.
119. Sir Claude COj1EA (Ceylon): This morning it
was my privilege as t~le representative of my country
in the Security Coun.::il to co-sponsor with the representatives of France and Tunisia. at the request of the
Republic of Mali, the draft resolution recommending
to the General Assembly the admission of the Republic
of Mali to membership in our Organization. It was
also my privilege to support at that same meeting the
draft resolution recommending the admission of the
Republic of Senegal to membership in the United
Nations.
120: It gave tL."l great pleasure to do so this morning.
.and it has given my delegation pleasure once again
in .the General Assembly to support·the application of
theS0 two African Republics to membership of this
body.
121. My delegation welcomed, at the 869th meeting
of the Security CouDcil held on 28 June last. the recommendation for the admission of what was then the
Federation of Mali, consisting of ~enegal and Sudan.
Since that time, this Assembly well knows the circumstances which led to the present position where the
two constituted components of the erstwhile Federation
of Mali have satisfied their aspirations in making
their futures as two sovereign, independent and separate Republics. It is a manifestation of the political
maturity of the two young Republics that they have
shown an appreciation of reality and resolved their
constitutional and politioal differences by pacific and
amicable methods without recourse to bitterness or to
means other than those of negotiation and adjustment.
122. Indeed, need wehave any doubts about the political maturity and wisdom of States led by men of such
calibre, ability and intelligence as Mr. Mobido Keita,
President of the Republic of Mali, whichwas formerly
Sudan. and Mr. Leopold Senghor, President of the
RepubJ.ic of Senegal-two leaders who have recently
been added to the list of African statesmen which the
liberation movement in Africa has produced in recent
times. In these circumstances, there is little doubt that

207

eveljTone here will agree that the Republic of Senegal
and the Republic of Mali should receive a cordial and
unanimous welcome into our midst as sovereign, f:ree
and independ~nt Members. We have constantly and
consistently reiterated our view that this world Organization should give effect to the principle ofunive].....
sality of representation. It gives us added pleasure.
therefore. to see the Assembly taking yet another step
in that direction.
123. My delegation is quitf} confide~t that the two
new Member States, like the fourteen others who joined
us last week, will fulfil every obligation and. perform
every duty which the Charter enjoins on all Member
States. The United Nations family will be the richer by
the admission of the Republic of Mali and the Republic
of Senegal today.
.
124~ On the other hand. we are all fully aware of the
tremendous tasks of nation building that face these
ilew States, tanks which require capital, techniques and
personnel. Like my own country, they will, during the
difficult period of transition from a colonial economy
·to a non-colonial one; require much assistance from
outSide. I am sura that theUT.lited Nations, which is
today admitting them to full membership will readily
hold. out the hand of assistance to them in all fields,
as it has done to so many other nations in the past.
125. We are also gratified that France has assured
them of friendship and guidance, and we ar~ glad that
France has helped. them in the attainment of their
independence.
126. On behalf of the Government and th,~ people of
Ceylon, I have great pleasure in extendiIlg tothe Governments and the peoples of the Republics ofMali and
Senegal our warmest good wi~hes, confident that the'Y'
will, while turning their efforts to their political development, social improvement and economic advancement. at the same time strengthen this Organization
and thereby help attain the fulfilment of the Purposes
and Principles of the Charter of the United Na~ons•
127. Mr. PAZHWAK (Afghanistan}: It is '\\ith a feeling
of great honour and privilege that I have· asked the
President's permission to eome here to welcome the
two independent nations which have just been admitted
to membership in this Organization: Mali and Senegal.
It is also a great honour for me that'Ispeak:at this
stage not only onbehalf ofthe delegation of Afghanistan
but also on bahalf of a great number of countries in
Asia and Africa who have asked me to eA"tend to the
representatives of these two countries their m()st
cordial and heartfelt congratulations on this occasion.
128. The increase in the membership of the United
Nations has been remarkable atthis session, andtoday
the Assembly has taken another step in this direction,
which makes it even more remarkable. Tbus,we look
upon what has happened as something of greatsigiJificance, and that is the support of the United Nations
as a whole for the cause of independence; the support
. of the United Nations as a whole for the universality
of this Organization; the Sllpport of the United Nations
as a whole fCI' the· fulfilment of the legitimate ~spira­
tions of peoples and of nations, particularly for their
right to .dignity, to· independence and to equality; the
support of the United Nations for a cause which nobody
'can deny-that a universal organization can only work
in a better way if the people of the world are all given
an equal chance to contribute to the common caaseof .
.humanity, in the interests of mankind as a whole.

208

General Assembly - Fifteenth session - Plenary Meetings

129. Finally, we think that with the entry of these
Members into our Organization a greater force will
be created in support of those peoples andnations. who
unfortunately have not attained their independence and
their full rights. While we welcom· .bese nations, we
would like to congratulate the United Nations on its
success. It is indeed a source of great pride for the
Organization. But obviously this pride cannot be fully
enjoyed unles.s all dependent people in the world fulfil
and realize their legitimate rights to independence
and are given a chance to join the Organization and to
contrib~te to the peace and prosperity of the world in
the interests of mankind.

130. Satisfaction in many areas may be easy to obtain, but in the field of the right of dignity and independence it is not an easy thing to find. We do not deny
that the Organization has been successful inthis field;
but if there is an exception in any part of the world,
the fulfilment of the principles of this Organization
will not be considered complete. Wllen we saywe look
forward to seeing all the peoples of the world independent, we say it with a feeling of confidence. At
this moment we cherish the hope that it will come
about very swiftly. The countries of Asia and Africa
hope that it will take place tomorrow.
131. Mr. MEZINCESCU (Romania) (o:anslated from
French): On behalf of the delegations of Albania, the
Byelo:;:uss~anSSR, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary,
Poland, the Ukrainian SSR, the Union of So-vietSocial1st Republics and the Romanian Peoples'· Republic,
I warmly welcome the Republic ofMali andthe Republic of Senegal which are becoming Members of the
United Nations.
132. The Socialist COl:lltries believe that the entry
of new States into the international community, as
Members enjoying. equal rights, strengthens the forces
wMoh are now operating in support of :teace and the
cons,olidation .of international security. By coming a
little clorer to universality, ourO~'ganizationacquires
greater prestige and authority. We are all the more
hc;-;py to welcome these two new Members of the United
Nations since they are two African States whose accession to independence is part of the process of the
liquidation of colonialism, which is hated by the pea-.
pIes and disgraces mankind.
133. The two new States are beginning their activity
in our Organization at a truly historic moment, when
numerous peace-lovillg States are represe~ted at the
fifteenth sesllliou of the General Assembly by the most
eminent. statesmen, a fa~tor that creates altogether
UnprecedElDtedconditions fOi' getting closer to finding
a solution to· the major pl'o:"lems disturbi,ng internationall'elations. We are convincedthatthemewAfrican States which arejo:L1ing the UI!.ited Nations today
willmalte a positive contribution to the.· solution £1£
these problems.

134. .I venture to observe at the SaDl.e 'time that the
admission of two new African Statf<lS, a £e'w days ..Iter
that of thirteen· other new Africa'a States and of the
R~public .of Cyprus, coincides with th'e. noble taskwhich I·. hope will. be reflected in tb/a agenda of the
(Jeneral Assembly...of adopting the De/olaration on the
. Grant of Independence to Colonial COWltries and Peoples~. which should accelerate the process of elimina·tion of the .last traces. of the hateful colonial system.
This ·fact.gives to what·has been called "The Afliean
'year at the United Nations" special significance which,

I aDl. convinced, has not escaped anybody's notice. It
is our fervent hope that the year will mal'k the real
end of slavery for all the peoples who are still under
the colonial yoke. I avail myself of this opportunity
to reaffirm the desire of the Socialist countries to
enter into and develop friendly relations with the
Republic of Mali and the Republic of Senegal and with
all the other new States in Africa. In conveying to the
representatives of the Republic of Mali andthe Republie of Senegal the most heart-felt congratulations and
the sincerest wishes for peace and prosperity, On behalf of Romania and of the other Socialist countries,
I should like te assure them tha~ in our countries,
they have sincere friends on whom they can always
rely.
135. Mr. ILLUECA (Panama) (translated from Spanish): It is a great honour for me to speak from this
rostrum when the meeijng is being presided over by
so distinguished ,a statesman as yourself.

136. On behalf of the Latin American nations, who in
this have asked me to speak in their name, I should
like to say that we shareintherejoicing, this evening,
in the General Assembly at the admission of two new
States, the Republic ofMali and the Republic of Senegal.
We are fully aware of the noble mission which lies
before these peoples and their Governments in the
world Organization. We know that, because of their
great traditions, they will play a constructive part.
Their peoples are most conscious of their duties and
their rights, and are called upon to make a substantial
contribution 1:0 international peace and security. May
I therefore conv~'· most cordial congratulations to
these two new Member States, as well as to the other
new African States with whom, also, the peoples of
Latin America share common ideals.
137: Mr. DJERMAKOYE (Niger) (translated from
French): At this time when the independence of Senegal
and of Mali is re!}eiving recognition intheworld forum:
of the United :Nations, I should like to t:«press on behalf of the four members of the Conseil de I 'entente
-Dahomey, the Upper .Voila, the Niger and the Ivory
Coast-our heartfelt fraternal congratulations to these
new Members.

138. The break-up of the Federation of Mali might
have led-as has happened elsewhere-to serious political diffi,culties prejudicial to the harmonious development of the young African States which, after
many struggles and sacrifices, have succeeded in
winning recognttion of their political coming-of-age.
But, thanks' to the mediation of various responsible
African pc)1iticia.ns, thanks to the good will and understanding of the Malian and Senegalese authorities.
thanks to the· commOn desire to settle all differenc~"
aJDong African States by peaceful means, the distul..
ing crisis of the former Federation of Mali did not give
rise to another drama in t'he heart of our continent.
139. May this wisdom of the African States serve
to establish for alltiriles the principle of seeking
peaceful settlement, first and· foremost,· at home, in
order to avoid immediate outside intervention the \
spectacular nature of which at once leads to the crystallization of the attitudes of the various parties and
which,· owing to a lack of sufficient knowledge.:>f Afri··
can psychology and despite the best will ofthe friends
offering help. is fraught with the danger of aggravating
the situation.

i40. In thanki
applications of
express the mo
world may bec
among peoples
countries, whic
thusiastically,
.benefit of our
141. Mr. EDU

of Ghana I wis
the Republic 0
Nation,S. It is r
sister States of
nies of France
today, that is, 2
that the occas
circumstance .
day because it
free exercise
lJ30ple of the fo
by their vote th
ing their right
their own des
France and in
tlJ.ought that th
litical and natio
Constitution an
as a sovereign
The Republic 0
membership in
142. Shortly
the French col
gether and fo
lishment of th
Ghl!lla as a s

peoples towar
June of this y
independent St
United Nations
We were quite
the Federation
Nations. Howe
barely two yea
solved as a po
the Federation
the Republic of
States-which
this great Ass
tined role in m
143. Perhaps
the very menti
the minds of
the achievemen
of the empires
ishedin the WeB'
The memories
aChievements (
period of our
endeavour in
called upon to
the projection 0
144. We hope
Federation of
c1rance fnthe
peoples toward
hand· we hope t
tinue to co-ope
p!oVelDent of t

876th meeting - 28 September 1960
140. In thanldng the countries which sponsored the
applications of Senegal and of Mali, l should like to
express the most sincere hope that the peoples of the
world may become united and that peace may reign
among peoples and nations so that our young Mrican
countries, which you have just welcomed here so enthusiastically, can prosper in peace for the greater
benefit of our people.

ars

:!Z.

.... ..: ...

,,-

141. Ml'. EDUSEI (Ghana): On behalf of the delegation
of Ghana 1 wish to weI come the Republic of Mali and
the Republic of Senegal to membership in the United
Nations. It is rather significant to note that these two
sister States of Africa, which were until recently colonies of France, have been admitted to membership
today, that is, 28 September 1960. Iventureto suggest
that the occasion constitules an irony of historical
circumstance in perspective. Today is a signliicant
day because it was exactly two yéars aga that, by the
free exercise of their will and sovereign rights, the
people of the former French colony of Guinea rejected
by their vote the new French Constitution, thus asserting their right to be independent and to be masters of
their own destiny. At that time the Government of
France and in fact the friends and allies of France
thought that the people of Guinea had committed political and national suicide by voting against the French
Constitution and by proclaiming the RepuQlic of Guinea
as a sovereign State outside the French Community.
The Republic of Guinea was subsequently admitted to
membership in the tJ:nited Nations.
142. Shortly after this historie and momentous event
the French colonies of Senegal and of Sudan came together and formed the Federation of Mali. The establishment of the Federation of Mali was conceded by
Ghana as a step in the forward movement of African
peoples toward political unity. When, therefore, in
June of this year the Federation of Mali became an
independent State and applied for membership in the
United Nations, Ghana was happy about that event.
We were quite prepared to support the admission of
the Federation of Mali to membership in the United
Nations. However, the Federation of Mali which was
barely two years old has now been broken up and dissolved as a political and juridical entity. In place of
the Federation we now have the Republic of Mali and
the Republic of Senegal-two sovereign and independent
States-which are now prepared to take their seats in
this great Assembly of nations and toplay their destined l'ole in modern international life.
143. Perhaps 1 need not re-emphasize the fact that
the very mention of the name Mali brings back into
the minds of modern African youth the grandeur and
the achievements of the great empire of Mali and also
of the empires of Ghana and of Songhai which flourished in the western Sudan during the mediaeval period.
The memories of these empires and the exploits and
achievements of our predecessors in that glorious
period of our common history inspire us to higher
endeavour in the new and destined l'ole which we are
called upon to play in modern international llie and in
the projection of the African personality.
144. We hope therefore that the dissolution of the
Federation of Mali will in no way prove to be a hindrance in the progressive movement of the Mrican
peoples toward political unity in our time. On the other
hand we hope that our two new sister States will continue to co-operate in an fields of action for the improvement of their respective national economies and

209

for raising the living standards of their respective
peoples. We trust that in co-operation with the other
independent Mrican States the Republic of Mali and
the Republic of Senegal will work together with courage
and with confidence for the elimination of all forms
of colonialism from the l'est of Mrica and will help
ta keep the cold war out of Africa and also from the
unhappy indeological confiicts and tensions which now
dividè the world into Eastern and Western blocs.
145. On behalf of the delegation of Ghana l congratulate our brothers from the Republic of Mali and from
the Republic of Senegal as they take their seats in
the Assembly and as they begin to participate in our
common efforts ta maintain peace, security, mutual
understanding, and mutua! self-respect among the
nations of the world.
146. Ml'• .;l(rishna MENON (India): Ml'. Vice- President, may l on behalf of my delegation congratulate
your country on its election ta the vice-presidency
of the General Assembly.
147. It is with Et sense of privileged duty that my
delegation appears on this rostrum, on its own behalf
and also on behalf of the delegation of Pakistan to con.vey our congratulations ta the two young RepublicsSenegal and Mali-which have now joined us as States
Members of the United Nations.
148. We have reason to congratulate ourselves on
more than one oount. First of all, the wisdom and
statesmanship of the leaders of these countries have
saved us from the fear of another criais and another
seat of confusion on the Mrican continent. The Assembly owes them a debt of gratitude for having been able
to resolve their disputes in this way and for having
given a demonstration of the implementation of the
principles of the Charter v.;rhich calls upon people to
resolve their disputes by peaceful means.
149. The Assembly is overcast, Ida not want ta say
with gloom but with concern, about the affairs of the
world. The tension that exists has in no way been
lowered by the meeting of a large number of statesmen in this place. The event which we are celebrating
today is a silver lining in these clouds and some of
us hope a precursor of the dispersal of them. The
wisdom shown by these young countries and their
statesmen-and l say this with great respect-might
perhaps point the way for greater and wiser men to
resolve their disputes. It has been said that one can
even learn from children; and sa others can learn
from young nations.
150. My country is very happy ta feel that on this
continent of Africa where in 1950 there were four
independent countries-that is, if you include South
Africa as an Independant country, large numbers of
!ts people not being independent-tllere are now some
twenty-six independent countries, covering a population of 178 million out of a total estimated population
of 222 million. The great French empire with its area
of 4.5 million square miles has now only three quarters of a million square miles under its tutelage. It
is our hope that with thevictory offreedom in Algeria j
the greater part of that area also will come within
the ambit of freedom. The remainder of what is truly
dark Africa is South West Africa-I use the lang'Uage
of the present rulers-and Portugal in Africa. We
have no doubt that the vigour and the determination
of the African peoples. backed by enlightened public
opinion and the conscience of humanity, will see the

.General Assembly - Fifteenth session - Plenary Meetings
210
---------------dJsmemberment of the Portuguese empire and the
liberation of the A:J."'rican peoples and others subject
to Portug-uese colonialism.

say that the Senegal rivel' rises in Guinea and that,
according to history, the IJnpltal. of the onceflourishing
empire of Mali was likewise in Guinea.

151. Senegal and Mali assure the Assembly that we
need have no concern regarding the liberation ofyoung
countries provided the circumstanoes that make it
possible for them to come together are provided in
some degree by the others. If countries and naiions,
particularly ex-colonial countries, were allowed to
settle their own affairs, thay would pl'obably settle
them and wo could thus get away from the doctrine of
"divide and rulen aud get to the modern version"divide and leave". In this particular casethebounda...
ries of these States were settled by themselves; their
problems were resolved in a short time. We have
every reason therefore to regard this as a comparatively good day for the United Nations.

158. In the eyes of my delegation, the admission of
the two neigJ>~lll'ing States of Sellegal and Malt to the
internatir..nal Organization is at the same time a Sign
of progress, So promise of success and a proof of jus..
tice in the great stru,ggle of the peoples of Africa for
the reconquest of froodom and weU"being.

i52. As I have said, perhaps we can leave here tonight in the hope that some of the great problems tbat
confront us may draw some inspiration from what has
happened here this afternoon. Once again, I congratuwo
late these two countries.
153. Mr. COOPER (Liberia}: It is with great satisfaction and deep emotion that my delegationwelcomes
to the United Nations the two sister States of Mali
and Senegal, our closest neighbours. We salute their
courage, their patience and their determination.

154. It is difficult to live under any form of foreign
tutelage or domination, however benevolent. It is therefore remarkable indeed thatthese two countries should
have achieved their independence without untoldhardship and bloodshed. We must express some apprecia..·
tion for this to France, which has made passible this
smooth, peaceful and harmonioustransformationfrom
colonies into independent States. We hope that, as a
result" of their 6X'Perience and their trials under such
tl:ying and difficult circumstances, the two countries
will bring to this Organization a new appNach to the
many and vexing problems which require our utmost
patience and perseverance.
~
155. To these countries I say that our task is not
completed and cannot be completed so long as some
of our brethren live under foreign rule, with all the
humiliation and oppression, and even death, that are
generally suffered by a dependent people. I am sure
that they will exert all their efforts, as they have done
in the past, to see to it that their brothers in Africa
achieve that freedom and jUstice which they now enjoy.
156. Mr. TO'URE Ismael (Guinea) (translated from
F:rench): Allow me, Mr. President, to thankyou and to
recall that two years ago, in the Security Council, it
'was your delegation which. tlJgether with that of Iraq,
sponsored the admission of the Republic of Guinea
to the United Nations. My delegation might quote an
African proverb and say that you had· a lllucky touch 11 p
for since the Republic of Guinea became the eightysecond Member of the international Organization ill.""
dependence has ·been achieved by a.veritable wave of
countries and fourteen more African States have been
admitted to the United Nations.

157. My delegation warmly welcomes the two. sister
Republics of Mali and Senegal, and would stress that
the admission of these States to the United Nations
has. special significance for llS. Thelinks which bind
us .to the peoples of Mali and Sl3negal are so close
that there is no needto emphasize them. I shall merely

159. This is 28 September 1960, the second anni..
versal'y of the proc1amation ofthe Republic ofGuinea's
independence. Dur. 'g those two years, the colonial
sYstem has never succeeded in isolating the yuung
Republic of Guinea. Today we are welcoming two new
sovereign African states whose addition to the interoo
national family will be a substantial contribution to
the unity and greawE'ss of the African continent.
160. Unity within the colonial system is meaningless
for us; but we, the young states of Africa, are con..
vinced that history, which today is imparting hard
instruction to the crumbling colonial system, is in&vltably drawing us together, infreedom from the chains
of slavery and in safety from the machinations of our
enemies.

161. There are striking coincidences in the mstory
of peoples. On 28 September 1898, with the defeat of
the great patriot Almamy Samory Toure, the territory
of Guinea was conquered by France and enslaved.
Sixty years later, on 28 Septeml>er 1958, Guineavoted
"No" in General de Gamle's referendum and, be-fore the world, proclaimed its independence. Today,
28 ~eptember 1960, two years later ,two further sister
Republics of Mrica, following thirteen others, have
received international recognition.
,
162. We wish to salute these two States and to con"
gratulate them and their peoples. A long and difficult
road· lies ahead. but we are convinced that the contribution of Senegal and Mali will be crucial, and we
are also sure that we must all retain our confidence.
With the Republic' of. Senegal and the Republic of Mali,
our African brothers, shoulder to shoulder ona basis
of equality with all peoples of good will, we know that
our struggle for prosperity, dignity and peace will be
crowned with success.

167. Mr. THIAl\
We should have
offer our warm
recently elected
that his electio
Assembly in the
YOWlg States .
particularly valu
of the United Ne:
we have to mak·
We need men 0
and advise us.
168•. Turning to
my sincere th
I thank them fro
fidence they ha
have done us, b
nations. We full
eision they have
all circumstanc
confidence and d
169. We enter
time. Today,
keenest wish is
peace. It would
side if in this tr
stantly feel the
Senegal but of
given so kindly
which you have
a responsibility
IHs for us to e

165.. I should like to request the delegations of the
.Republic of Mali and the Republic of Senegalto accept,
and extend to their people, the heartfelt congratulations
of the people and Government of Ethiopia.

170. At this po
gratitude to the
which sponsore
the United Nati
ported our admi
171. After eve'
past few days
to the United N
expatiate on this
action in Black
rived at that jud
independence
the highest inte
that this indepe
out friction or
guard friendshi
these radical c
France on a ne
to whose clari
-General de Ga
whose constant
in the world,
of pea.ce and fr
stllllding shown
havs establishe
thia auspicious
satisfaction, w
peaceful solutio
which are the s
that decoloniza
this century,
we see no reas
endeavour to gi

166. The P:RESIDENT: I now wish, with my personal
.congra.tulations. and deep feelings of welcome, to call
on the representatives of the two nev.r Member States.

172. In this co
pl'oud we are 0
dent HabibBour

163. Mr. ALEMAYEHOU (Ethiopia): I ahould like to
make some brief remarka on the occasion of the adD
miSsion to the United Nations of two sister States,
the Republic of Mali and the Republic of Senegal.
164. The Government and people of Ethiopia rejoice
in the admission of Senegal and Mali to the United
Nations, not only because their right to full membership of this internationa11lommunity has been acknow"
ledged, but also because this fuU membership in the
Uriited Nations of an increasing mu.nberof Africans
is a clear indication ofthe total emancipation of. Africa
from colonial subjugation. It is an 'indication of the
end of colonialism in Africa, from which the pecplefj
of Africa have suffered SO much.

876th meeting - 28 September 1960
167. Mr.. THIAM (Senegal) (translated from French):
We should have liked at the outset of the session to
offer our warmest congratulations to ~rr. Boland,
recently elected President of the Assembly. lam sure
that his election will be of great assi~tance to the
Assembly in the organization of its work, and that for
young States like ourselves his experience \'Iill be
particularly valuable in thts period. As new Members
of the United Nations, we are conscious of the efforts
we have to make in order to build up our experience~
We need men of the stature of our President to help
and advise us.
168. -Ttu'Ding to the Assembly, I shouldliketo express
my sincere thanks to the delegations here present.
I thank them from the bottom of myheart for the confidence they have shown in us, and the honour they
have done us, by admitting us to the great family of
nations. We fully recognize the importance of the decision they have taken and we shall do our utmost, in
all circumstances, to show ourselves worthy of their
confidence and deserve their esteem.
169. We enter this distinguished forum. at a troubled
time. Today, the fate of humanity is at issue. Our
keenest wish is to contribute to the establishment of
peace. It would be useless for us to be here at ;}'OUT
side if in this tremendous enterprise you did not constantly feel the real and effective presence not only of
Senegal but of all the new· States to which you have
given so kindly and brotherly a welcome. By the act
which you have just performed, you have undertaken
a responsibility towards the world andtowards history.
It is for us to ensure that you never have to regret it.
170. At this point I must express our country's full
gratitude to the two great nations. France and Tunisia,
which sponsored our candidature for membership in
the United Nations, as well as to Ceylo.... which supported our admission in this hall.
171. After everything that has been said during the
past few days by all the new African States admitted
to the United Nations, I do not think it necessary to
expatiate on this subject. If any judgement of France's
action in Black Africa were required, you have arrived at that judgement yourselves, inrecognizingour
independence and soYereignty by a unanimous vote of
the highest international body. What is remarkable is
that tins independence should have been acquiredwithout friction or violence, in circumstances which safeguard friendship and fruitful co-operation. Behind all
these radical changes, which set our relations with
France on a new course, stands the illustrious figure
to whose clarity and breadth of vision We pay tribute
-General de Gaulie. I am. sure thatthe United Nations,
whose constant concern is the safeguarding of peace
in the world, will rightly appreciate the atnl0sphere
of peace and friendship which, thanks to the understilnding shown by the Head of the French State, we
have established in this part of Africa. fu :the light of
tl:;is auspicious precedent, from which we all take
satisfaction, we hope that, despite the difficulties,
peaceful solutions will be found in other parts of Africa
which are the scene of fighting. Once it is recognized
that decolonizatiQn is. the outstanding phenomenon of
this century,and that it is necessary and inevitable,
we see no reason why the parties involved shQuld not
endeavour to give effect to it in thebest possible way.
172. In this connex:ion I am glad to emphasize haw
proud we are of the sponsorship of Tunisia. President Habib Bourguiba is a living example offirmness,

211

courage and refus&1 to compromise, temperedbywisdom and discernment. I stress the example of Tunisia,
not only because of the welcome pa.rt played by that
country in our admission to the United Nations, but
because it seems to us, the people of· Senegal, that
Tunisia is a typical example of ideal decolonization.
Decolonization is something withnot merely apolitical
but also an economic, sceial, moral andpsychological
aspect. The young independent States must, as has
been Said, avoid walking "backwards ll into the future;
in other words. they must be conscious of their new
position asindependen~States, and not continue to be
obsessed with colonialism. Otherwise we risk casting
constant doubt on our newly acqUired independence,
whereas, if we wish to do constructiveworkin natio~­
building, that independence should be our startingpoint.
173. The problem which will increasingly face us
-and we hope to be able to revert to it during this

important session-is not ao muchthe struggle against
colonialism, whose disappearance is inevitable, as the
problem of how to make up for i.nst time gnd reduce
the ever-growing gap between the less developed and
the more developed countries.
174. To be sure, we know the -value of freedom too
well to fail to show, whenever necessary, our active
sympat.'1y for all who are inspired by a national ideal
and who accept heavy sacrifices in order to achieve it.
In this body, which is dominated by the ideal of San
Francisco, we. may suppose that they will always find
a hearing when defending the cause offreedom and the
right of peoples to seli-determination. But I wouldnot
wish to pursue this subject now, and I apologize for
havi.-ng touched upon it in this short statement whose
pu:rpose is really to a'lCpress our gratitude.
175. In that connexion I should pa:rticularly like to

mention how impressed we have been bythe thoughtful
attention and understanding shown. to us by both the
Secretary-General and the President of the Security
Council.
176. Once more, on behalf ofthe delegation ofSenegal,

I express to the Assembly my deep gratitude for the
action it has taken with regard to, my country~
177. Mr. AW (Mali) (translated from French): The
delegation of the Republic of Malt thanks the Assembly
for its unanimous vote in favour of Qur country's admission to the United Nations. On behalf of the peop]",

and tb.e Government of Mall, may I expresstc you our
gratitude and affirm our. determination to live up 'to
our responsibilities, thus provingworthyofyourtn\St.
We are particula:dygrateful to the two sister nations ,
CeylC'D. and Tunisia, which did us, the hc;mourof sponsoring our candidature in the Security·Ccuncil. JtiS
hardly necessary to stress that this was anatllrat
choice since we stand fQrgreater Solidarity between
the States of Asia and Africa.
178. Those who have been following recent events in
the Fedel'ation of Mali were no doubt SUl'I)risedto see
a third and unasked sponsor added tothatwo sponsors
we selec:ted, i.e.~ Ceylop. and Tunlsia. We regal:d this
French move as an unnatural act which we wish to
denounce solemnly from thii:lrostrumon behalf of
Government and thefieople of Mali. We wish to denounce the petty man('eutteswhich have been going on.
in the lobbie.s of the United Nations ever sinoe the
proclamation. of QUI' Republic ·'l.IJ1d .inwllich recourse
was sometimes had to the diSsemmation of false in-

the

212

General Assembly - Fifteenth session - Plenary Meetings

formation and the use of forged documents, in order
to impose this sponsorship upon us despite the warning
we conveyed to the French delegation. The purpose of
these manceuvres, which were backed by a concerted
campaign. in the Paris Press, was to confuse world
opinion by trying to disguise the fact that the element
of confidence and friendship implicit in sponsorship
does not at present exist between France and our country.
179. Our first statement from this rostrum cannot
be confined to an expression of the high esteem in
which we hold the United Nations. Last week, sharing the emotion of all our African brothers, we were
present in this hall at the uncontested admission of
the new Afiican nations, while that of our own country
was being deferred. Our birth to international life,
like that uf the childbol'D.intravail, has not been painless. Therefore I cannot fail to tell the Assembly that,
despite everything, our pride and joy are unimpaired.
In. order to remove or prevent all misunderstanding,
the peoples of the world whose representatives are
here assembled should know from the outset who we
are and why there has been a slightdelay in our com.ing before this august Assembly.
180. No one can doubt that we would have preferred

to be able to speak here today onbehalf of the Federation of Mali. Since the reasons for our devotion to the
Federation may escape the uninformed observer, allow
me to outline some ofthem•Strange as it might appear,
you know more about the .Federation ofMali than about
its component States. A few years ago the glorious
name of tlGhana l was assumed by Black Africa's first
post-war independent Republic. Eighteen months ago,
when the two syllables 'Malill were heard, another
and equally glorious page of African history emerged
from colonial darkness. Eight centuries ago Mandingo
rulers presided over the destiny of an empire which
yielded in nothing to the kingdoms of Europe and which
maintained diplomatic relations with numerous countries. For eighteen months the chancelleries of the
world have been weighing our generation's chances of
matching in these modern times our empire-building
ancestors' organizational and administrative talents.
Some journalists even saw inthe adoptionby our young
Federation of this glorious ancestral name a secret
intention of embracing the conquermg militarism that
had marked tha zenith of the Empire of Mali. In. a
short space of time those two syllables remindedmilHom. of Af...-icans of the fact that Europe had not introduced them to civilization; there could have been
no finer stimulant for· ridding us of the complex that
undezlies Africa's loss of personality.
18L Mali stands for all that and the Federation of
Mali stood for even more. Within a space of eighteen
months, by dint of strenuolW efforts" we set up the
administrative infrastructure of a modern State. We
c:t'eated institutions and passed laws on the basis of
which we entered into international commitments. OUr
paramount achievement was to give a nationality to
savt;)n million men and women. We gave its flag to an
army which even today is making a contributionto tb~
struggle wagf:ld by the Congolese people to consolidate
its national independence and maintain the territorial
integrity ·of the young Republic of the Congo, whinh is
threatened by imperialist forces.
182. That, all that, is what made us cling to the
Federation of Mali. That is what makes USo the
Malians of the Sudan, regard the secession of oal."

partner as a scandal that nothing can justify, one that
reflects on all Africans who are seeking to achieve
political' unity. Our insistence on maintaining the
Federation at all costs springs from that fact and it
alone. It is inconceivable to us that yesterday Mali
should have stood for .AfrIcan greatness and African
personality' and that todaythe destruction ofeverything
connected with the name should be eagerly pursued.
We cannot understand how the political, economic and
cultural reasons justifying a federation could be true
yesterday but not today. For us, certain truths exist
and we still believe in them.
183. I will not disguise the fact that, in the circum_
stances, we are distressed by the childish attempts at
justification that have been made sip.ce 20 August. We
are distressed at seeing Africans boast ofhavingbeen
:robbed of their personality by colonialism. When we
see decadent radicaliSm 'and sterile polemics exalted
into revolutionary doctrine, it is brought home to
us how much still remains to be dene before Africa
achieves complete emancipation. We are, however,
still optimistic because we are convinced that the day
is not far off when all the Africanpeoples will be free,
including the people whose ancient African essence is
being denied by the very bards of llnegritude ll •
184. When we say llall the African peoples ll we pa,r.,

ticularly have the Algerian people in mind. At the
appropriate time we shall explain fully our views on
this 1;lroblem. We reserve the right to speak of it here
as mU0h as necessary. But since our attitude to this
pl'oblem was one of the main reasons behind the plot.
that has led to the dissolution of the Federation of
Mali we wish to say here and now that our attitude
has not changed. Our attitude to the colonialist war
in Algeria was, when we still belonged to the French
Community, and remains now that of all Africans face
to face with their conscience: today Algeria is as muoh
of a French colony as the Sudanese Republic was yesterday, and the Algerian people has been fighting for
more than five years to regain its freedom. The Mrican states whose independence has just been recognized by France cannot but realize that the sacrifices
of the Algerian fighters and the earlier sacrifices of
Viet-Namese patriots initiated the process that has
led to the disintegration ofthe French colonial empire.
The independent African States cannot deny to the
Algerian people the right to independence. We have
said so before and are saying it now. That is the very/'
least that ;Mricans pan ~o. yve tbink,forour p~,t1fat
the war m .Algeria is ID Itself reason et:l.Olfgh for a
break between France and the African,-States.

185. Much has been said about,gerio~idein. th~ Congo
where bands, armed by the colonialists, are trying ~o
overthrow the country's legitimate Government. For
our part, we think that the French have been commit..
ting the c:rime of genocide for years andwith impunity
in Algeria where patriots areniassacred for demand-ing self-determination. We have always thoughtsoand
we have never concealed that view.
186. What concerns us now is that effo~ are being

made to associate African States with that crime. We \
hope that no one will be misled and that no Mrican,
nertainiy no A-friemi- State; will feel sufficient affinity
with France to beGome an accomplice toa deed so
fraught with consequences. We declare 9ur full soUdarity with the Algerian people whose martyrdom has
gone on fol" too long and whose cause-we are con~illced-Vv:ill triumph, because it is a just cause.

187. I have just
wbich impelledth
tion to the very
came up before
I noW try to a:naly
Algeria is one of
our failure, in vi
. of view of acbie
remind you that
a year of persist
era-. The Federa
genuine nation '
tionalism which
desperate effort
that Guinea first
ture in Septembe
patiently attacked
which history had
188. The Feder
responsible for
That is why Mali
entertain no ill
colonizers who
own free will. T
ways been the re
bear directly by
exercised by rev
of the world. Ev
set in motion wh
Mali nationalist
of the, Franco-M
in Mali who wants
that was grasped
189. France has
of the Federatio
pendence of one 0
partner in the Fe
the logical concl
agreements had
Federation of M
States, the disap
ipso facto render
Sudanese Republi
free of all co
Legislative Asse
passing on 22 Se
No. 60-35/AL
Jl Article 1: T
11.25 a.m. on 2
"Republic of M
independent an
and sovereign
free of all co
11 Article 2: T
under the emer
190. ! have thou
account of the e
Mali which has
family of natio
dead, long live

191. From the
teristics, Mali to
has a territory w
to the Sahara, to
richest lands he
reason to be hop

876th meeting - 28 September 1960
187_ I have just described the fundamental reasons
wbiob. impelledtheSudanese State to defendthe Federation to the very end, in other words until the issue
came up before the United Nations for decision. May
I now try to analyse brieflythe reasons for our failure.
Algeria is one of them. Nor should anyone mjnimize
our failure, in view of its importance from the point
of view of achieving African unity. I should like to
remind you that the Federation came into being after
a year of persistent and stubborn efforts by its lead-ers. The Federation of Mali was the end result of
genuine nationalism-an irresistible current of na"
tionalism which flowed from Bamako and which a
desperate effort VIas made to dam. While it is true
that Guinea first breached the French colonial structure in September 1958, it was Mali that strongly and
patiently attacked the very foundations of that edifice
which history had condemned.
188. The Federation of Mali thus came to be held
responsible for the chain reaction of independence.
That is why Mali has always beeninthe dock. We could
entertain no illUSIOns because history knows of no
colonizers who relinquished their colonies of their
own free will. The emancipation of colonies has always been the result of pressure, either brought to
bear directly by the country seeking its freedom or
exercised by revolutionary movements in other parts
of the world. Events in the Federation of JY::ili were
set in motion when the imperialists realized that the
Mali nationalist wing rejectedtheneo-colonialisttenor
of the. Franco--Malian agreements. There we:re people
in Mali who wanted real independence, and as soon as
that was grasped the Federation was doomed.
189. France hastened to make final the dissolution
of the Federation of Mali by recognizing the independence of one of the federated States. The Sudanese
partner in the Federation was therefore boundto draw
the logical conclusion that, since the Franco-Malian
agreements had been concluded by France with the
Federation of Mali and not with either ofthe federated
States, the disappearance of the Federation of Mali
ipso facto rendered the agreements null and void. The
Sudanese Republic thus became the Republic of Mali,
free of all commitments and all political ties. Our
Legislative AssemblY gave statutory form to this by
passing on 22 Septembel' 1960, by acclamation, Act
No. 60-35/AL/RS, which I shall now read out to you:
JlArticle 1: The Sudanese Republic Shall, as from
11.25 a.m. on 22 September 1960, assume the name
llRepublic of Mali w; the Republic of Mali shall be an
independent and sovereign State. The independent
and sovereign State of the Republic of Mali shall be
free of all commitments and political ties.
"Article 2: The present Act shall be promulgated
under the emergency procedure. JI
190. ! have thought it essentialto give an unambiguous
account of the exact position of the new Republic. of
Mali which has just been admitted into this great
family of nations. It could indeed be said: J1 Mali is
dead, long live Mali".
191. From the point of view of its physical characteristics, Mali today, with a population of 4.5 million,
has a territory which extends from Timbuktu, gateway
to the Sahara, to the edge of the forest; it is one of the
richest lands held oy Africans and they have every
reason to be hopeful.

213

192. It has been said that this year 1960 is beyond
doubt the year of Africa. Similarly, this half oftne
century will undoubtt3dl.y be Africa's. This Africa in
search of itself is a continent emergingfrom centuries
of foreign rule, conscious ofthefactthatit can become
master of its fate only in freedom and unity. We think
i.n this connexion that the only lasting groupings will
be those with solid foundations such as political views
held in common, implying identical politicalstructures
and an identical conception of the state andthe economj~ together With a genuine desire to put the African
community above any other. No o1;b.er formula, particularly if it is inspired from outside, can result in
the common front which our peoples must present to
the world.
193. Round-table conferences among Africanpolitical
leaders will not make decisions on African unity on
the basis of the whims of the participants; rather will
the latter have to bow to the wishes of their peoples.
Federation or confederation, multi-national or the op.
posite, are all ofthem discreditedterms inthe African
vocabulary and merely provide topics for theorizing.
If the future groupings are not based on the criteria
defined above, neo-colonialism will always be in a
position to find some puppets to thwart our efforts.
Over and above the groupings that might be formed in
a given geographical area, there should also be solidarity among all developing countries, among all anticolonialist and anti-imperialist peoples, in the spirit
of Bandung, to defend their independenceagainstthose
who are dreaming, not of the Balkanization, but of the
systematic tlKatanganizationJI ofthe African countri.es.
All the countrIes threatened by the same danger must
form a 1ID.ited front. We must avoid falling into the
trap of setting up-on long-distance instructionsgroups which would correspond to tb.~ a:.:eas where
the former metropolitan countries held sway. In the
face of the threat to the ve~ existence of our young
States presented by the coalition of international interests, the possession of a foreign language in common is of less importance than our common desire
for complete emancipation.
194. There exists another question which obtrudes
somewhat starkly, I would say, on the y.oung States
which are entering the international arena. We are
being asked almost point-blank: JI Are you turning to
the East or to the West?" We shall try to explain to
you the viewpoint of the Government of t.he Republic
of Mail. These are problems to which we have been
giving much thought. Whatare webeingaskedto choose
between? In our view it is not pointlass to ask this
Simple question before speaking ofbJtJcs, the coldwar,
freedom or totalitarianism•. If the cnoi{le is between
two ideologies-communism and capi talism-bur reply
is that neither of them, in their clas,sical interpretation" suits us today..
195. We are a classless society from which we have
just eradicated tribalism. There is no owner class,
and until now the only exploiters of our entire com..
In'.ij.1ity have been thecolonialists. Nor have we any
religious sectaril:Ulism, since tt.e Moslems and, animists who are the overwhelming majority get on very
well with the Chrifltian minority.
196. Such, briefly described, is our societY_ I must
add· that, despite eighty years of colonial domination,
oUr people has pr6served the collective spirit which
has been called primitive but which we regard as the
cornerstone of true African humanism based oil jus-

------~

'¥d+'--

214

.'.

General Assembly - Fifteenth Session - Plena'l'Y Meetings

,-------_..:..-_----;.--------_---.:_--.;;;~--------

United Nations Charter. Only a free Africa, mistress
tice and solidarity.. Loyalty to these values and their
adaptation to the needs of the modern world constitute
of her fate, can make an effective contribution to
the background to our ideology. It is still our goal to
world peace. The Mali operation or the Congo operaspeed up our development, for which the total elimition, and perhaps others, are passing phenomena and'
nation of foreign domination and exploitation is, of
the imperialists are mistaken if they rely on them. '
course, a sine qua non. The state ofdirect subjection,
201. There is one more pointwhichwewantto recall:
resulting from colonization, has now come to an end,
it is that the strat.egists of imperialism have always
but we fully realize the threat of indirect subjection
disregarded national feelings in the colonial and dewhich outside assistance withpolitical conditions might
pendent
countries. That is a very important point and
entail. We are confident, however, and think that we
I Caimot conclude without reference to it. Those who
can live up to our respoDSibilities. Our concern for
fail to recQgnize,this colonial phenomenon mistakenly
the solidarity of peoples and for world peace forbids
us to turn our back on any nation or group of IUi.ti9ns, believe that we can barter our national dignity fot
the promise of illusory material assistance. The
but we wish to stateunequivocallythat absolute respect
4.5 million Malians whom I have the honour to reprefor our national sovereignty will be pre-condition for
sent here want to be free, whatever the cost, and their
our alliances.
decision is finale Although we ,are fully aware of the
197. Although we do not want to engage here in pointerdependence of Preoples and the imperative need
lemics about positive neutralism, we are compelled
for universal solidarity, we are none the less deterto note that the choice which is so oft3n mentioned
mined to be ourselves first and foremost. Our people
amounts to deliberately ignoring one half oftheworld;
would rather be poor than lose their dignity. We have
we are wondering whether such a choice is indeed
known other privations during the eighty years of
desirable for the new States. What is the situation?
colonialism and we wish to state here that the tide
The world is split into two; some nations are already
of independence rolling over Mrica is irresistible.
in existence and others are being born. If all 'the new
World peace would be in jeopardy if the former metronations were to side with one or the other of the two
polit.an countries which once lorded over Africa were
blocs, the division of the world would perforce be
to retain the secret hope of pre-empting our young
perpetuated; whereas if they cho,se to act liS a bridge
states by hatching plots against their sovereignty.
there would be a greater chance of all the nations
Humanity's great hope lies in the disappearance of
drawing close1' together. Some Europea:m heads of
all complexes between big and small on this rostrum
State still dream of a third fQrce'in EUrope, standing,
so that our good will should be commensurate with
not, we note, between East and West, but between the
our common ambition to 'build a world of peace and
Soviet Union and the United States. That would entail
freedom.
splitting the Western bloc into two. It is among tlie
202. Such is the message, of the young Republic of
cha~pionsof this doctrine of the third forc'9 that we
Mali to the Assembly. If is a message of a people
find thostJ who remindthe Russians that theyhave skins
ripened in trials, a people which is organized, disof adiiferent colour than the Chinese; there again we
_cipli!l.ed and fully conscious of its responsibilities, a
note a desire to effect a split in the East.
people which is determined to play its part in building
198. We think that those views are academi-c.If it
a world community founded on iu~ticeandpeace.
is t::ue ,that the blocs have been formed on the basis
203. The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative
,of irrecmicilable ideologies, a third force, whichwould
not b~ 'aggressive 'in 'any way but, rather, a steadyof France, who has asked to be allowed to speak in
ing influence and a r"rce for peace; cOpld be found
exercise of his right of reply. .
in the united, front of the Y0lmgnations and the under204. Mr. BERARD(France) (translatedfrom French):
developed countries which need peace in order to build
I have not come' to the rostrum in order to reply to
up real economic iIldependence. We are "taunch chamthe statements, allegations and even attacks made by
pions of peaceful coexistence.
the previoUS spe~er. Perhaps, when he has become
199. ' SUch are the views of the Government of the' more accustomed to this Assembly, hewlll realize
Republic "of Mali' 0:"1 ,the great problems with which
that the tone he used and the words he uttered with
the world is confrofited. We also wish to state briefly
regard both' to my qountry and to Senegal were out of
our views on~ystems of gow~rnm.ent. Weare not im- keeping
with the festiveatm.osph~rewhich has reigned
pressE)dby a~empts to represent as totalitarian the
in
the
Aase:r:pbly
this afternoon.
new AfriClm states which are anxious to maintain
internaLorder and security in order to engage in na205. What has' impelled me to spealt is my desire
tional construction.. We want a strong democracy, a
that there should be no misunderstanding about the
,true .• democracy' which relies on the people and which
reasons for which my country sponsoredthe admission
allows a young State to cope with all its responsiof the Republic of Mali, and the Republic. of Senegal,
biUties.
'
in the Security Council and this Assembly. In myoa2()O.Thel:"e' are tho$e who think that the young and pacity as .Iieadof the:Frenchdelegation I offered to
developip.gha~ionshave nopart to playinthisAssemsponsor, theadmissi6n of Mali., not +or the purpose of
.bly-.R'aqia!ism and. domination of big.countries over embarrassing the, young Republic or' of offending its
small is what we s.ee in this way of thinking, which delegation; I, had no, intention of forcing themto accept
'Caimot "but endanger worlcl peac~, and international sponsorship by IIlysell, or my country, since the matter \
solidarity. We believe that all the peoples are entitled is one, of indifference to us. I did so at the formal
to respect, since it is onlyonthebattlefield that might request of the Government of Mali. The representatiVe
Is right. Ifitwere'agreedthat possession of great of Mali will possibly denytbis, and saytllat his inlJli.1itary strength was a p:rerequisite for being heard structions ., are different ',fr.qmmine. I have already
in inter;national debate,mimy who ,now play prominent ,had a discussion with him about .it.:Sutlha,ve, I am
,;,parts would be relegated to the extras. All of US must bound to say, received cqn:firmationthat such'was
realize •this and remain . faithful .to the spirit. of the the wish of his Government. I willevenconfesstb.at,

in- order to be ab
Bamako this very
t8in. that there ha
the Government 0
sion of President
,Accordingly, this
and this afternoo
sponsored the a
as some months a
sored the admissi

I.,itho in U.N.

215

876th meeting - 28 September 1960
in" order to be absolutely sure, I communicated with
Bamako this very evening with a view to making certain that there had been no change in the il.ttitude of
the Government of Mali. I was assured that the dec1-o
~ion of President Modibo Keita remained unaltered.
.AL'cordingly, this morning in the Security Council
and this afternoon in the General Assembly, France
sponsored the admission of the Republic of Mali, just
as some months ago, in the Security Council, it sponsored the admission of the Federation of Mali.

L,ltho In U.N.

206. In conclusioIlt I would simply say to our Malian
colleague thatt despite all he has said in the past and
may.in the future say C::l the subject of France, my
country will never regret having sponsored his country's admission to the United Nations, since in doing
so France has remained faithful to its ideals and to
its principles.
71le meeting rose at 7.5 p.m.

77001
