TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING: 7 AUGUST 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1436) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . , . . . . . , . .

pay

Adoption of the agenda . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . , . ,

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8616);
(b) Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/861 7);
(c) Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8721);
(d) Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8724) . . . . . . . . , . .

1

S/PX. 1436

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a.qmbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Securiiy Council. The date of the document

indicates the suppIement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRE

Held in New York

on

ANL) THIRTY-SIXT
t&es&y,

President: Mr. JoLo August0 DE ARAUJO CASTRO
(Brazil).

7 August

X968, at 3 P.m.

right of vote in the debate. In accordance with the decision
previously taken by the Council, I shall now invite the
representatives of Jordan, Israel, the United Arab Republic
and Iraq to participate in the discussion. Since the space at
the Council table is limited, I propose, in accordance with
past practice in this respect, to invite the representatives of
Jordan and Israel to take seats at the Council table and to
invite the representatives of the United Arab Republic, Iraq
and Syria to take the seats reserved for them at the side of
the Council table, with the understanding that they will be
invited to the Council table whenever they are called upon
to make statements.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l436)
1. Adoption of the agenda.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. El-Farm
(Jordan) and .Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Security Council table, and Mr. A. Hilmy (United Arab
Republic), Mr. A. Pachachi (Iraq) and Mr. G. Tomeh (Syria)
took the places resewed for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8616);
Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/861 7);
Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8721);
Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8724).

2. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker on my list is the
representative of Jordan, on whom I now call.
3. Mr. EL-FARR4
(Jordan): The Security Council has
been subjected during the last two days to many attempts
by Mr. Tekoah to divert the Council’s attention from the
Jordan complaint against Israel to other irrelevant issues. It
is not difficult for my delegation to answer every Isrncli
distortion and expose every pretext used ,to justify 1sr:u:li
crimes against my people, but I think I can rend:r the
Council a good service by not indulging in any irrelevnut
material. The matter before the Council is an act of
aggression committed by the Israeli armed forces against
Jordan and arrogantly admitted by Israel both here and ii?
Tel Aviv. Wasting more time listening to cheap Israeli
tactics does not befit the dignity or the responsibility of the
Security Council.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8616);
(6) Letter dated 5 June 1966 from the Permanent Representative of Israel addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8617);
fcl Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8721);
(u’) Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8724)

4. Mr. Tekoah spent some time speaking about so-called
terrorism. I have had a chance in the past to state that
military occupation and continued Israeli attacks to secure
the continued presence of the Israeli armed forces in Arab
territory are not expected to be met without resistance by
the people, the victims of such an occupation. Certainly the
military occupation of part of Jordan does not inspire
peace and as long as the Israelis continue to be there, there
will be resistance, there will be a struggle, and there will be
sacrifices for liberty. That is only natural. Resistance
against the Israeli forces of occupation has precedents in
every single country which has experienced foreign military
occupation be it in Europe, in Africa, in Asia, in Latin
America or elsewhere. Indeed, what is happening today in
Angola, Rhodesia and South Africa is not different from

1. The PRESIDENT: By a letter dated 6 August 1968
addressed to the President of the Security Council
[S/8730]
the Permanent Representative of Syria has
requested that he be invited to participate in the consideration of this question. I propose, if there is no objection, to
invite the representative of Syria to participate without
I

the resistance of the people of Palestine. Members Candraw
from their own experiences. What did the European States
do when the forces of nazism invaded their lands and
occupied their countries? Did they not resist’? Was not
their leadership leading and guiding the national resistance
from outside their respective countries while their countries
were under Nazi occupation? Was not London the centre
of both the governments in exile and the national resistance
operations? Did the people need an invitation to resist the
military occupation or wasnot that their natural reaction?
The Soviet Union lost 20 million people defending its
fatherland. The European States lost millions Of their
young in liberating the homeland. Their struggle and
resistance gained sympathy all over the world, among all
peoples who believe in the rights of man and reject
destructive iclcologies. Our people are not the exception to
the rule. No Government can suppress their feelings or
convictions and determination. If Mr. Tekoah expects
Jordan, in answerto his Hitlerite utterances yesterday and
the continued crimes of his army against US, to inform him
today from this Council that the people’s national resistance to Israeli occupation will be stopped tomorrow, he is
grossly mistaken, We are not there to defend Israeli
aggressionand continued occupation of our territory.
5. I have said in this Council that Israeli occupation
conveys no rights. They should get out. It imposes a duty, a
duty of the people to struggle for their liberation. When
this domination involves the Holy City of Jerusalem, the
mission is holier, the struggle greater and the causemore
worthy. The Israelis cannot occupy other people’s homelands and expect peace. Before Mr. Tekoah speaks about
terrorism he should answer this question: what is his army
doing there? What is the Israeli Army doing in Jordanian
territory?
6. Mr. Tekoah spoke a great deal about El-Fatah. El-Fatah
is the name of an organization struggling for a cause, an
organization dedicated to peace based on justice, but
compelled to resort to national resistance because of the
arrogance of the occupier and the inaction of the highest
organ of the United Nations, this Security Council.
El-Fatah stems from the Palestine people who are presently
dispersed under every sky but who are determined to have
their homes and homeland, and enjoy and live the great
Charter values: dignity, freedom and self-determination.
The Security Council is the guardian of all these values.
Certainly the Security Council does not expect them to
bow down to destructive Zionism. No matter how we look
at it, is there any justification whatsoeverfor the large-scale
Israeli operations against Jordan last Sunday and Israeli
aggression last June? Do individual acts for which Jordan is
not responsible-I repeat, for which the Government of
Jordan is not responsible-justify the irresponsible behav.
iour of a Member State created by the United Nations?
Will this Council accept the continuous arrogance of this
Member State? And if the Council is responsible for the
presence of this Member, is not the Council not responsible
for its misbehaviour aswell?

abide by, accept, or implement your decisions, is it enough
for fie United Nations, especially the Security Council, to
reiterate, on every complaint of Jordan against Israel, on
every aggression of Israel, the same or similar resolution,
either appealing to or deploring, condemning or censuring
Israel, which, in effect, is becoming a kind of routine
resolution, having no effect other than encouraging the
Israelis to feel that they can commit their serious crimes
against Jordan with impunity?
8. The charge before you is not denied by Mr. Tekoah. He
simply raised the question of so-called organized terrorism.
This, as we all know, is not a nc.w argument, and should not
be taken seriously. It has been used before this Council on
every single occasion for the last seventeen years. It was,
however, overruled by the Council, and in seven different
instances Israel was condemned by the Security Council.
9. The first Security Council resolution was taken on 18
May 1951 [93(1951)].
On 24 November 1953 in resolwtion 101 (1953) the Security Council censured Israel for
committing the Qibya aggression. On 29 March 1955 in
resolution 106 (1955) the Security Council condemned the
attack that was made by Israeli regular armed forces against
the Gaza Strip. On 19 January 1956 in resolution
111 (1956) Israel was condemned and warned that if its
attacks were repeated the Council would have to consider
what further measures would be required to maintain or
restore peace. On 9 April 1962 in resolution I71 (1962) the
Security Council adopted unanimously its fifth decision
censuring Israeli military actions. On 25 November 1966 in
resolution 228 (1966) the Council censured Israel for its
large-scale military action on Es-Samu’, in Jordan. In that
decision it emphasized to Israel that actions of military
reprisal could not be tolerated and that if repeated the
Security Council would have to consider’ further and more
effective steps as envisaged in the Charter to ensure against
the repetition of such acts.
10. On 24 March this year in resolution 248 (1968) the
Security Council condemned the military action launched
by Israel against Karameh refugee camp. Again the Council
declared that acts of military reprisal could not be toiented
and that if they are repeated the Security Council would
have to consider further and more effoctivc steps as
envisaged in the Charter to ensure against the repetition of
such acts.
11. Now we are coming before the Council with a
complaint involving the repetition of more serious acts of
aggression-one against the civilian population of Irbid, and
the other against the people of Salt, causing the death of
93, and injuring 203 Jordanians.
12. Of course, it was made clear time and again that the
Security Council does not condone the idea of military
reprisal.
13.. At the 635th meeting of the Security Council Israel
faced a firm stand. I need not cite all statements made in
that meeting. Suffice it to cite the statements of the two
Permanent members of the Security Council who not only
participated in the debate, not only supported the legitimate complaint of Jordan-and we are grateful to them for
that-but went to the extent of co-sponsoring the resohr.

7. If Mr. Tekoah alleges-and here I quote his words from
a Jewishnewsbulletin, Jewish Telegraph Agency of 26 ~~~~
1968-that “International law authorities question the
‘juridical validity’ of the United Nations resolutions”
vis-a-vis Israel and therefore his Government refuses to
2

tion on the Qibya aggression. I am referring to the United
Kingdom and the United States. Here is what the United
Kingdom representative said on an identical argument
presented by Mr. Tekoah’s predecessor, Mr. Abba Eban, the
present Israeli Foreign Minister. I quote from the statement
of the United Kingdom:
“Her Majesty’s Government has, in any case, already
stated that in its view there was no possible justification
for such action and, ,through Her Majesty’s Ambassador in
Tel Aviv, it has informed the Israel Government of its
horror at this apparently calculated attack. The further
information that has come to hand and the increased toll
of life can only confirm my Government in condemning
it and reinforce its opinion that it has constituted a threat
to the security of the entire area.
“ , , . The unfortunate thing is that this kind of wholesale and indiscriminate reprisal should be indulged in at
all . . .” [635th meeting, paras. 49 and SO].
14. The British statement in the Security Council continued:
“The trouble about such a reprisal raid as that at Qibya
is that it will probably only result in a growth in the
number of persons who decide to cross into Israel to
revenge themselves by taking life for life. Thus this
reprisal raid may bring upon Israel the very thing which it
has hoped to stop [ibid., para. 531.
5‘. . . But if the small liberal democracy which, we
believe, the sons of Israel are seeking to establish in
Palestine is to preserve the sympathy of its friends
throughout the world, then we suggest that it would
certainly be well advised not to try to show, as some of
the Israel Press have sought to show, that the destruction
of a village in Jordan territory and the slaughter of its
inhabitants, most of whom were undoubtedly quite
innocent wasthoroughly justified, and indeed the logical
and final result of a chain of incidents.” [Ibid., para. 59.j

15. The representative of the United States, a sponsor of
the same draft resolution, stated:
“We . . . subscribe to the statements in the speech of
the representative of the United Kingdom bearing on this
point.

Maybe it would come to realize that military force is not its
best card.
17. I should like now to turn to another important
question raised during our deliberations, and that is the
question of observers.It has been suggestedthat the parties
should reconsider their positions and agree to the presence
of United Nations observersin the area. We maintain-and
we would like to make our position very clear-that the
machinery of the United Nations should be reinforced, and
that it is neither in the interest of peace nor in that of the
Security Council to look for new machinery. The place of
the observers is the Armistice Demarcation Line and the
Headquarters of the Armistice will be asit has alwaysbeen,
Jerusalem. And all this should be preceded by full and
complete withdrawal of all Israeli forces from all occupied
territories. The emphasis should be on withdrawal, not on
cease-fire. The Security Council should not help create
conditions which would freeze a temporary situation. Our
Secretary-General very ably informed the United Nations
that the Armistice machinery is still valid, that the
Armistice Agreement is still binding, and that neither Israel
nor Jordan has a veto concerning the revocation of the
Agreement.
18. In emphasizing the importance of the Armistice
Agreement, I am defending the United Nations machinery
everywhere, not only in our area, becausethat machinery
has been functioning effectively and successfullyin many
parts of the world. The following statement presented by
the representative of the United States in defence of the
Korean Armistice Agreement may be helpful. Justice
Goldberg, in the discussion of the PuebZo case, had the
following to say:
“The Armistice Agreements must be restored to their
full vigour, and the weight and influence of the Security
Council must be exerted to this vitally important end.”
[138&h meeting, para. 95.J

19. Jordan today is making the same appeal to the
Council: we appeal that the Armistice Agreement be
restored to its full vigour, and that the weight and influence
of the Security Council be exerted to this vitally important
end.

“We would expect the Security Council to take action
only after the representatives of Israel and Jordan have
been heard. . . .” [Ibid.,paras. 60 and 61.1

20. One final word on this question. The observersdo not
and cannot prevent the Israeli forces from attacking villages
and civilian populations. Their presencedid not prevent the
Israeli attack against the Suez two weeks ago. Nor would
their presence have prevented Israeli aircraft from bombing
our towns and cities in June and August.

16. These are the eloquent, clear and able interpretations
and the advice given by two permanent members of the
Security Council to Israel. They involve a question of
principle, and I am sure the same argument, the same
appraisal and the same positions are valid today. What is
needed are ways and means to put them into force in order
to put an end to Israeli irresponsibility. What is needed is
that Israel should hear more of such advice from its friends.
It should know that it has become an embarrassment to its
friends. Maybe through renewal of .this advice Israel would
become clean of mind, clean of heart and clean of
behaviour. Maybe it would put an end to its war crimes.

21. One other important point is worth mentioning before
concluding my speech. Many members refer to the need to
support the efforts of Ambassador Jarring. For our part we
did not fail to offer every assistanceto the distinguished
Special Representative. We shall continue to do so. MY
Government would like to emphasize, however, that we
hear too much about helping the efforts of the Special
Representative and too little about constructive steps in
that direction. Certainly, checking continued Israeli violations is a constructive step and is helpful, indeed very
helpful, to Ambassador Jarring. It is a step in the right
direction. Let all those who speak of efforts to help

30. The Jordanian representative was particularly explicit
in this attitude when he spoke about the incident which
occurred yesterday in the Ein-Yahav area. Here was a unit
of commandos, dressed in army uniforms, bearing rifles,
machine-guns and a bazooka, who crossedthe cease-fire line
and attacked the Israeli village of Ein-Yahav in the Arava
area between the Dead Sea and Eilat. They shelled and
damaged the clinic of the village. They fled in the direction
of Jordan, with Israeli forces in hot pursuit after them. The
chase continued through the desert until the Israelis caught
up with the attackers, killed 5 of them and took
2 prisoners.

Ambassador Jarring ask their conscience what they are
really, genuinely and honestly doing to help the Special
Representative.
22. What is before the Security Council today is one single
issue: the Israeli attacks on Irbid and Salt. We shall
therefore refrain from speaking on questions injected into
our deliberations and which may confuse the issue.
23. Suffice it to say at this stage that when the Security

Council unanimously adopted the resolution of 22 November 1967 [2#2 (1967)/, it was the understanding of my
Government that all members of the Security Council
would act and work within the Council and outside the
Council to bring about the implementation of that resolution. This includes, of course, putting an end to the
contemptuous behaviour of Israel and its continued acts of
aggression. If the Israelis continue their defiance, whether
in Jerusalem or in the Gaza Strip, whether in the Suez area
or in Golan, or in the bombing of innocent civilians, it is
the duty of the Council to take action, because this would
be helpful to Mr. Jarring and would promote the succcss of
his mission. Without this, I do not see how we can move in
the direction of peace in our unhappy land.

31. The Jordanian representative would like us to concede
fiat the cease-fire line, not recognized by him and his
Government as barring r&Is from Jordan, should be
recognized by the Israeli defenders as a screen protecting
the attackers. That is an absurd idea. The cease-fire can be
maintained only on the basis of complete reciprocity. The
cease-fire line can be effective as a dividing line only if both
sides respect it as such.
32. The Security Council cannot accept the thesis that the
cease-fire does not bind one of the parties. The Security
Council cannot accept that one of the parties should be free
to consider the cease-fire a fiat for continued acts of
aggressionfrom its territory.

24, If the Security Council, after seeing its will challenged
by Israel for the seventh time, does not take effective
measures, its inaction will affect not only the peace of the
Middle East, but the peace of Africa, Asia, and probably
other parts of the world as well. Then the values enshrined
in our Charter will be replaced by a policy of military
occupation, blackmail, intimidation,
destruction and
famine.

33. The present debate cannot but have a direct bearing
on the maintenance of the cease-fire. The future of the
cease-fire depends on whether the Arab States will be
allowed to persist in their disregard for the cease-fire
obligations or be called upon to abandon warfare by
whatever means they pursue it.

25. You may recall that while the complaint I submitted
in June about the attack on Irbid was still pending before
you in the Security Council, the attack on Salt took place,
last week, last Sunday. While this attack is being considered
here now, the Israelis, only yesterday, have crossed Jordanian territory, using helicopters to chase people, to kill and
murder, Five were killed yesterday, others injured.

34. Firing on Israeli villages from Jordanian military
positions is a flagrant breach of the cease-fire. It must Cease.
Terror and sabotage raids are and have always been
considered violations of the cease-fire. They must be
stopped. They can be stopped, especially in view of the
extensive governmental involvement in them. In addition to
the already known and recorded participation of the
Egyptian, Iraqi, Syrian and Jordanian Governments in the
organization, training and arming of terror commandos, I
should like to submit to the Council the following
information.

26. Of course, unless action is taken, we expect more of
these crimes. I hope the Security Council till take these
happenings very seriously, because the situation is deteriosating more and more every day.
27. The Security Council has time and again warned lsrael
that it would take further and rnore effective measures if
the Israeli acts of aggression were repeated. Israel, by
repeating its acts of aggression on a much larger scale, has
left no choice to the Security Council but to take more
effective measures. The challenge before the Security
Council is great; its task and its reaction must be greater.

3.5. Ata Dawod Reis, a raider captured on 17 July near the
Jordan River, gave the following evidence. On 1.5 July he
arrived with his unit at Karameh and from there went to a
Jordanian military post at Urn Shurt, where they found
another raider unit. They spent that night in the army post.
During the day of 16 July they were not allowed to leave
their huts for fear that they might be seen by the Israelis. In
the evening the two units advanced to the Jordan River, led
by a Jordanian lieutenant. At 2300 hours they crossedthe
river, after the Jordanian officer had given them details of
the way, gave them the password and promised covering
fire by Jordanian Army positions in case of retreat under
attack.

28. The PRESIDENT: I now call upon the next speaker
on my list, the representative of Israel.
A’ Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The thesis we have heard the
Arab representatives propound in this Council is strikingly
bizarre. Arab warfare against Israel will continue but Israel
must not defend itself. Jordanian military positions cannot
be stopped from shelling Israeli villages, but Israel must not
try to silence them. Raiders will continue to kill and
sabotage, but Israel should not reach out to smite them
down.

36. Nabil Hassan Qubabi was captured on 9 July. His unit
was taken by a Jordanian military vehicle from Salt to a
military post in the vicinity of the Damiyah Bridge. They
crossed the river with the assistance of Jordanian soldiers,
4

37. Maamun Ahmed Abdallagh Ghaled was the commander of Saboteur Unit NO. 6. On 14 June he arrived at
Wadl Quarn police station in order to co-ordinate the
incursion and the retreat of his unit with Jordanian
lieutenant Khaled. The lieutenant told him that the
password would b.e “Mahmud” and informed the Jordanian
Army unit on guard in the area.

Arab aggression in 1967 is without any foundation whatever. These acts of hostility are as old as the Israel-Arab
conflict itself. Terror warfare is not an outgrowth of the
June 1967 hostilities, and is not concerned with the
problems created by those hostilities. It aims at destroying
Israel’s sovereignty and depriving its people of their
independence.

38. Mahmud Ali Yorad crossed the cease-fire line on
7 June with a unit of Iraqi Commando Battalion No. 421.
Before fording the river they met Jordanian soldiers who
showed them where to cross. Another unit of five
marauders was ordered to stay behind with the Jordanian
soldiers in order to give cover in caseof retreat.

44. The leader of El-Fatah, YasserArafat, whose name I
have already mentioned to the Council on a previous
occasion, described on 5 June 1968 the objective of
El-Fatah in the following concise terms: “the liquidation of
Zionist existence. We shall not accept”, he added, “any
thing less than an Arab Palestine and full victory”.

39. Halif Husein Mustafa testified about Jordanian officers
inspecting the raider training camps and about the incursions carried out by way of Jordanian military posts. The
Palestinians in Jordan, he said, had one choice: to join the
Jordanian Army or the terror organizations. The cliscrimination against,Palestinians which prevails in the army encourages them to, choose the terror organizations. Halif Husein
Mustafa spent twelve days in the bases of Salt. He knew
about 300 recruits who did not require any military
training since they had served as soldiers in the Iraqi Army
Battalion No. 421 or in the armies of Jordan and Syria.

45. Yasser Arafat is not the only leader of the terror
warfare waged against my people. Another is the former
Mufti Mr. Husseini, the father of Arab terror against Jewsin
Palestine in the 1920s and the 1930s. Husseini spent the
war years by Hitler’s side in Berlin, helping Eichmann to
annihilate the Jewish people of Europe, helping to recruit
Moslem Bosnians to fight on the Nazi side. Husseini, who
was declared a war criminal by the allies, is today in Jordan
heading the terror movement against Israel in the same
spirit that animated him during his macabre activities in
Hitler’s Berlin.
46. That is the kind of activity that the Jordan Government and other Arab Governments support and identify
themselves with. Israel cannot be expected to acquiescein
these war operations designed to bring about its destruction. The Arab Governments can be expected to put an end
to these operations.

40. It will also be recalled that on 25 April 1968 an Israeli
patrol encountered a raider unit near Beer Qra, the
children’s village on the Arava Road. In the exchange of fire
all 6 saboteurs were killed. All of them wore Egyptian
Army uniforms. Their commander had the rank of lieutenant in the Egyptian Army. Two soldiers had receipts in
their pockets conr%ming that they had deposited their
miIitary documents at the Egyptian Consultate in Amman.
One soldier had a document issued in Cairo in 1967, and
another was found to be a member of the Egyptian
Commando Battalion No. 141.

47. A number of delegations have expressed justified
concern about the possible effect of the aggravation of
tension in the area on the efforts that are being made by
Ambassador Jarring to promote agreement between the
parties. We share this concern. Ambassador Jarring deserves
the support and co-operation of all of us. However,
continued Arab warfare against Israel cannot but undermine the prospects of peace. There can be no progressto
peace while the cease-fire is being shattered by Arab
aggression.

41. The Security Council has been dealing with warfare by
terror since March. None of the Arab Governments has
denied during this period the evidence brought before the
Council about their support for and participation in terror
warfare. Israel awaits to see whether the Security Council
wiIl take effective action to terminate this conspiracy of
aggression or whether it will be left to Israel to deal with it
by itself.

48. There can be no peace as long as the Arab States
pursue war by terror. The cessation of this warfare is a
prerequisite of any movement towards a just and lasting
peace, It is essential for the prospects of peace in the
Middle East that the Security Council take action to stop
the grave cease-fire violations from Jordanian territory.
Inaction on these violations will inevitably increase the
dangers to peace in the region. We appeal to the %CUritY
Council to act, to act at long last to put an end to Arab a,&-‘of aggressionagainst Israel.

42. Again, we must have no misgivings regarding the
nature and purpose of this conspiracy by terror warfare. I
should like to reiterate that it is odd to find the Arab
representatives and their supporters attempting to describe
here, and even to justify, the armed attacks of Jordanian
military positions on Israeli villages in terror operations
conducted against Israel as resulting from the hostilities of
June 1967.

49. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the next speaker, the
representative of Syria.

43, Nothing could be further removed from the truth. The
same methods had been used by the Arab States long
before 1967. The same arguments to justify them have been
voiced by Arab representatives in the Council for years. The
allegation that Jordanian artillery shells Israeli villages and
that armed raiders from Jordan attack Israel and Israeli
citizens solely because they are reacting to the failure of

50. Mr, TOMEH (Syria): Mr. President, may 1, first of a&
offer you our hearty congratulations both in your capacity
as the new representative of Brazil and as the President of
fie Security Council? You bring personally to your office
a rich and varied experience, a vast knowledge of international affairs and tact to handle the thorny
and difficult
5

while claiming erroneously that the Arabs want to drive the
Jewsinto the sea.

problems with which we are confronted. It is indeed a
difficult and great task, but great men are ahaYS given
great tasks.

56. This tragedy, which assumed great proportions twenty
years ago and continues to the present time, brings to one’s
mind memories of the long history of the Near East, whose
peoples have witnessed so many tragedies. I am referring
here specifically to a similar conquest, the conquest of
Tamerlane. The annals of history reveal that when he and
his invading hordes occupied Persia and found a great
people with a great civilization living there, he commented
by saying: “It is a pity there is a people in this land, It
should be. empty to make room for the grazing of our
horses.” Continuing his onslaught, he occupied Baghdad
and burned its famous library, which was one of the
greatest cultural losses of all mankind. He continued Ms
march to Damascus and razed it to the ground. He was
astonished then to find in that city so many scholars, artists
and craftsmen. He gathered them in one spot outside of
Damascus and beheaded them. This place is still known
today as the “Tower of Heads”.

51. Like all delegations which have preceded me in
welcoming the new representative of the United States,
Ambassador George Ball, I add my voice Of Welcome.
Ambassador Ball also brings to his position great qualities
which I cannot sum up in better words than his own.
During the swearing-in ceremony at the White HOuse on 24
June, Ambassador Ball said:
“The qualities required for this task are SO formidable
that merely to list them is humbling: perception to
understand the sensitive problems of other nations, both
big and little; patience in a milieu where time is a central
ingredient of every diplomatic solution and where undue
haste may be self-defeating; imagination to discern the
full potential of the instruments at hand; experience to
teach their limitations.”
52. We also wish to welcome Under-Secretary-General
Kutakov to his new task. Those of US who knew
Mr. Kutakov as a member of the Soviet delegation are sure
that he will bring to this new ,offce his known great
qualifications, his sense of responsibility and, above all, his
devotion to the great principles of the Charter.

57. What the Arab world is witnessing today is a similar
barbaric conquest, with the difference that Tamerlane and
his hordes came from the innermost parts of Asia, whiIe
Dayan and his hordes came primarily from the innermost
parts of Europe. Although these conquests are separated by
time, they are one by nature, and both are not unlike
Hitler’s devastation of Europe. Thus in the short span of
our lives we have seen the refugees of Hitler outdoing the
“master race”, to face us today with the refugees of Dayan.

53. The Council has before it a complaint submitted by
the Ambassador of Jordan on 5 August 1968 concerning
the new aggressionby Israel against his country as grave as
the one for which he had asked an urgent meeting of the
Security Council on 5 June. The representative of Jordan,
Ambassador El-Farra, as well as many other speakers, have
dwelt at length on the various aspects of this new Israeli
attack as well as the continued acts of aggression to which
Jordan and its variant Arab peoples have been and are being
subjected.

58. The present Israeli aggression against Jordan, which is
the subject of the complaint under consideration, is not an
isolated incident but a link in a long chain of violence
perpetrated by Israel, world Zionism and their supporters.
They have inherited all the savagery and inhumanity of all
colonial movements in their ugliest manifestations against
mankind.

54. As we all listened very carefully to his moving
presentation of the case and the details of those savage
Israeli attacks, my attention was drawn in particular to a
statement he quoted from General Dayan on 26 April of
this year in which he warned that the Jordan Valley will
turn into a battlefield and that, in the words of General
Dayan : “there will not be room there for civilian life, for
families, children, and agricultural cultivation” (1434th

59. This is the crux of the matter-that we are faced with
an imperialist invasion of the area. Yet, as adequately
remarked by many speakers, Mr. Tekoah, in his now all too
familiar manner, constantly pleads innocence and love of
peace. Now, I will not answer Mr. Tekoah, but I will let
Mr. Tekoah’s leaders give him the appropriate answers to
prove who is the aggressor, who is misleading the Security
Council, and where intransigence comes from. Speaking in
an interview broadcast in the weekly newsreel programme
Kol-Israel on June 22, Mr. Eshkol declared that Israel
would insist that the River Jordan remain the country’s
security border. Israel distinguished between political
borders, cease-fire lines and security borders, he stressed.
He went on to say: “When agreed borders between Israel
and her neighbours were finally decided upon, the historic
rights of the people of Israel to the land of Israel would
have to be taken into account, without ignoring the fact of
Arab population concentrations.” That quote was from the
Israel Digest. It continues: “As for the Security Council
resolution of last November, Mr. Eshkol said: ‘Only after
the United States had made it clear that it concerned new
fixed borders, different from the 4 June lines, to be
determined by agreement between Israel and its neighbours
could we co-operate with the United Nations envoy’, he
recalled.” Continuing in the same vein, he said: “Israel

meeting, para. 361.

55. In the same statement, the representative of Jordan
told us, Dayan boasted that “70,000 families had already
left the upper Jordan valley settlements, while in Israel,
border ldbutsim had been reinforced by , . . youthful
volunteers” (ibid., para. 4.51. This devastation inflicted on
Jordanis the same devastation that visited other occupied
Arab territories in Syria and the United Arab Republic,
wherein the mass expulsion of the civilian population after
the Israeli aggressivewa.rof 5 June 1967 and their forcible
eviction have taken place at gun-point, The same happened
in Palestine following the Zionist-Israeli aggression of 1947,
wherein a whole nation, the Arab people of Palestine, was
arbitrarily deprived, by sheer brutal Zionist force, of their
birthright, the aim being to empty the Arab land of its Arab
inhabitants and to implement systematically the Zionist
plan to drive the Arabs ,back, step by step, to the desert,
6

cannot forgo its absolute control over its eternal capital.”
This was on 12 July, after four resolutions had been
adopted by the General Assembly and the Security Council
concerning Jerusalem.
60. Another statement was issued by Israel’s Foreign
Ministry, on 19 June 1968, after Foreign Minister Eban had
consulted Prime Minister Eshkol. The statement said:
“Attention is drawn to the statement by the United States
representative on 15 November 1967, in which he said that
agreed and secure boundaries mentioned in the Security
Council resolution are not identical with the 4 June lines.”
61. I am sure it will not escape the attention of the
members of the Council that in both statements emphasis
by the Israeli leaders is put on the finality of the occupied
territories as being the borders of Israel, as well as on the
United States official stand as given in this Council
Chamber.
62. On 2 January 1968, Menachem Begin, a cabinet
member, stated, with respect to the occupied territories:
“These are integral parts of the land of Israel, and there is
no question of returning them.”
63. As a military strategist, General Dayan contributed his
cheer to the picture, in the following terms: “From where
we are now, crossing the Suez would mean our being on the
approaches of Cairo. To cross the Jordan is tantamount to
being in Amman. To continue from Kuneitra means to
reach Damascus.”
64. I am sure these statements answer what we have just
heard from the Israeli representative about the desire for
peace.
65, Mr. Tekoah today, as in fact during the last meetings,
gave a long list of what he terms “acts of terrorism
committed by Arab saboteurs”. The following tales of
horror and atrocities committed by the regular Israeli army
have been given in the March issue of Imperial News. This
publication is introduced by a dissident number of Israelis
who left Israel after the conquest of Arab territories and
exiled themselves to London. In their own words they
describe this magazine as follows:
‘Ymperial News is an information bulletin about the
Middle East in general, and about Israel with her newly
created colonies in particular. It is edited and published
by Israelis, the majority of them natives, living temporarily abroad.

“They oppose the view held by the majority of the
Hebrew-speaking population in Israel that keeping, temporarily or permanently, the territories taken from the
neighbouring countries during the June war, is vital to the
existence of Israel.”
66. In the same issue, that of 9 March 1968, there is the
following about one massacre on the Jordan river:
“Every evening Israeli soldiers lay ambushes along the
Jordan. Every night they fire at everything moving in the
dark. Every morning bodies litter the Jordan, men,
women, children, whole families, massacred during their

attempt to return home without the coveted Israeli
permit.
“Hard to believe that the Israeli army indulges in
murder. Yet anyone bothering to talk to soldiers of the
occupation forces will discover that they consider this
almost natural. Their stories, especially their matter-offact attitude, will shock anyone who has not been turned
into a beast by Jewish nationalism.”
67. In the sameissueanother story is given:
“This is an eye-witnessreport of a soldier who wishesto
remain anonymous about the massacres of refugees
carried out after the war. His story hasbeen corroborated
by other soldiers whose names we have but cannot reveal
for the same reasons.
“The report concerns the sector on the Jordan River
between the Yarmuk and the Allenby Bridge, The time is
the end of July and the beginning of August. The report
wasgiven in Tel Aviv, September 10, 1967.
“ ‘Every night Arabs cross the Jordan from East to
West. We blocked the passages(i.e., the places where the
river is shallow and can be crossedby foot) and were
ordered to shoot to kill without warning. Indeed, we fired
shots every night on men, women and children. Even
during moonlit nights when we could identify the people,
that is distinguished between men, women and children.
In the mornings we searched the area and, by explicit
order from the officer on the spot, shot the living,
including those who hid or were wounded. After killing
them we covered them with earth or sometimes left them
lying there until a bulldozer came to bury them.’ ”
68. The Israeli representative has repeatedly referred to
the Arab freedom fighters as terrorists and saboteurs, and
once again-since my country was mentioned-we must
rebuff this vulgar and repulsive description coming from an
aggressortrying to cover up murderers and trying to cover
up the crimes of his country.
69. Terror and kilhng with systematic planning to drive
the Arabs out into the desert was part and parcel of the
Zionist doctrine and plan. Indeed, they made of it not only
a barbaric method to implement their heinous and sinister
plans against the Arabs; they made of it a philosophy and
an ideology as well. I could mention scoresof books on this
issue, but I shall be satisfied with recommending one of
them only, written by a member of the present Israeli
cabinet, Menachem Begin. The name of that book is The
Revolt. 1 No similar or equivalent book exists, to the best of
my knowledge, in the whole literature of mankind, to make
of terrorism an ideal to be worshipped.
70. Long before Israel was established, this doctrine of
terrorism as being the only way to drive the Arabs out of
Palestine wasformulated and inculcated into the minds of
the Jewish immigrants to Palestine. The following is one
Zionist version of this doctrine:
“The only way that seems, to my mind, to be right is
the way of .the Irgun Zvei Leumi, the way of courage and
1 Menachem Begin, TheRevolt (New York, &human, 1951).

I.

‘.

.

.

a member of the Israeli Cabinet refute the fancies of
Mr. Tekoah. Mr. Menachem Begin, in his book Tlze Revolt,
to which I referred, states in chapter 19 entitled “The
Conquest of Jaffa”:

daring without renouncing a single iuch of our homeland.
When political negotiations prove futile, one must be
prepared -to fight. Without them the very existence of our
nation is jeopardized and fight we must with all possible
means. This is the only way left to our people . . .: to
stand . . . to be ready to fight. For it is a law of history
that only with blood shall a country be redeemed.”

“At the end of January 1948, at a meeting of the
Command of the Irgun in which the Planning Section
participated, we outlined four strategic objectives:
(1) Jerusalem; (2) Jaffa; (3) the Lydda-Rarnleh plain; and
(4) the Triangle.“2

This letter was written to Menachem Begin by one of his
soldiers on 16 April 1945.
71, Mr. Tekoah is extremely fond of repeating one phrase
regularly in each of his statements: “the twenty years of
Arab aggression against Israel”.
72. The rewriting of history is not unknown to aggressors
and warmongers and usurpers of the right and property of
people, and the Arabs can speak of a Zionist war against
them for the last seventy-five years. Indeed, it started when
the idea of Zionism was born in the mind of Herzl as a
Western-colonial extension into and conquest of Palestine.
To refresh the mind of Mr. Tekoah and to stop his flights of
fancy, I will let no less a man than Mr. Ben-Gurlon himself
answerMr. Tekoah.

78. Three important results must be emphasized which
have a direct relation to the Jordanian complaint and the
Palestine question.

73. Only last week, on 31 July, Mr. C. L. Sulzberger, in a
series of articles that appeared in The New York Times
which concluded on 4 August, reported a conversation with
Mr, Ben-Gurion in which Mr, Ben-Gurion said the following: “In 1920 Ben-Gurion publicly outlined his frontier
ideas for the eventual State of Israel: northern-the Litani
River in South Lebanon;“-that, in fairness I must comment, has not been annexed yet-“eastern-the Awage
River in Syria and the Jordanian deserts,“-almost exactly
where the Israeli armies are stopping on Syrian territory
now-“southern-the Red Sea.”

79. First, if the Arabs of Palestine were not driven out by
terrorism and massacre, Israel could not have been the
exclusive Jewish racist State that its leaders wanted it to be;
for the Arabs would have been in the Israeli State itself,
equal in number to the Jewish population, and that would
have defeated the purposes of Zionism.
80. Secondly, in accordance with the last report submitted
by the mandatory Power to the United Nations in 1947,5
Jewish ownership in Palestine amounted only to 5.66 per
cent. The Arab Palestine people are still the legal owners of
the land of Palestine from which they were expelled by
force. A conquest in international law does not termlnate a
legal right as long as the owner of that right claims it. No
better words could exist to establish this right than the
words of a great American international jurist, Philip
Marshall Brown, who says:

74. Emphasis on the real facts of the history of the alleged
twenty years of aggression is necessary to help in the
assessmentof Arab claims not in the light of a propagandized version but in the actual and historical context of
what happened.
75. In an article entitled “For a new approach to the
Israeli/Arab conflict”, published in the New York Review
of Books of 3 August 1967, by Mr. I. F. Stone, a
well-known American writer of the Jewish faith and
well known previously for his Zionist affiliation, wrote:

“Military occupation . . . does not confer title or
extinguish a nation.
“ . . . so long as a people (of the occupied country] do
not accept military conquest; so long as they can
manifest, in one way or another, their inalterable will to
regain freedom, their sovereignty, even though flouted,
restricted, and sent in exile, still persists.“6

Jewish terrorism, not only by the Irgun, in such
savagemassacresas Deir Yassin, but in milder form by the
Haganah itself, ‘encouraged’ Arabs to leave areasthe Jews
wished to take over for strategic or demographic reasons.
They tried to make as much of Israel as free of Arabs as
possible.”
“

.

.

But as we know, in accordance with the partition resolution, Jerusalem was to be a corpus separatum. Jaffa,was an
all-Arab city and part of the ,1rab State to be. At a later
stage of the same chapter, Begin tells of addressing his men
as follows: “Men of the Irgun! We are going out to
conquer Jaffa. We are going into one of the decisive battles
for the independence of Israel.“3 After the conquest of
Jaffa and the expulsion of the Arab population of Jaffa, he
ends the chapter with this sentence: “The conquest of Jaffa
was one of the fateful events in the Hebrew war of
independence.“4 That was in April 1948-before the State
of Israel was established and before any sort of Arab
aggressionhad taken place.

.

81. Thirdly, the term “belligerence” does not in any way
apply to a people that is defending its legal right against a

76. Let us take more specifically and accurately the words
of Mr. Tekoah-“The twenty-years war of aggressionagainst
Israel by the Arabs”. We are now in 1968 and twenty years
would take us back to 1948.

2 Ibid., p. 348.
3 Ibid., p. 354.
4Ibid.,
p. 371.
5 Official Records
of the General
Hoc Committee
on the Palestinian
annex 25.
6 American
Journal
of Interrratiorral

77. The partition resolution was passed on 29 November
1947 [General Assembly resolution 181 (II)], and Israel
was declared a State on 14 May 1948. Here again, I will let
8

Assembly,
Question,
Law,

Secorld Session, Ad
Summary
Records,
vol. 35, 1941,

p. 667.

brutal conquest. The conquered were, and still are, the
Arabs. The conquerors were, and still are, the Zionists and
the Israelis. No amount of sophistry or obfuscation of facts
can alter the ultimacy of this truth.

freedom-fighters for their usurped rights and conquered
homeland.
88. The Arab people of Palestine, the still legal owners of
the land of Palestine, are-as stated today by the representative of Jordan-not in any way different from the peoples
of Southern Rhodesia or South Africa or the Portuguese
colonies, or any other peoples suffering from the colonial
yoke. To fight occupation is a moral and legal obligation of
any patriots. Europe knew freedom-fighters who struggled
against nazism; they were heroes for this. To describe the
Arab freedom-fighters as terrorists and saboteurs is to have
two scales for justice, two contradictory systems of values.

82. That war continues to be the ultimate objective of
Israel has been confirmed to us by Mr. Tekoah himself in
his second intervention of 5 August, when, quoting The
New Y&c Times of 2 June, he said:
. “The six-day war has brought about more co-operation
between Arabs and Jews than the eighteen preceding
years of Armistice Agreements. This co-operation has two
channels: the link across the Jordan River and the daily
experience of coexistence on the west bank.”

89. Furthermore, it must have been noticed from the
statements of Mr. Eshkol and Mr, Eban that in their
obduracy and intransigence in continuing the occupation of
conquered Arab territories and insisting on not withdraw&
to the 4 June armistice lines, they had relied on the official
United States stand in the Security Council. To us,
therefore, there is no question that the Israelis are finding
their intransigence, rightly or wrongly, in the support of the
United States Government.

83. NOW, knowing that the six-day war was planned,
started and executed by Israel, the only logical conclusion
to be drawn from this attitude is that through two or three
more wars, animated by blind hatred and hostility against
the Arab people, Israel and world Zionism think they can
solve all their outstanding disputes with the Arab countries.
84. That violence is preached as a doctrine by Zionist
intellectuals and religious leaders has also been confirmed.
The New
York Times of 4 August 1968 reported from
Israel:

90. As a matter of fact, all developments point in that
direction. The Jewish Telegraphic Agency bulletin of
2 August 1968 tells us that:

“For the last five days, thirty prominent American
Jewish and Israeli intellectuals have animatedly debated
the nettling problems affecting the relationship between
the two communities.

“A foreign aid Bill which made provision for the sale of
supersonic jets to Israel passedthe Senate today. The Bill
stated that: ‘The President should take such stepsas may
be necessary, as soon as practicable after the date of
enactment of this section, to negotiate an agreement with
the Government of Israel providing for the sale by the
United States of such number of supersonic planes as may
be necessary , , .‘.”

“..*
“ . . . Rabbi Richard Rubenstein, an American Jewish
theologian, of the ‘God is dead’ school, said that the
reentry of the Jewish people into the realms of nationhood and territory, required ‘the intelligent use of
violence’.”

91. A more ominous measure is the one reported in The
New York Times of 21 July 1968, in these words:

“Under terms of an amendment to the 1967 Foreign
Aid Appropriations Bill-which took effect 2 JanuaryPresident Johnson is directed to subtract from United
States aid to all but seven under-developed nations the
equivalent of what each country spends for such modern
arms asjet aircraft and missile systems.”

85. We listened very carefully to the statement given by
the representative of the United States, Ambassador Bali,
on 5 August, in which he said: “While it is true that I am
present here today as a very new member, the argument we
have been listening to is, unhappily, anything but new. It is
merely one more chapter in a lamentable chronicle.”

92. Among the seven exempted nations, in accordance
with this amendment which is already a law, is Israel. But
Israel, by economic standards and becauseof the billions of
dollars that have been poured into it from the United States
and Western Europe, is considered to be a fully developed
country. In fact, Israel boasts of its technical assistance
programmes in Africa, Asia and Latin America. Should we
not be surprised, then, when all. of a sudden Israel is
converted by American legislation into an under-developed
country to enable that State to procure supersonic jets,
missiles and what-not, for use in devastating, conquering
and killing the Arabs? The only conclusion left open to US,
regrettable as it may be, is that what has been perpetrated
since 5 June 1967 against the Arabs is not essentially
different from the war conducted by the United States in
Viet-Nam.

(1434th meeting, para. 187.1

86. How true, but how sad. Such being the case, the
question duly arises why and what are the underlying
causes? Why is it that the United Nations for the last
twenty years and, before it, the League of Nations, have
continuously been seized with the question of Palestine and
with its derivative: disputes and problems. If this question
is valid then patience is an imperative necessity to go
beyond the external manifestations of the problem to its
innermost heart. There will we find one fact, and one fact
only: the denial to the Arab people of Palestine, of their
inalienable rights to their homeland.
87. Hence, it is totally unacceptable .to us to equate
continuous wanton massacres of Arab civilians by the
Israeli Army, such as form the subject of the complaints of
fie representative of Jordan, and the struggle of the Arab

93. Since the Security Council resumed its deliberations
on 5 August over the complaint by Jordan, Israeli aggres9

General, Ambassador Jarring, because in that mission lies
the best, and perhaps the only, hope for a just and lasting
peace based upon a peaceful and accepted settlement as
called for in Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22
November 1967. It was on the basis of these considerations
that my delegation voted in favour of Security Council
resolution 248 (1968) of 24 March. 1968.

sions and threats of further devastation of Jordan have not
ceased. It is high time that the Council condemned the
aggressor and checked its ominous course, which constitutes a threat to world peace.
94. To conclude my statement, I wish to affi*n that
human beings desire peace and long for genuine peace,that
we, the Arabs, a whole generation of us who have seen and
witnessed devastation, are tired of the wars of colonial
conquest imposed upon us, of the humiliation at the hands
of the colonial Powers and their stooges. To sum up my
thoughts on this great ideal of mankind, peace, I cannot
find better words than those of His Holiness Pope Paul VI,
when he said:

101. The recurrent flare-ups and acts of violence along and
across the cease-fire line between Israel and Jordan, which
culminated this time in the Israeli air raids against objet.
tives in Jordan on 4 August, have given us cause for both
great regret and great concern. We deplore such massive
raids by the Israeli military forces, as well as all other acts
of violence across the cease-fire line.

“Peace is not pacifism; it does not mask a base and
slothful concept of life, but it proclaims the highest and
most universal values of life: truth, justice, freedom,
love .”
95. The PRESIDENT: Before calling on the next speaker
on my list, I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a note from the representative of Saudi Arabia
asking to be allowed to participate in the debate, If there is
no objection, I propose to invite the representative of Saudi
Arabia to take part in the discussion, without the right to
vote.
At the invitation of the President,Mr. J. Baroody (Saudi
Arabia) took the placereservedfor him at the sideof the
Council chamber.

96. Mr. MELLBIN (Denmark): Before I turn to the item
on our agenda, I wish, on behalf of the delegation of
Denmark, to welcome you as the representative of Brazil in
the Security Council and as the President of the Council for
this month, and to assureyou of our full co-operation.

102. We are aware of the arguments put forward by the
parties in defence and justification of their action cr
inaction, as the case may be. But the casebefore us is net
one likely to be solved unless we face the fact, painful asit
may be, that certain actions by either party may well result
in certain counteraction by the other party, all to the
detriment of the cause of peace and reason and in
contravention of the efforts of this Council and of tile
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. Therefore
it should be brought home to the parties, and in no
uncertain terms, that the Security Council expects that
from now on they will adhere scrupulously to the cease.
fire, that there must be no violence because violence will
breed violence, and if an end is not put to it the outcome
will not be to the benefit of anyone in the Middle East and
might well bring in its train disastrous consequencesgoing
far beyond the area and scope of the conflict now being
considered by the Council.
103. The PRESIDENT:
representative of Iraq.

97. I also wish to state that my delegation whole-heartedly
joins in the words of welcome extended by you, on behalf
of us all, to the new Permanent Representative of the
United States, Ambassador George Ball, and to the new
Under-Secretary-General for Political and Security Council
Affairs, Mr. Leonid Kutakov;

The next speaker on my list is the

104. Mr. PACHACHI (Iraq): I have asked for the floor to
voice once again our deep concern at the continued threat
to peace and security in the Middle East resulting from
increased Israeli military activities and belligerent policies.
105. Only yesterday, and while the Council was discussing
the aerial bombardment of Salt and Irbid, Israel troops
crossedthe Jordan river and penetrated deep into Jordanian
territory. This latest outrage must be considered against the
background of threats and bellicose statements uttered with
disturbing frequency by Israeli leaders, as well as the
sabre-rattling speeches of the representative of Israel in this
Council yesterday and today. Such statements by the
gentleman on my right could normally be dismissed a~
another of the performances with which he periodically
entertains the Council. But that is not the casenow, and
the Council must take these threats and warlike gesturesat
their face value.

98. In briefly stating the attitude of my Government
towards the tragic events which are the subject of our
present debate, allow me first of all to reiterate the main
considerations which have guided my delegation throughout in questions relating to the Middle East since the
establishment of the cease-firein the summer of 1967 and
the adoption of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) in
the fall of that same year.
99. We consider that all violations of the cease-firemust
be deplored, not only becauseof the irreparable loss of life,
the human suffering and the material damage that they
inflict, but ‘also because such violations can only impede
progress towards peace in an area that has been tom by war
and conflict for two decades.

106. This makes it imperative for the Council to take
speedy and effective action before Israel’s rulers are
encouraged by this Council’s apathy and silence to embark
upon new military adventures; but in order to take action
the Council must determine once and for all that the
activities of the so-called infiltrators cannot be equated
with those of the armed forces of Israel. On the one side We
have individuals acting independently of any governmental

100. We also consider that all concerned-the parties
themselves as well as the members of this Council and,
indeed, all Members of the United Nations-must support
the mission of the Special Representative of the Secretary10

authority and control, while on the other side we have
large-scale, k$dy
sophisticated, carefully planned and
meticulously executed military operations, the responsibility for which is freely and often proudly admitted by the
Government of Israel. How is it possible to treat the two in
the same way? The serious implications of such equal
treatment wmot escape’ anyone, least of all the rulers of
Israel, who will consider it to be acquiescence in, if not
approval of, the dangerous concept of military reprisal by
the Council.

ened? Is it Israel’s, whose armies occupy Arab lands and
whose troops and air force periodically attack Arab
countries at will? IS Israel’s survival really threatened’?
Does anyone in his right mind believe this’? This used to be
a good propaganda line that was used by Israel effectively
for years; it deluded many people-but no more. The myth
of a helpless and beleaguered nation fighting for its life was
exploded with the crash of Israel guns and bombs on
5 June, when its armies broke out in all directions and
occupied large areas of Arab lands. It is the Arabs of
Palestine who have always been on the defensive-from the
very first day when the Zionist movement began to
implement its programme of establishing a Jewish State in
that country.

107. The Council has been unanimous in condemning such
acts of military reprisal as flagrant violations of the United
Nations Charter and the cease-fire resolution. The continu~IUX
of such acts will have the most serious consequences
for peace, not only in the Middle East but elsewhere in the
world, particularly in the southern part of Africa, where
Israel’s admirers and imitators are watching closely to see
what this Council will do. They will not fail to draw the
appropriate conclusions if Israel is again permitted to get
away with no more than a verbal condemnation.

113. This has not been a twenty-year war, as the representative of Israel never tires of repeating, but at least a
fifty-year war. It is a war in which Zionists have always
been attacking and advancing, while the Arab people of
Palestine have constantly been on the defensive, trying
desperately to stem the tide and savethemselves and their
country from this deadly onslaught. During this fifty-year
war, the Arabs of Palestine have lost far more than the
Israelis: thousands lost their ‘lives during the thirty-year
period of the Mandate when they had to fight the Zionist
invaders as well as their colonial protectors; thousands have
lost their lives since the creation of Israel, and more than
one million of them have beenmade refugees. But over and
above all this, their country has been occupied in its
entirety by an immigrant alien population, This is the price
that the people of Palestine have paid and are stil1 paying
for the invasion of their land by the Zionist aggressors.So
when the representative of Israel speaks of wars of
aggression and genocide, of killing and violence, Ict him
remember for once what Israel has done to the people of
Palestine and is still doing to them. Nothing said here by
the representative of Israel can erase the crime that has
been committed against a people which has done no wrong
to the Jews, and in whose land his people have always
found a haven and refuge.

108. It is therefore not enough, as has been suggested, to
express concern’ and lamentations for the loss of life and
ask both sides to observe the cease-fire.’ It is not enough
even to condemn Israel--necessary though this is. All this
has been tried before without making the slightest impression on Israel’s war-lords. The Council cannot abdicate its
responsibility for taking effective action by such palliative,
irreIevant and entirely insufficient measures as the stationing of observers, for example. For nearly twenty years there
have been observers under the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization. But this did not prevent Israel
armed forces from crossing the Armistice Demarcation
Lines thirteen times and inflicting great losses on the
inhabitants of the neighbouring Arab countries.
109. The issue is whether acts of military reprisal can be
tolerated under any circumstances, and whatever the
alleged provocation. This is the crucial question before the
Council, and until effective steps are taken to prevent the
repetition of such acts it is futile to speak of observers.
There are at present observers in the Suez Canal area and in
the Syrian sector, but their presence has not prevented
Israel from shelling civilian centres of population and
expelling thousands from their homes.

114. The representative of Israel has stated that no one
shall smite a Jew with impunity. But, Mr. Tekoah, you have
been smiting the Arab people of Palestine for fifty
years-and with relative impunity-and now they are
exercising their God-given right of self-defence to resist
your occupation and giving back to you just a fraction of
what they have been receiving from you for half a century.
In view of this, how can anyone but sympathize with the
struggle of a people who have been victims of a savageand
ruthless campaign to obliterate their national identity and
drive them out of their ancestral homeland. It is an insult to
the intelligence of the members of this Council and an
offence against every decent impulse for the representative
of Israel to call these fighters for freedom cowards or
terroristic criminals.

110. So any attempt to equate individual and sporadic
activities of Palestinians seeking justice and fighting for
their rights with Israel’s military attacks against the Arab
countries would be interpreted by Israel as a vindication of
its stand and condonation of its dangerous and barbaric
concept of military rep&& with all the serious consequences it will have for international peace and security. AS
the representative of France correctly stated yesterday, “we
have never considered the concept of military reprisals
acceptable. It is condemned by our Organization and by the
Charter.” [1435th meeting, para. 29.j

115. We have seen here during the last three days a rare
display of venomous invective and uncompromising hostility and hatred from the representative of Israel. I say this
more in sorrow than in anger, for what we have heard from
the representative of Israel in this and other debates during
the last four months reflects-accurately, I am afraid-the
present thinking and mood of Israel’s rulers: ‘intransigent,
arrogant, aggressive, cruel, intoxicated with success and

I1 1, What is at stake, therefore, is not only peace in the
Middle East but the whole fabric of relations among States
and the civilized international order which the Charter and
r-his Crganization are trying to establish in our troubled
world.
112. The representative of Israel spoke of the threat to
Israel’s survival, But which people’s survival is now threat11

oblivious to all the great values which have made the Jewish
religion such an enduring moral force in the world. What we
have been hearing is the voice of triumphant militarism,
bent upon the achievement of each and all of its objectives
by force of arms, determined to transform Israel into a
garrison State,, living by war and sustained by continuous
expansion.
116. Where will all this lead to? History provides the
answer; it abounds with examples of leaders pushing their
people through military adventures and conquests down the
path of ruin and misery. Will the leaders of Israel ever
learn? I doubt it.
117. Mr. TARDOS (Hungary): First of all, I should like to
associate myself with those who extend the congratulations
and good wishes of their delegations to you in your
capacity as President of the Security Council and as the
new Permanent Representative of your country.
118. At the same time, I wish to express my delegation’s
thanks and appreciation to Mr. Bouattoura, who, as President of our Council last month, has again showed his skill
and talent during the private consultations he conducted.
119. Finally, on behalf of my delegation, I welcome
Ambassador George Ball, as the new representative of the
United States in the Security Council, and our new
Under-Secretary-General for Political and Security Council
Affain, Mr. Leonid Kutakov.
120. Turning now to the item on our agenda, I have to
express my delegation’s deep concern over these new acts
of aggression of Israeli armed forces against Jordan. All too
often we have to deal with the numerous acts of aggression,
violations of cease-tire and even invasions by Israel against a
neighbouring State Member of the United Nations. Yet the
serious violations of the Charter and specific resolutions of
the Council continue to represent a grave threat to
international peace and security.

of tension but the contrary. What other aim could be
served, for instance, by the expulsion of 50,000 Arabs from
the Gaza strip? The Israeli leaders not only aggravate the
already tense situation in the region, but, in our opinion, do
not even serve Israel’s own interests. By the series of
aggressions committed since June 1967 Israel has been
alienating itself from world public opinion and making it
more and more difficult to find a peaceful solution to the
problems of the Middle East. Thereby Israel endangers the
very end it intends to fight for-its national existence.
123. The Security Council should prevent the deteriocation of the situation by taking resolute action against the
Israeli aggression.
124. As ,to the idea of having United Nations observers
deployed in the region along a certain line, it seems to us
that when Israel feels free to send its aircraft deep inside its
neighbour’s territory they could not fulfil their mission,
Furthermore, by sending observers now, in the present
circumstances, the United Nations would only bless and
prolong the Israel occupation of the territory.
125. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated franz French):
Mr. President, it gives me great pleasure to welcome you to
our Organization as Permanent Representative of Brazil,
and to express the warm congratulations of the delegation
of Senegal on your assumption of the Presidency of the
Council. Undoubtedly your outstanding qualities as a
statesman will enable you to guide our work with competence and tact, as did your predecessor as President of the
Council, my friend Ambassador Bouattoura, who succeeded
above all in establishing the Committee to supervise the
application of sanctions against Rhodesia.
126. We also wish to express our best wishes to Ambassador George Ball, who comes to us here with the highest
diplomatic qualifications, which enable us to give him our
full confidence.
127. I also wish to congratulate our new Under-Secretary
General, Mr. Kutakov, who will, we are certain, live up to
the merits of his predecessor.

121. The gravity of this situation compels us to make a
few remarks. First, the fact is-and it is acknowledged
overtly by the Permanent Representative of Israel-that
Israel military airplanes and Israeli shells bombed the
territory of Jordan. Secondly, there is no argument
whatsoever that could justify such a grave violation of the
letter and spirit of the Charter of the, United Nations, an
Organization to which both Jordan’ and Israel belong.
Thirdly, to give a pretext, at least, the representative of
Israel tried to explain to us that the barbarous shelling and
bombardment was a necessary measure of self-defence on
behalf of Israel because of the continued terror raids by the
Arab commandos against its citizens. However skilfully he
tries to defend his country’s policy, he cannot distract our
attention from the basic facts, namely: (n) that the socalled terror raids and sabotage actions are direct consequences of the continued and illegal Israeli occupation of
Arab lands; (b) that there cannot be aggressionon behalf of
the indigenous population against an intruder-the caseis
rather the opposite; (c)that even resistance against the
Israel occupation gives absolutely no right to Israel to
attack its neighbours.

130. Why were the towns of Irbid and Salt bombed on
4 June and 4 August ? The only reason which has been
invoked here is legitimate self-defence.

122. It is not only these latest acts of aggression which
prove that the Israeli policy makers do not seek a relaxation

131. I think we should, once and for all, agree on the
meaning of legitimate self-defence, since a mistaken idea of

128. I should now like to turn to the problem which is the
subject of our meeting. Once again the Council is meeting
to take note of the fact that, despite its appeals for calm,
despite its condemnations, the Middle East has just been
the scene of bloody incidents. Once again, as on 4 June last,
innocent victims have been killed while they were going
about their daily work in their efforts to extract food for
their families from an unyielding soil. I should like to ask
Ambassad.or El-Farra of Jordan to convey the feelings of
sorrow and friendly solidarity of the Government and
people of Senegal to his Government and people.
129. We have heard the statements made by the parties
concerned with great attention.

12

this legal concept could rapidly lead States to a worldwide
conflagration. Members of the Council should realize that
Salazar in Portugal, Ian Smith in Southern Rhodesia, and
Vorster in South Africa are listening to us to see how we
react to the interpretation Israel seems to be giving to the
concept of legitimate self-defence.

permission to speak on the item under discussion. Having
said that, I should like to join the preceding speakers in
welcoming you, not only as the newly appointed representative of Brazil to the United Nations but also asPresident
of the Security Council. Words of highly merited praise
have preceded you on account of the high qualities that
embellish your character. I am sure that it will be a privilege
for me, like my other colleagues, to co-operate with you in
this Organization. Suffice it to say that we indeed congratulate ourselves on having you among us.
:

132 As far as I am concerned, I should like to tell you,
0 rte simply and dispassionately, what I understand by
legitimate self-defence. The victim of aggression may, in
order to protect and defend himself, respond immediately,
without delay and at the actual site of the aggression,to the
aggressor’s attack by means proportionate to those used by
the aggressor.

141. I have not yet had the pleasure of meeting personally
the newly appointed representative of the United States but
I have heard from various quarters many laudatory remarks
concerning him, not only as a most capable diplomat but
also as an astute financier and man of the world. Finance is
very important in this Organization, becausethe policies of
nations everywhere, it has been my experience, revolve
around economics. So indeed it is an asset to have a
financier among us here. I sincerely hope that as the
representative of Saudi Arabia I shall be enabled to
co-operate fruitfully with Ambassador Ball in the future.

133. What are the main factors in this definition? First,
the aggression; second, the victim; third, the aggressor;
fourth, the time and place of the response; and fifth, the
means used for the response. In the light of these
considerations, let us examine the two arguments before us :
Jordan declares that its towns of Irbid and Salt have been
subjected to air raids by Israel, causing dead and wounded
among the Jordanian civilian population; Israel, in its reply,
has admitted the air raids but has added that they were
carried out in exercise of its right of legitimate self-defence
against the commando attacks by Palestinians. I feel most
sincerely that we must take a strong stand against this
method, and we must say “no” to Israel whose action on
4 June and 4 August cannot be interpreted as the exercise
of the right of legitimate self-defence.

142. My
whole-hearted congratulations
go to
Mr. Kutakov, the newly appointed Under-SecretaryGeneral. Apart from his being a most intelligent gentleman,
he is one of the friendliest personalities I have ever met
among our Russian colleagues. Of course, Ambassador
Malik is an old friend whom I have known for about twenty
years or so. He was always gracious to me, although he is a
Communist and I happen to be a monarchist, It showsyou
that when there is a rapport between persons of different
political persuasions ideologies do not count much in the
personal relationships among United Nations colleagues.

134. In this particular case, Jordan was not the aggressor;
it had not launched any attack against Israel. Yet it was
Jordan’s territory and its towns that were bombed. These
are the facts.

143. Mr. President, you and other members of the Council
may wonder why the representative of Saudi Arabia should
ask to be allowed to speak time and again on the subject
under discussion, or rather on the Palestine question. One
may ask, what can one say that has not been repeatedly
said about this question of Palestine, not only since the
inception of the United Nations but as far back as 1919,
the date of the Versailles Treaty? I believe we should
always go to the genesis of this question before we address
ourselves to various incidents that have been happening, not
only since Israel was created by the United Nations but
since 1920. I happened to be a contemporary of that era.
The first trip I made to Palestine wasas a pilgrim in 1925. I
was still a student at the American University of Beirut. I
remember that I had severalJewishfriends, fellow students
at that University. There wasno barrier of religion or race
that separated me from them. In fact two of them were
among my best friends and still are.

135. I must refer once again to the situation of the
Palestinians, whose fate has still not been settled by the
international community. They have taken refuge by the
thousands, for better or for worse (rather worse than
better) in the States which were able to shelter them-just
as Senegal, Guinea, Congo (Kinshasa), Tanzania and Zambia
have also had to provide asylum for refugees on their
territories. In fact, the real problem is the settlement of the
fate of these unfortunate Palestinians, and the evacuation
by Israel of the territories it has occupied by force.
136. Senegal places great hopes in Ambassador Jarring’s
mission for achieving strict compliance with the resolution
of 22 November 1967 [242 (1967).
137. Senegal, true to its belief in the value of dialogue, is
obliged formally to condemn raids and military operations
of the kind we are considering at present, which can only
compromise the efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.

144. I should not have asked for the floor had it not been
that I heard certain deleterious remarks made about the
Mufti of Jerusalem, whom I happened to meet in 1925 in
Jerusalem. The Mufti of Jerusalem, Amin el Husseini, is not
here to defend himself, but I am in duty bound, as a friend
of the Mufti’s, to tell you something about him. You may
rest assured that I will not cover anything in order to
whitewash a personality or to blacken another personality
in what I am going to say. I can picture him in front of me.
Having visited the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, I went to
the Mosque of the Rock. My brother, who had known the

138. It is high time that peace wasestablished in that part
of the world.
139. The PRESIDENT:
tative of Saudi Arabia.

The next speaker is the represen-

140. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President, I
thank you and the members of the Council for granting me
13

per cent Palestine Arabs before the Balfour Declaration and
only 6 per cent were Jews. Those Jews mostly lived side by
side with their Arab brethren. They were mostly of Semitic
origin. Zionism, as you know, was a dream of the late
Theodore Herd who thought that there was no life for the
Jew in Europe on account of religious intolerance. But in
fairness to the Europeans, religious intolerance was prevalent among the various Christian sects. Even the Catholics
killed one another during the Inquisition. So no wonder the
Jews were maltreated. I do not say it was right, but it
happened that way. Then, when Protestantism arose, there
were slaughters among the various sects. Then the Dreyfus
Affair came, and I do not have to go into detail about what
has happened since then.

Husseini family, had given me a letter of introduction to
the Mufti. The Mufti had an office at the door of the
Mosque of the Rock, and he personally took me into the
Mosque.
145. I was barely twenty years old, but at that time I had
been a pan-Arab and an Arab nationalist since I was
fourteen. We spoke about the Balfour Declaration. If my
memory still servesme well, he said, “There is no problem
between us and our Jewish brethren of the Orient. Our
problem is with the Jewsof Eastern Europe who, under the
banner of Zionism, want to expel the Arabs from their
homeland”.
146. I smiled and thought that the Grand Mufti, as he was
called, was exaggerating. Events have shown him to be
right. Mr. Tekoah said that the Mufti went and sat by the
side of Hitler as if Hitler had nothing to do but receive the
Mufti of Jerusalem, Where did he want the Mufti of
Jerusalem to take refuge, in London or in Washington? In
fairness to the Mufti, the Mufti did not know what Hitler
was doing to the Jews of Europe. I do not think that Hitler
was duty bound to tell the Mufti what he wasdoing. I guess
that many Germans-it wasshown later after the war and in
the Nuremberg trials whoseproceedings I followed-did not
know what was happening to the Jews in Eastern Europe
under the Nazi regime. So I think that one should be fair
not only to the Mufti, but also to any Palestinian patriot
who tried to defend his country and his people. Such
malicious statements will endear the Mufti more to the
people and will not resolve any questions. Tendentious
statements about personalities is of the nature of character
assassination, and I think that the United Nations should
rise above this method of vilification. I think that we sink
to a lower level in resorting to it.

151, Legislation was enacted in most Western countries to
guarantee the rights of the Jews. In fact, SO much legislation
was enacted in Western countries that finally many were
questioning not only whether the Jews had equal rights but
whether they were also enjoying privileges as a minority,
perhaps to atone for the persecution of the past ages in
Europe.
152. But in our part of the world there wasno such thing
as persecution of the Jew on account of his religion. There
may have been isolated cases in any country. For that
matter the Jewsbelonged to the Sacred Book, as the Arabic
expression goes.
,153. Whom do the Zionists of Eastern Europe think they
are fooling? Zionism did not spring from amongst the
Semitic Jews, and I do not know whether some of our
Israeli colleagues are of Semitic origin or not, but I know a
Semite when I see one. They came from Eastern Europe.
There is nothing wrong in coming from Eastern Europe.
But they were not Semites; they had a Semitic religion, A
Scotsman who is a Christian is not a Semite, but he has a
Semitic religion. A Sudanese who is black and who may be
a Moslem and Arab at the same time is not a Semite. But he
has a Semitic religion and so have these people of Eastern
Europe.

147. But I do not want to be too hard on Mr. Tekoah
because my logic will probably convince him of what I am
going to say about this question under discussion. He is a
person and as a person I respect his dignity, as a human
being. But I believe, as my colleague from Syria and others
have mentioned here time and again, that what has been
taking place since the creation of Israel by this Organization
is a link in the long chain of events, and I can seeno end to
that chain.

154. Nobody begrudges the fact that they are Jews. On
the contrary, we all believe that Judaism is one of the three
noble monotheistic religions.

148. I recall the last time that I spoke in this Council
which was on 4 April. I said that we will hear of more
incidents, that there will be charges and countercharges,
incriminations and accusations and rebuttals. But this
procedure will get us nowhere.

155. Where did Zionism spring up? From Old Jerusalem?
Did it spring from Baghdad, Damascus, or Cairo, or
Yemen? And, incidentally, the Jews in Yemen are pure
Arabs who embraced Judaism when Jewish settlers
happened to live amongst them; they embraced Judaism.
No, Zionism sprang up in Europe, and this is an incursion, a
European incursion, a colonial incursion, into the Middle
East; and this is not the first incursion, Our Semitic area
was invaded by the ancient Persians, who were not Semites;
the ancient Greeks, who were not Semites-Alexander the
Great; by the Romans, who were not Semites; and by the
hordes of Crusaders, who were not Semites; and even by
our co-religionists, the Moslem Ottomans, who were not
Semites. And the last chapter of incursions is that of the
non-Semitic Jew of Eastern Europe who, under the banner
of Zionism rationalizes his right to Palestine. I do not have
to mention this time and again. He said, “God gave us
Palestine.” All right. In the Koran there is no mention of it.
The Koran is a holy book, like the Bible. There is no

149. I shall go to the genesisof the question because, after
all, if we lose sight of how Israel came to be established in
Palestine, we will be building syllogisms on false premises
and all our arguments will be invalid. If this is true of logic I
would say that in human relationships, anything that does
not have a solid foundation is like a house, built on sand:
the structure may be sound to all appearances but it will
totter before the storm becauseit is not built on solid rock.
150. No one can dispute the fact that sovereignty resides
in the people of any country or any land. It did reside in
the peoples of the colonies. That is my first point. Why do I
make it? Because the people of Palestine consisted of 94
14

I

i

mention, is there, that God is going to give Palestine to the
Jews? I ask the Zionists to produce the title deed-they
speak as if God were a person-and in this age of
technology, to think that God Ahnighty, the invisible, gives
a deed, Whether YOU are a theist or an atheist, even when
somebody gives a title deed to a land, the land unfortunately, time and again, is taken by conquest-by the sword.
This is how the Zionists took Palestine.

Jewish Encyclopaedia. Zionism is colonialism in disguise.
Theodore Herzl asked Stefan Zweig for his collaborationand I know from friends of Stefan Zweig, who was
Viennese-and Hem1 was Viennese too. Stefan Zweig died
in Brazil in 1942; he committed suicide because he knew
that man did not learn anything from the First World War;
he committed suicide in 1942; and he was a Jew. I was one
of his reader fans-a marvelous writer. Stefan Zweig,
incidentally, collaborated with Herzl in contributing certain
articles to a newspaper which Herzl edited or owned or
both. Mr. Herzl asked Mr. Zweig whether he would join the
Zionist movement, and Mr. Zweig said: “There are too
many ‘isms’ for me to join Zionism. There should be only
one ‘ism’-humanism.” And some of you are familiar with
how he left Austria for Switzerland, as Remain Rolland,
the French pacifist, also did; they collaborated for world
peace. One was of Austrian origin and the other was
French, and they were both against the war, both were for
peace. He was a Jew from Eastern Europe, Stefan Zweig,
and this is to show you that an Eastern European Jew can
rise to great heights.

156. I have mentioned time and again-and I have to go
through the genesis of the problem-that many of those
who had lived in Palestine before the Zionist movement
may have been Semitic Jews and were converted to
Christianity and Islam. So, in effect, those Eastern European Jews who came under the banner of Zionism have
used Judaism as a motivation for a political end. What have
they done? When they kill and are being killed, they may
kill those who were originally Jews-Semitic Jews. This is
the genesis of the question. Mr. Balfour had no right to give
away land that did not belong to him. He is dead now. Nor
did Mr. Truman have any right to give away land that did
not belong to him on humanitarian grounds. I read it from
the rostrum of the United Nations from the memoirs of
Mr. Truman. He said-and I am paraphrasing-“The Zionists
bothered me so much that I had to get rid of them and give
them Palestine.” And they come here and say: “The Arabs
are aggressing against us and killing us.”

160. But I think that Zionists forget Judaism when they
come with a sword, with deceit and duplicity, to chase out
the indigenous people of Palestine-forget that they happen
to be Arabs, that they happen to have been Arabized. I
would like, across this table, to remind the Israeli representative of Micah the Prophet. The Israelis claim that they are
imbued with religious sentiment. Their Government is
secular, I have no doubt. But many Jews of Eastern Europe
had no choice after the Second World War but to find a
place of refuge, and this was accorded to them by the
British and by Mr. Truman. I would like to remind the
representative of Israel of the words of Micah the Prophet. I
know
them by heart, but I had better read them from the
Bible. This is from the Book of Micah, chapter 6, verse 8:

157. Oh, I have heard it said, “Well, this is a fait
accompli.” Many of my friends have told me-1 do not
want to mention names-prominent friends in this country
and other countries-“So what can you do? Israel is here to
stay.” That is one opinion. They could have stayed as our
brothers, being European Jews, if they had come to
Palestine and lived side by side as we thought they would
live because of their religious sentiment for the Holy Land.
Their arguments in the past since the twenties have been
threefold: first, “on historical grounds we should have
Palestine”. I mentioned, and I repeat again, that Abraham,
the prophet of us all in the area, came from Ur of the
Chaldees. What would prevent the Israelis in the future
from saying, “Since Abraham came from Ur of the
Chaldees”-Ur
of the Chaldees is in Mesopotamia, which is
Iraq today-“we should have Iraq as well”? You have only
to read Leonard C. Wooley, the archaeologist. He was a
great British archaeologist who first revealed that Abraham
may have lived in Ur of the Chaldees.

“He hath shewed thee, 0 man, what is good; and what
dot11 the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to
love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? ”
161. Does this apply to Israeli history since the Jews of
Eastern Europe came, under the banner of Zionism, to
colonize Palestine?
162. God Almighty is invisible. God Almighty, no doubt,
has revealed himself through reformers. Many of them are
still called prophets. It so happened that rn0s.t of the
prophets of the three monotheistic religions sprang from
the land of Palestine. They were truly Semitic prophets.
But neither Islam nor Christianity, nor, for that matter,
Judaism, consider God a discriminator. There is one
sentence that has been misinterpreted by many Jews-and
in fairness to them I must say that many Christians and
many Moslems have also misinterpreted certain phraseology
of the New Testament and of the Koran. Many of the
fundamentalist Jews think that they are the “Chosen
People” of God and that God has given them Palestine. This
is their genuine belief because they are fundamentalists.
There are fundamentalists in all religions, even, I believe, in
the religions that are outside the pale of the monotheistic
religions. I happened to be a humble student of comparative religions in my younger days. The fundamentalists
truly believe in the letter. The liberals tell them “the letter
killeth”, but they say that when there is a word, you should

158. The name “Jew” goes back to the fourth son of
Jacob. He is also one of our patriarchs, because he is the
patriarch of the area-not from Eastern Europe. There is
nothing wrong in naming a sect after the son of a patriarch,
like Buddhist, with reference to Buddha, Jew, with reference to Judah, the fourth son of Jacob, the son of Isaac,
the son of Abraham-patriarchs
of the land, of the Semitic
land, the land which, although it had Canaanites and
Arameans and Arabs and so-called Jews, with reference to
Judah-they
are all Semites and brothers-not
cousins,
brothers.
159. Here come the converted Jews of Eastern Europe,
with the banner of Zionism, and say “The Arabs are
aggressing against our land.” The Eastern European Jews
were converted in the seventh century. Go and consult the
15

become Palestinians. Why should we take exception to
those Arabs who are sympathetic to their Palestinian
brothers? We do not take exception to many Jews in
Western countries who, out of sentiment, send millions and
millions of dollars and pounds sterling and francs-of
course, the pound is controlled now and they cannot send
much. But they send the free currencies. Meetings and
dinners are held; bonds are floated--tax-free
bonds, mind
you. At one time a certain currency here was in difficulty,
but not the bonds. I think that, financially, if they are not
redeemed they become bad debts or something-Mr.
Ball
can bear me out. Any bad debt, if it is legitimate, can be
deducted from one’s income tax.

take the meaning of it literally. I mentioned here in this
Council that to many Jews-I have many friends among
them, some of them Rabbis-Zion is of the spirit, not of the
mountains, not terrestial. Amongst the rulers of Israel, as
with any other people, there are no doubt many devout
men. But my experience with politicians has been that most
of them are secular; and politicians, whether Jews or
Gentiles, quite often use religion as a means to political
ends. It so happened that the Zionist politicians were no
exceptions in this practice of politicians. The Zionist
politicians used the motivation of Zionism to attain their
goal of taking Palestine.
163. We hear a colleague hailing from Israel saying: “YOU
are aggressing against my people. You Arabs are aggressing
against my people.” Now I come to the core of the matter:
the series of incidents. If anybody robs a person of his
house, his orchard, his land, whether he be Jew or Gentile,
should he remain passive? The Palestinian people are a
people and have a personality, and they have decided not to
yield to any counsel. In fact, they would kill-and I know
this to be true-even Arabs who would advise them to
accept a fait accompli. They would call those Arabs who
accept the jhit accompli traitors, inasmuch as in Europe
those who accepted the fait accompli in the Second World
War-without naming countries-were called traitors.

169. Organizations have been instituted,
here in this
country, to collect funds for Israel. The Arabs should have
no sympathy with their Palestinian brothers? They have na
right? Only the Jews should have sympathy?
I do not
blame the Jews. The Zionists play on their sentiments. But
many Jews are loyal to their country ofbirth and adoption,
as they should be. The French Jews--and I know many
French Jews-are among the best Frenchmen. So are the
American Jews I know. I am sure our colleague, Mr. Malik,
can cite many good Russians who happen to be Jews,
170. To make a nationality out of a religion-we say it a
hundred times-is theocracy, something of the past. If so,
religions should be the foundations of States. There is no
one Moslem State. There is no one Christian State. For
those who do not believe in the traditional God-the
communists-there
is no one communisf. State; there are
others. Ideology is something which is tantamount to
belief, creed, or religion. Only the Zionists want all the
Jews to be banded under the Zionist State. That is the idea.
And how do we know that, little by littie, they will not
nibble into the Arab countries-the
Zionists--nibble into
the other Arab countries, in order to find refuge for the
Jews. But the Jews are prosperous abroad; they do not
want to go there. That is all rationalisation. It is PISS&, as
the French say, but Zionists still insist that Palestine is the
homeland of the Jews,

164. No Arab who is in high position dare confront the
Palestinians and tell them to submit. In fact, he has no right
to tell them. After all, so far at least, the Jews-the Zionists,
rather-have not invaded other Arab countries. They are far
from Libya, Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia, Saudi Arabia, Iraq.
But the Arab people in all those countries-and I forgot
Sudan-none of these Arab people, although they belong to
different nationalities, have the right to tell the Palestinian
“Forgo your land”, because we started by saying that
sovereignty resides in a people, and the Palestinians are a
people. Most of them are living in camps, many of them are
dispersed.
165. Those who are dispersed are more dangerous than
those who are living in camps, because they have become
desperadoes, and one cannot blame them. There is rancour
in their hearts, not against the Jew as such, but against the
one who usurped their homeland and robbed them of their
homes and dispersed their families, scattered them to all
four comers of the world. Wherever one goes one finds
bitter Palestinians.

171. The third argument is that Palestine is holy to the
Jews. What about the holiness of Palestine to the Christians
and to the Moslems? In fact, there is only the Wall, which
is a relic allegedly of Solomon’s Tcmplc. I believe it was
part of the stables of Solomon’s Temple, because the
Temple was destroyed by the Remans. Mr. Tekoah knows
that. The Wall, at least I was told by archaeologists-they
are not politicians-years
ago, before the partition of
Palestine, that what is called the Wailing Wall was part of
Solomon’s Temple. It is good to have religious sentiment
and to go and wail at the Wall-there is nothing wrong with
it. The Christians go and visit the Holy Sepulchre, the
Moslems go to the Mosque of Al Aqsa-the land is holy to
all these faiths.

166. What right have we in the United Nations to tell
them, “Oh, never mind. Forget about your homeland.
Forget your land, and come on now, live amongst us”.
Suppose they do not want to live amongst us? Where are
the fundamental human rights? A person wants to live
wherever he wants to live.
167. The second argument used by the Zionists was that
Palestine was given to them on humanitarian grounds
because they had suffered in Europe. That is a hackneyed
argument. If every suffering people should displace another
people, God help us.

172. Now here in the United Nations we go by what are
called democratic principles and take democratic procedures as a basis for our action in the United Nations. I am
told there are 16 million Jews in the world. There are over
1 billion Christians, and there are 600 million or so
Moslems. Why should the Zionists claim Palestine because
of its holiness to them, and the Christians and the Moslems
not claim it for its holiness to them? Really, the Christians

168. Then comes the question of guerrilla bands, They are
Palestinians and those who are not Palestinians have
36

should be there, if we go by numbers. But the Christians do
not claim Palestine on religious grounds.

phizes an Arab and says: “Where is your sense of chivalry,
where is your senseof humanity”, he becomes submissive.

173. Let us assume the Moslems want to claim it on
religious grounds. By what right should 16 million have a
right to Palestine and not 600 million?

180. But the Arabs are people too. They can be roused.
This is not their epoch of power and dominion. But who
can guarantee what the picture will be a couple of decades
from now, when they will try to fight again with the
Israelis-not because they are Jews but because they are
colonizers, and try to assimilate them as they had assimilated many other intruders before. We have Arabs of
Circassian origin, from the Caucasus;they are Arabs who do
not know any word of the country of Mr. Malik; we have
Arabs who were originally Berbers; we have Arabs who are
black Africans. We are a multiracial society, Mr. President,
like your country, Brazil, to the glory of Brazil. We have no
discrimination in Arabism. Arabism is a culture, it is not a
religion.

174. Of course this argument is invalid; it does not hold
water. And, more particularly, I want to mention something about Jerusalem, and I know what the Saudi Arabian
people think about what has happened about Jerusalem.
Under no circumstances will the Saudi Arabians accept the
Zionist domination of Jerusalem and-while I do not
represent other Arab States, this is my understanding, and I
am saying it informally-no Moslem State will ultimately
give in to the domination of Jerusalem by the Zionists; I am
not saying by the Jews, but by the Zionists, for Zionism is a
political movement.

181. Judaism is a religion, but it is diversified in cultures,
otherwise there would not be Yiddish. I have seen Jews
who have evolved a sort of European literature of their
own, and we have Jews who recite Arab poetry, which is
their own-Arab Jews. Arabism will never die so long as
mankind does not commit suicide.

175. I come to the conclusion of my statement. What
should we do? Have other meetings of the Security
Council? Interminable meetings. This thing would go on.
The Palestinians will come stealthily into, their homeland,
because ‘they are weaker, and they will do what other weak
People resort to: they have to kill. It is deplorable.
Probably they are innocent, because they are frenzied with
their love of their country, and the people whom they kill
inside Palestine-to which Israel lays a claim which is
invalid, as I have said many times-those so-called Israelis
are probably innocent too.

182. So I advise-and I should not use the word “advise”,
because any advice that is proffered and is not asked for is
usually rejected-but I, as a human being, warn the Israelis.
I warn them as human beings, too, that there will be a day
of reckoning, which will be deplorable.
183. The empires that were built in the Arab lands have
crumbled into ashes. Archaeologists go and examine the
strata of the fertile crescent to see to what civilization this
stratum belongs and to what stratum another civilization
belongs. But where are they now? Where are the Greeks of
Alexander the Great? Where are the Romans? Where are
the Crusaders? Where are the Ottomans? They do not
exist any more.

176. One day there will be an upheaval-perhaps not in
my lifetime, I do not know when it will happen although
many things may occur to change the picture: balance of
power, power politics, spheres of influence; I do not have
to go into the interplay of forces that may sometimes
destroy not only a region but the whole world in our era.
177. DO you know, the first people to give their heels to
the air would be the politicians and the rulers. I have seen it
time and again. They get off Scot-free and the people who
suffer would be the Jews, the innocent Jewish people, and
the innocent Arab people. The rulers will vanish. They did
vanish, many of them I saw them in Western Europe in the
thirties. I spoke to them when they left Germany, Who
remained in Germany to be persecuted? The poor stayed
there, the poor cobbler, the delicatessen man, who became
victims of Hitler and the Nazis.

184. Is there not a lesson for those Zionists of Eastern
Europe, that their fate is written on the wall? Unless
mankind commits suicide, then we are all in the same boat.
185, I have craved the indulgence again of the President of
the Security Council, as well as the members sitting around
this table, with no other motive other than humanitarian.
The only solution to this question is not by submitting new
resolutions. It is, I hope, not in the near future, but some
time in the future, that the Eastern European Zionists will
come to their sensesand not be enamored of their military
prowess,which is in contravention of the highest principles
of Judaism, whose God is a God of mercy, of love and of
compassion, leave aside the quotation I have cited from the
Prophet Micah.

178. There are 100 million Arabs in the area, from the
Atlantic to the frontiers of Iran, down deep into Africa to
the Sudan. The whole fertile crescent is Arab. It so happens
they were not born Arabs; they were “Arabized”, not by
force or coercion, by choice. There is resiliency in Arabism.
Empires have come and empires have gone. The Arabs had
their own empire and it crumbled like other empires-and
perhaps rightly so.

186. I could cite no end from the Bible to show that
Judaism does not thrive, except on mercy, love and
compassion. The Eastern European Zionists come with the
sword to chase the indigenous people-who may originally
even have been Jews-out of the land, and we sit here
dabbling in words, stringing together all kinds of phrases,
hoping that a solution can ultimately be found.

179. The Arab people multiplied because of their culture,
because of their language, because of their poetry, because
of their tradition, because of their customs, becauseof their
chivalry. These are the qualities that make the Arab proud
to be an Arab. No more his m&h!, although he talks of past
glories, it is the culture, the language, things of the spirit.
Arabs may fight amongst themselves but when one apostro-

187. There is no solution to that question unless the
Zionists finally come to their sensesand live in the State of
17

neighbour’s house . . . nor any thing that is thy nai
bour’s.”
189. The Jews of Eastern Europe trickled into PalesiiRz
Not only did they covet their neighbour’s house, kh)
expropriated the houses, the orchards, the whole land, m&
they are still expanding. For heaven’s sake, go back to yetit
Eible, and if you are good Jews and not merely politii;i
Zionists, take the spiritual phase of the Bible and no1 tjw
terrestial interpretations that you have put upon it.

Palestine, which will contain both Arabs and Jews,regardless of whether they are of European origin or not, side by
side, without the domination of Israel over Arabs or
non-Arabs, but as citizens of the Holy Land under a
Palestine banner instead of an Eastern European Zionist
banner.
188. Before ending, I should like to quote from Exodus
20:.17-and this I addressto the Israelis around this table. I
shall not quote the whole thing, but its essencewill become
evident. These are the words of Moses. Incidentally, the
wife of Moses was a Midianite-a Semite-and the word
from which the word Jehovah is derived is the name of the
God of the Midianites, which symbolized the one God. So
even Jehovah happens to be a word of Semitic origin and
did not come out or ,..e Balkans. “Thou shalt not covet thy

190. The PRESIDENT: I wish to thank the representntkza
of Syria, Denmark, Hungary, Senegal and Saudi Arabia TV:
the kind and generous words of welcome they exte&?
to me.
The meeting rose at 6.45 p.m.

18
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Erice: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other currencies)

35639-October

1972-2.0~:
