United Nations

S/PV.4237

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth year

4237

th meeting
Tuesday, 28 November 2000, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. van Walsum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Netherlands)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Cappagli
Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Heinbecker
Mr. Chen Xu
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Ward
Mr. Mohammad Kamal
Mr. Kassé
Mr. Andjaba
Mr. Granovsky
Mr. Tekaya
Mr. Kuchynski
Sir. Jeremy Greenstock
Ms. Soderberg

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

00-76793 (E)
`````````

S/PV.4237

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Ms. Carolyn McAskie, Emergency Relief
Coordinator ad interim, Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Ms. McAskie to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by the Emergency Relief Coordinator ad
interim of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Carolyn McAskie, to whom
I give the floor.
Ms. McAskie: Let me thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to brief the Council on the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is

2

particularly pertinent at this moment, for, thus far, all
diplomatic and military efforts to end what has been
described as “Africa’s First World War” have not
shown results, while the humanitarian crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains one of the
worst in the world in terms of both intensity and
magnitude.
The overall situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in our view from the humanitarian side,
continues to deteriorate as military activity occurs with
varying intensity and skirmishes from time to time
develop into full-scale battles. The Council is familiar
with the unfortunate events that occurred in Kisangani
a few months ago, having itself sent a mission to the
region. United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations have been forced repeatedly to suspend
or forgo operations throughout the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In most parts of Orientale
province and parts of Equateur province not under
government control, many areas remain inaccessible as
a result of a dilapidated or non-existent road network
and rampant insecurity. There are recurrent epidemics,
a scarcity of medicines and a collapsed health-care
system.
The figures of people affected by this conflict are
staggering. In three years of protracted civil war, the
number of conflict-affected from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has soared to around 16 million
people — a full 33 per cent of the population. Council
members are familiar with a study issued earlier this
year by the International Rescue Committee, which
concluded that up to 1.7 million people —
approximately 600,000 of them children under five —
are likely to have died as a result of the war in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
alone. About one third of those deaths are actually
attributable to violence. The rest are due mainly to
preventable diseases and malnutrition caused by the
lack of access, the lack of assistance and the sheer
inability of people to live a normal life. The study
suggests that child mortality rates in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are among the highest in the
world and, tragically, this is likely to increase even
further.
Flagrant human rights violations prevail
throughout the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
occur in an atmosphere of total impunity. In terms of
displaced persons, civilians in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo are afforded no protection, but are, on the

S/PV.4237

contrary, systematically targeted by all parties to the
conflict. We have provided a series of briefing maps to
the Council from which members will see that over two
million people have been displaced.
Of particular concern is the situation of the Kivus
and Orientale province, where insurgencies, counterinsurgencies and ethnic tensions have led to some
950,000 civilians being displaced. This is further
complicated by the presence of armed groups, which
use random violence against civilians as a strategy of
war.
Of particular concern is the situation of large
numbers of people who have opted for refuge in the
rainforest — around 200,000 in all. Many of them have
suffered repeat displacements; they have fled to remote
areas, subsisting mainly on wild berries and raw food,
with little or no access to health care. We also continue
to learn of internally displaced persons who are
systematically subjected to forced labour, finding
themselves in the hands of the military or various
militia groups as prisoners or hostages. Children suffer
an equally terrible fate and we continue to hear reports
of recruitment of Congolese children, some of them
being taken to neighbouring countries.
As far as refugees are concerned, there are
currently over 300,000 in neighbouring countries, with
a rapid and recent exodus from Equateur province into
the Republic of Congo — a tragic situation for a
country that has recently been coming out of a war of
its own, now to suffer the double burden of a
tremendous inflow of refugees; 100,000 have fled to
the Republic of Congo alone and another 10,000 to the
Central African Republic. In the past two weeks, 5,000
more people have fled from Katanga into Zambia. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo, however, is also,
conversely, host to over 330,000 refugees who have
fled civil strife in the neighbouring countries of
Rwanda, Burundi, Angola, Uganda and the Sudan.
What does this mean for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo? It means that the economy has all but
crumbled, leaving the vast majority of the country’s
population to face dire financial hardship. The war,
compounded by deep-rooted economic and social
problems, mismanagement and neglect, has rendered
food shortages commonplace and has sparked a
devastating increase in malnutrition. There are extreme
food deficits ranging from 20 per cent to 55 per cent of
demand in some parts of the country. The foreign

exchange rate is at twice its previous valuation; there is
a standing ban on the use of foreign currency, and the
already limited resources available for humanitarian
activities have depreciated seriously, putting at risk
those who are most in need of assistance.
Humanitarian agencies find it increasingly
difficult to operate in this environment and to provide
the level of assistance needed to save lives. The war
has had the twin effects of creating new populations in
need and at the same time creating untenable security
environments that impede access to those same
populations. This is further exacerbated by logistical
constraints which render the delivery of assistance to
many remote areas extremely difficult, if not
impossible.
These problems are encountered both in
Government-controlled regions of the country and in
areas controlled by all three rebel entities: the Rally for
Democracy (RCD), the Movement for the Liberation of
the Congo (MLC) and the Rally for DemocracyLiberation Movement (RCD-ML). In Government
areas, the problems stem from strict administrative
procedures surrounding the granting of access, while in
rebel-held areas lack of access derives from the
prevailing lack of security. In one notable instance
where obstacles prevented access, an estimated
300,000 displaced persons in southern Equateur and
another 150,000 internally displaced persons in
northern Katanga were left without desperately needed
humanitarian assistance despite the fact that the
humanitarian agencies had both the means and the
capacity to undertake delivery; they were prevented
from entering.
Despite those problems, the United Nations
agencies on the ground continuously work hard to
respond to the situation at hand. That has resulted, for
instance, in a number of breakthrough operations in
some of the most critical conflict-affected areas,
including Kasai, northern Katanga, Equateur, Ituri and
South Kivu. The United Nations maintains a countrywide presence in all 11 provinces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The United Nations agencies
and the Humanitarian Coordinator enjoy the extremely
close and useful collaboration of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), and the comprehensive support
of Mr. Kamel Morjane, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. I would say that this is one of

3

S/PV.4237

the best examples of political and humanitarian
cooperation in the realm of United Nations exercises.
This year, significant success was achieved —
and we have indeed had some success — through the
implementation of a nationwide polio eradication
campaign that reached more than 10 million children
under the age of five, and through other country-wide
and cross-front-line initiatives. For example, this year’s
State examination campaign included 28,000 students.
It is hard to tell how many children are in school in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo these days;
estimates range from 35 per cent to 50 per cent of
school-age children receiving primary education.
Against that backdrop, the consolidated appeals
for funds for the year 2000 requested $71.4 million.
The response to date has been 61 per cent:
$43.6 million. However, more than 80 per cent of the
funding provided was for food assistance and food
security programmes, with critically low funding
received for primary health, epidemics control, child
protection, human rights and confidence-building
sectors. Because of the magnitude of the crisis, the net
impact of the humanitarian assistance provided in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo can only be
described as minimal. In 2000, of the 16 million
war-affected people, less than 50 per cent received
humanitarian assistance, and even that on a sporadic
basis.
Earlier today, the Secretary-General launched the
appeals for 2001. The 2001 appeal for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo articulates a humanitarian
strategy with the following elements: immediate
provision of life-saving support; enhancing survival
strategies and coping mechanisms of war-affected
populations; facilitation and promotion of free
circulation of persons and goods across the front line;
and support to community-based self-recovery
initiatives.
Members of the Council will see from the
information package provided that this coming year’s
consolidated appeal includes projects that target
different levels of intervention, from household food
security and health interventions at the local level, to
wider assistance programmes requiring participation
from all parts of the country. To prevent an even larger
humanitarian catastrophe, this is one of the few appeals
in which we have vastly increased the amount of
money requested, but to a relatively modest

4

$139.5 million — modest, that is, in relation to the
need. A keystone of humanitarian response will be the
emergency humanitarian intervention mechanism that
we have created, which provides funds for rapid
emergency response to situations such as those that
arose in Kisangani last June and most recently in
Equateur province. It makes funds available locally
through donations from our donors, funds we can
access immediately to respond to an on-the-spot crisis.
As
the
humanitarian
situation
becomes
increasingly grave for growing numbers of Congolese,
the efforts of the United Nations and its implementing
partners are being hampered by the lack of security,
limited access to affected populations and critically
few resources for life-saving interventions. What is
needed now is a genuine commitment by all parties to
ensure that access for humanitarian agencies is
improved. I would urge Council members to impress
upon all parties to the conflict the need for cooperation
to ensure full humanitarian access across the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It would be of paramount importance for all
parties to the conflict fully to respect international
humanitarian law, human rights law and the principles
of engagement for humanitarian assistance in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo drawn up by the
humanitarian agencies, in order to ensure that civilians
will not be targeted by violence or forced to flee their
homes, and that humanitarian personnel will be
provided with the necessary guarantees of safety and
security.
Moreover, the world community must realize that
the means currently available to the relief community
are not commensurate with the magnitude of what is
certainly one of the world’s gravest humanitarian
crises.
We would like to draw the attention of the
international donor community to what we see as the
crucial symbiosis between peace and humanitarian
assistance in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We hope that increased donor assistance can reinforce
common objectives of life-saving, rebuilding
livelihoods and promoting peace and security.
Particular attention could be given to the security
of aid workers operating in highly insecure and volatile
areas of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. A
particular request is made in the consolidated appeal
for support for the security element.

S/PV.4237

I would say that this past year has been a year
that signified the departure from a passive to a more
challenging and result-oriented approach to tackling
the devastating effects of war. The achievements could
be rated as significant despite the enormous
difficulties. But the low level of funding means that
humanitarian operations remain on a hand-to-mouth
basis.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is under
political, social and economic stress, and its problems
are deeply interconnected with those of its neighbours.
The people of the Congo are becoming exhausted, no
longer able to cope with the violence and
impoverishment to which they are subjected on a daily
basis. The failure to sustain any semblance of normalcy
must be recognized as the result of decades of poor
government and an absence of governance. Ironically,
it is that absence of governance that has taught the
people of the Congo how to survive and that has
sparked their resilience.
We recognize that a commitment from the
international community to address the humanitarian
situation will not by itself solve the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We fully support
the efforts of the Security Council to continue to seek
lasting solutions to address the military and political
issues, in concert with humanitarian efforts. While the
humanitarian situation is extremely grave, we know
that a humanitarian response is not viewed as a
substitute; nor should it preclude the search for a longterm solution.
The President: I thank Ms. McAskie for her
comprehensive and illuminating briefing.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We are grateful
to you, Mr. President, for scheduling this briefing by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. This follows the logic of the
meeting we had in March on the humanitarian situation
in Iraq. Today’s meeting also represents the first
follow-up to the provision made in resolution
1327 (2000) for humanitarian briefings on conflict
situations. We appreciate the very useful briefing given
by Ms. Carolyn McAskie. We also thank her for
sharing with us a nicely bound and very informative
folder.
The humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has continued to deteriorate; the

number of displaced persons has increased; more
people are being driven from their hearth and home;
more people are being forced out of the country; there
is renewed fighting in Kisangani or the Kivus or
Equateur; there are casualties; there are gross
violations of humanitarian laws and human rights;
belligerent parties continue to recruit children and send
them to the front line for combat; the situation is grave,
but humanitarian access in many areas remains
difficult. That has in essence been the substance of the
quarterly reports of the Secretary-General and the
periodic briefings given by the Secretariat over the
year. The situation, as Ms. McAskie has informed us
today, has not improved in any of these areas.
It is appalling that 16 million people, or 33 per
cent of the country’s population, remain in critical need
of food, and that a large number of people suffer
epidemic outbreaks of cholera, meningitis, dysentery,
malaria and haemorrhagic fever. Women and children
are most affected by this crisis.
The recent leadership wrangles in the Congolese
Rally for Democracy-Liberation Movement (RCD-ML)
has claimed at least 40 lives in Bunia and has forced
about 1,000 people out of the country. Such fratricidal
wars must stop. We call upon the parties to
immediately halt all military action and open
humanitarian corridors for these people. We also urge
members of the United Nations with influence on the
parties to secure necessary humanitarian access to
these areas.
It is unfortunate that all actors — internal and
external — continue to justify the war by insisting that
they have their stakes. As the war is fought at the
expense of the Congolese people, it would seem, from
the behaviour of the belligerents, that the people alone
have no stakes or that their lives or their right to peace
and prosperity have no place in the belligerents’ minds.
It is this point that High Commissioner Sadako Ogata
tried to impress upon the leaders during her June visit
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, when she
said,
“Don’t forget the people and, as you negotiate,
don’t ignore the human cost of the war.”
The failure to recognize the human cost of the war is
demonstrated by the continued ceasefire violations by
all parties. The recent ceasefire violations in the north
of Katanga are deeply deplorable. The RCD’s recapture

5

S/PV.4237

of the town of Pepa complicates the situation and
challenges the role the United Nations could play there.
The dire humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as in other conflict zones, is the
direct consequence of conflicts. The long-term solution
of the humanitarian crisis lies in a political settlement.
Humanitarian assistance cannot be an alternative to a
political settlement. The Council had extended the
mandate of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) by
two months to allow for political and diplomatic
initiatives for the full deployment of the United
Nations mission.
The Council will have to take a serious decision
on continued engagement by the United Nations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as the mandate of
MONUC comes to an end after the technical roll-over.
The progress that we expected from the different
diplomatic initiatives has proved elusive so far. This is
certainly a source of serious concern. We, however,
continue to believe that the United Nations must
remain engaged in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo while efforts continue in order to create
conditions for the full deployment of MONUC. We
hold the view that the existence of a peace agreement
should not be an obstacle to a peace settlement. If need
be, while maintaining commitment to the Lusaka
Agreement, the parties could, in order to move
forward, agree to additional provisions like the
Kampala disengagement plan.
The United Nations, like the parties to the
conflict, cannot ignore the regional dimension of the
conflict. It has been repeatedly mentioned here that
there is no military solution to the crisis. Lusaka
represents a package. The United Nations has
welcomed it and remains committed to help in its
implementation. If the parties so require, we would, in
principle, have no problem with a Lusaka-II or LusakaIII. We should support all serious efforts that advance
the prospects of peace. It should be recognized by all
parties that an inclusive political process is a
prerequisite
to
any
credible
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme.
It is regrettable that the provisions of the relevant
Security
Council
resolutions
remain
without
compliance, although they are mandatory for the
concerned parties. The key to the resolution of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and

6

to comprehensive peace in the Great Lakes region lies
in the full implementation of the relevant Council
resolutions. That should take place without any further
delay.
I would conclude by recalling the wise advice of
President Mandela. Speaking about the rebel groups in
Burundi, he said that surrender of weapons by rebels
cannot be realistically expected until they can become
fully involved in the peace process. He mentioned that
the African National Congress did not give up arms
until it was allowed to be fully engaged in the political
process. There should be useful wisdom in the words of
an elder statesman for the authorities in Kinshasa and
other, neighbouring capitals.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): We
warmly welcome the briefing from the acting
Emergency Relief Coordinator, which was a very good,
very clear and, in some of its aspects, quite depressing
briefing. I want to go back to one or two points of
detail.
It is very good to hear that there is excellent
coordination with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and his team, which is the kind of
coordination that we need to see in the most difficult
and complex situations — particularly in Africa, as we
pointed out in the report of our mission to Sierra
Leone. That is good news.
I do not want to get into the detail of the politics
of what we face in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We shall discuss that on later occasions — with
the troop contributors this week and when we consider
the roll-over of the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). In addition to the humanitarian
situation, the general situation is depressing, because
Lusaka is not being implemented as it should have
been implemented by the parties. They virtually all
bear some responsibility for that in their several ways.
We in the Council all know that the Congo is
perhaps the greatest challenge we have to face with
respect to Africa in the Security Council, and we have
got to get it right. It is a more serious and complex
situation even than Sierra Leone, and we must give it
the same effort and the same intensity. I hope that
somewhere we will find some leadership for addressing
the problems of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
both from within the region and from outside. But we
will come to the details of that in due course when we

S/PV.4237

address the rollovers and when we have an account of
the meetings that have taken place in Maputo and that
are to take place later in Lusaka.
The first indications of the second Maputo
meeting are that there is increasing weariness with
continuing the conflict, increasing impatience from the
parties within the region — those that are not
contributing to the early implementation of Lusaka, or
whatever they can agree between them to substantiate
Lusaka — and there is, I think, an interesting
indication from Kinshasa that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is willing to work
with MONUC and with the international agencies to try
to make things operate better on the ground. In meeting
the objectives that we have set ourselves, that would all
be good news if it were confirmed, but there is an
enormous amount to do.
I pay particular tribute to the work of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
and to that of the agencies and the non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) on the ground. I think that they
are facing the most awful conditions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Not only is there sometimes
almost complete insecurity for them as operators, but
there is also a dire lack of proper infrastructure and
proper support. It is vital for their security and for their
ability to do their job that they get help on the ground
from everybody concerned.
I am therefore quite interested to hear more
details from the Coordinator ad interim on the present
state of the relationship of the agencies with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and with the factions that operate in the areas where
they find themselves. The Rassemblement congolais
pour
la
démocratie-Mouvement
de
libération
(RCD-ML) is in Kisangani and Goma, and the
Mouvement de libération (MLC) is in Equateur
province. I would just like a bit more detail on the
actual state of relations now — what kind of help is
being provided, what kind of obstructions are there,
where the Coordinator ad interim feels the greatest
insecurities are, and what we are going to need to talk
about when we look at the primary tasks for the
deployment of MONUC, if and when we come to that.
We would also be interested to know whether the
agencies are developing with the NGOs a coordinated
aid strategy that responds to the humanitarian situation
and where the lacunae are in that particular process, if

any, or whether that coordination picture is also quite
good. Generally, we would like also to know what the
current obstacles are to humanitarian access, which we
ought to be addressing at the same time as we look at
MONUC rollover.
I think that it is quite important to use this
briefing to try to specify the actual points which may
be remediable with a huge amount of effort and a bit of
goodwill, to be differentiated from those where it is
fairly hopeless to expect any real improvement in the
near future.
My delegation takes note of what the Coordinator
ad interim said about funding, in particular the
regrettable focus only on food as opposed to non-food
aid. I think part of the reason may be the sense of
helplessness over the Congo, that one does not invest
one’s aid into those things that need programmes
extending over time, whereas one does invest in food,
because food is a daily need that has to be delivered
into mouths day by day, and it can go on as best as one
can handle it. But disease, transport and other aspects
that the Coordinator ad interim has mentioned are
programmes for which confidence, stability and
continuity are required, and that may be part of the
problem. But we have taken note of where the
deficiencies are.
With those points and questions and in more
detail, I am looking forward to some further remarks
from the Coordinator ad interim later. I think I will stop
there.
Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
Canada is deeply concerned by the serious
humanitarian crisis resulting from the continuation of
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The conflict has caused unspeakable suffering to the
population of the Congo as well as enormous loss of
life and material damage. The fact that this situation
has lasted now for more than three years is intolerable.
At the present time, the major obstacle to
humanitarian access for those people who need
emergency assistance is the non-implementation of the
Lusaka Agreement by the parties and the lack of zeal
of those parties in cooperating with the United Nations.
(spoke in English)
We join our colleagues in condemning all
violations of the ceasefire. We urge all parties
concerned in the region to cease immediately military

7

S/PV.4237

activity and to implement fully the Lusaka Agreement
and the Kampala disengagement plan. We call on all
parties to the conflict, and in particular the
Government, to respect their obligations, particularly in
ensuring the safety and freedom of movement of
United Nations and humanitarian personnel. We join
the United Kingdom in saluting those heroes who are
working in the Congo on our behalf in the most
difficult of conditions.
We encourage all United Nations agencies and
humanitarian organizations present in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to work closely together in
developing an effective and holistic strategy to address
the urgent humanitarian needs of civilians.
Canada condemns all violations of human rights
and humanitarian law committed in both Government
and rebel-controlled areas. Those responsible for
violations, including serious crimes such as crimes of
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and
other grave violations of humanitarian law, must be
brought to justice. There cannot be peace or
reconciliation if we do not put an end to the culture of
impunity.
On a further issue, Canada is greatly concerned
with continuing official infringement on the right of
free expression, in violation of the Lusaka Agreement.
We are particularly concerned by the recent
announcement by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that “to criticize the State is to
be an enemy of the State”. Freedom of opinion and
expression are essential as peace- and confidencebuilding measures.
(spoke in French)
We have been informed that, apparently, certain
non-governmental organizations believe that a
significant deployment of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) might further hamper
humanitarian access by provoking hostile forces to
oppose any international presence.
We would be grateful to the Bureau of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for
sharing their assessment of this view.
Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this open briefing, and I should like also to thank
Ms. Carolyn McAskie for the important information

8

that she has shared with us, both orally and in writing,
on the serious humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
The humanitarian situation and the political and
military situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo cannot be considered separately, because the
former is, to a great extent, the consequence of the
latter. The current military situation, characterized by
the absence of peace and the absence of widespread
warfare but marked by local conflicts, implies a lack of
solutions to problems of, among others, refugees,
massive displacements of populations, chronic
malnutrition, health and educational opportunities for
young people. In sum, the humanitarian crisis resulting
from armed conflict is gradually eroding the living
conditions of the majority of the Congolese population,
relegating one of the African States richest in natural
resources to position 152 out of a total of 174 countries
on the human development index.
Armed conflict also affects the conditions in
which the humanitarian organizations carry out their
work. They are operating in a security context that is
different from the one the parties agreed to respect in
July 1999, when they signed the Lusaka Agreement.
The parties have repeatedly violated the ceasefire and
the humanitarian clauses of the Agreement. The
humanitarian organizations have faced limited access
to vulnerable populations, restrictions on their freedom
of movement and serious security risks in Governmentadministered areas as well as in areas under the control
of the three main rebel movements. Of a total of
1,800,000
internally
displaced
persons,
the
humanitarian agencies have access to only one-sixth of
that number because of widespread insecurity. The
parties must assume responsibility for the human costs
of limiting access to vulnerable groups. In this context,
Argentina wishes to reiterate once again the importance
of respecting the principles stemming from the 1994
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel.
I also wish to refer to the violations of
international law occurring in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, particularly in the eastern part of the
country. There have been crimes against humanity
there. Suffice it to recall the massacres of the civilian
population in Kalimbo, Katogata and LusendaLumimba. These massacres cannot go unpunished. The
necessary mechanisms to carry out an international

S/PV.4237

investigation must be created and those responsible
must be brought to justice.

having taken the initiative of organizing this Security
Council meeting on this vital question.

Humanitarian assistance is an essential palliative
in a crisis situation, but it is no substitute for the
fundamental political decisions that the parties to the
conflict must take. In our judgement, these decisions
go beyond full compliance and good faith with the
Lusaka Agreement, involving respect for the territorial
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the principle of non-intervention in its internal matters,
security guarantees for all the States of the region,
particularly Rwanda and Uganda, and the withdrawal
of all foreign forces from the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We also believe that the deployment of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), when
there are reasonable security conditions — and I say
“reasonable”, not “ideal” — will be a factor of stability
that will contribute to the substantive resolution of the
matter, as well as facilitating the work of the
humanitarian organizations.

Our debate today is an important stage in the
work being done by the Security Council this month on
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It clarifies our reflection on the international
community’s attitude to the conflict in this country. In
two weeks we will be making decisions on United
Nations action in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and the Council must be in a position to
express a view when it has examined all the aspects of
the question.

In conclusion, permit me to make two brief
observations.
The political and military situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot be analysed
in isolation; rather it should be seen in the context of
the situation in the Great Lakes region. We believe that
the humanitarian situation must be analysed with the
same regional approach.
We also believe that long-term stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot be seen
separately from the strengthening of democratic
institutions and the promotion of sustainable
development throughout the region; that is, a regional,
comprehensive approach is needed. For these reasons,
we wish to reiterate once again our support for
France’s idea of convening an international conference
on the Great Lakes region when the appropriate
political conditions exist.
Mr. Levitte (France)(spoke in French): I wish to
thank Ms. Carolyn McAskie, acting Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for her accurate and detailed briefing,
which is very useful for our Security Council because
it sheds light on a misunderstood or little known aspect
of the tragedy being experienced by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo: the humanitarian situation.
Therefore, I also wish to thank you, Mr. President, for

The humanitarian aspects are, in our view,
essential. As Ms. McAskie has rightly emphasized, the
situation is tragic. In addition to Ms. McAskie’s
briefing, we also bear in mind the information provided
by the Special Rapporteur on human rights in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Garretón,
whom the Security Council heard in October during an
“Arria” meeting. Mr. Garretón gave a briefing on
human rights violations throughout the country,
emphasizing in particular that the most basic right, the
right to life, was scorned, particularly in the eastern
part of the country. Mr. Garretón’s report lists of
massacres of the civilian population and inter-ethnic
confrontations in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
We also bear in mind information transmitted to
us by non-governmental organizations. I refer
particularly to the report issued in June 2000 by the
American
organization
International
Rescue
Committee, which estimated that from August 1998 to
May 2000 the conflict had caused the death of more
than 1.7 million persons in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo alone.
I do not mean to join in a battle of figures here,
but two essential points must be recalled: first, the
victims of conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo number in the hundreds of thousands,
unfortunately; and, secondly, the deaths result, on the
one hand, from the violence committed against
civilians and the resultant displacement of populations,
and, on the other hand, from the interruption of
assistance caused by instability in the area and the lack
of access to these populations. Thus the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has tragic
humanitarian consequences.

9

S/PV.4237

We must be aware that this crisis is political and
military. The current situation is deeply rooted in the
tragedies of the Great Lakes region over the last
decade. The immediate cause of the conflict is the
crisis that was triggered in August 1998. We must
therefore give the Congolese humanitarian support to
help them meet their immediate needs, and in this spirit
we encourage the actions of the United Nations
agencies, the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) and non-governmental organizations.
As part of the European Union, France is also
providing assistance through the European Community
Humanitarian Office (ECHO), which this year has set
up a programme to provide health care and assistance
to displaced persons.

Such a civilian observer component, as distinct from
military observers, could perhaps play a useful role
within MONUC in assessing the situation and ensuring
liaison with civil society.
Naturally, the conditions for deploying such
civilian observers — in particular with regard to
security — would have to be examined carefully.
I listened to the comments of our colleague from
Canada, and I, too, would like to hear Ms. McAskie’s
opinion on that matter. I would also be interested to
hear her thoughts about my comments regarding the
possibility of deploying civilian observers within
MONUC in order to play a supplementary role.

However, we must also contribute to a political
settlement of this conflict. That is the responsibility of
our Council. Efforts to implement the Lusaka
Agreement and the relevant Security Council
resolutions have encountered many difficulties, but the
United Nations must continue to pursue those efforts.
I should like to say once again what I have often said
during our debates: we must not give up. How could
we give up, after hearing Carolyn McAskie’s
comments?

Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): My delegation thanks
the acting Emergency Relief Coordinator, Ms. Carolyn
McAskie, for her briefing on the deplorable
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is
the most mineral-rich country in Africa, yet it has the
worst humanitarian situation in the world. Indeed,
Ms. McAskie’s briefing only confirmed our worst fears
about the immense suffering of the Congolese people
as a result of the senseless war of aggression. My
delegation strongly deplores the current state of affairs
and the targeting of civilians.

In the coming days, the Security Council will be
called upon to decide, on the basis of recommendations
to be made by the Secretary-General, what support
MONUC can provide to the settlement process. France
believes that we must continue to pursue our efforts.
Here, I would like to endorse a point that our Argentine
colleague has just forcefully underlined: MONUC must
retain the resources envisaged for it last February so
that it can fully play its role, and these resources must
be effectively deployed.

Today’s meeting affords us an opportunity to
reflect on the fate of those Congolese women, men and
children who continue to be uprooted from their homes
or who are killed and maimed, in addition to the
women who are rape victims. In our view, our
objective should be to address their situation by
helping to put an end to this suffering. In order to do
that, we must address the causes of the situation, which
is the aggression of Uganda and Rwanda against the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In the light of our debate today, we will have to
consider whether MONUC can also play a role in
better evaluating the humanitarian situation and
thereby contribute to the assistance effort. In this
regard, we believe that it would be desirable to
strengthen the civilian component of the United
Nations mission. In several conflict situations, the
United Nations has incorporated a civilian component
into its on-site missions, particularly in missions with
both a civilian and military aspect, such as was the case
until 1998 in Angola. It is also the case in Afghanistan
at present, where there are civilian observers as part of
the United Nations Special Mission in Afghanistan.

We all have a responsibility to ensure that
Congolese civilians live in dignity, like those in any
other nation on earth. We are particularly concerned
about the civilians in the eastern part of the country.
The report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
shows a clear but sad picture of the humanitarian
situation, especially in the eastern part of the country.
At a closed briefing for Council members last month,
Mr. Garretón, in explaining the human rights and
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, stated that in the east of the country there is
no right to life. In our view, that sums it all up.

10

S/PV.4237

Violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, in particular the deliberate targeting
of civilians and their communities in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, must stop. The
Security Council must do more to end the culture of
impunity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
especially in the occupied eastern part of the country.
The war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has implications beyond that country’s borders. It has
devastating implications beyond the central African
region. This is evident from the briefing we just heard:
there are thousands of internally displaced persons, and
so many neighbouring countries are affected by the
refugee flow. These generous neighbours have to carry
an extra burden of hosting thousands of refugees. Some
of them are least developed countries, while others
have just emerged from conflict themselves and are
making efforts to reconstruct their economies. Worse
still, the situation could have serious repercussions for
the rest of the African continent.
As I listened to the briefing by Ms. McAskie,
I could not help but recall the briefings we heard from
the women of Sierra Leone and Somalia during the
preparations for the meeting on women and peace and
security. Their experience could surely apply to any
women and children in a conflict situation. The raging
war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo thus
vividly underscores the fact that women remain the
worst affected of all groups in the avoidable conflict in
that country.
Apart from being killed, wounded or maimed
permanently, women are subjected to all other forms of
atrocities of war. Soldiers prey upon them, they are
humiliated by being raped, sometimes in the presence
of their husbands or children, and as a result of being
raped they have a high risk of contracting HIV/AIDS.
The burying alive of 15 Congolese women in South
Kivu is still fresh in our memories. We are still
awaiting and demand the findings of the investigation
into this barbaric act.
The international community — and in particular
the Security Council, which has the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security — cannot and should not allow continued
mass displacements and major breaches of international
humanitarian law to persist with impunity. The
perpetrators of such crimes should be held responsible
for their actions.

I should here like to emphasize the
complementarity of action by the Security Council and
by the humanitarian agencies in the field. It is clear
that one cannot meet humanitarian needs while failing
to address what caused the needs in the first place. In
her last briefing to the Security Council, the outgoing
High Commissioner for Refugees, Mrs. Sadako Ogata,
made concrete and forward-looking proposals to this
end. We in the Council must therefore exercise the
necessary political will to address the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo if the humanitarian
agencies are to effectively bring long-term relief to the
suffering masses.
The ongoing fighting is a great source of concern
to my delegation, as it is not only a violation of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, but is contributing
immensely to the displacement of innocent civilians.
Clearly, the parties engaged in the current fighting are
taking advantage of the minimal presence of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in the country. We
have no doubt that the presence of MONUC on the
ground will act as a deterrent, that it will improve the
humanitarian situation and thus prevent further loss of
life, displacement and misery. We are heartened by the
outcome of the second Maputo summit. It is our hope
that the United Nations, and especially the Security
Council, will not be found wanting again this time.
My delegation is grateful to all humanitarian
agencies and organizations that are providing muchneeded relief under difficult conditions. The safety and
security of humanitarian workers providing that muchneeded relief are therefore paramount. We are also
grateful to those donor countries that have been
providing resources for assistance to the Congolese
refugees and internally displaced persons. We also wish
to express our thanks to the European Union for its
continued support for the needy people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Finally, we call on the donor community to
respond generously to the forthcoming inter-agency
appeal for 2001.
It would be remiss of me to end my remarks
without expressing my delegation’s thanks and
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for having
scheduled this meeting. Since 1960, when that gallant
son of Africa, Patrice Lumumba, was assassinated, the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo have

11

S/PV.4237

never enjoyed social and economic prosperity. For 37
years, they lived under the rule of the most brutal
dictator, only to find themselves and their country
being attacked and besieged. The Security Council
must not and cannot abandon the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The illegal
exploitation of the mineral wealth of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should not take precedence over
the dignity and humanity of the Congolese people.
The United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, must stay the course, fulfilling its
responsibility in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): I
commend your vision, Mr. President, in having this
important meeting today. As we discussed this morning
regarding East Timor, when other crises divert our
attention we tend to let fall by the wayside some of the
urgent crises before us, and I commend your vision in
scheduling this meeting today despite the other
pressing business that is occurring around the world.
I would also like to pay a special tribute to
Carolyn McAskie for her leadership on this issue, as
well as for her briefing on the humanitarian situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo — as depressing
as that situation is. As the Emergency Relief
Coordinator for the United Nations she has a somewhat
Sisyphean task in trying to address all these issues. We
admire her tenacity in continuing to address what is by
all accounts a very depressing and discouraging
situation.
After looking at the situation and listening to Ms.
McAskie’s briefing and reviewing the notes that she
passed out, I think that the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo demands the continued attention
of the international community and continued pressing
by the international community on all sides to do more.
The people about whose suffering we have just heard
certainly deserve no less. I think one has to admit that
the Governments of the region — of the Congo, and
particularly of Rwanda, Uganda and, obviously, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as well as the various armed Congolese and other
foreign rebel factions — all share responsibility for this
humanitarian crisis that we have just heard described
here today. I hope that if there is one unequivocal and
clear message to both the Governments involved and
the rebel sides involved it is that they should all hear

12

today’s programme of the international community and
recommit themselves to the search for peace. To do
otherwise is simply unconscionable.
It is important to remember that this crisis, this
disaster — and I think that by all accounts it has to be
termed a disaster on every human level — is entirely
man-made, and that means it can be entirely solved by
men, and of course by women as well. As Ambassador
Levitte pointed out earlier, we do not have the choice
of giving up. We must continue to address this issue. If
one looks at this man-made disaster, the only
conclusion one can draw is a broad indictment of those
who seek to win or retain power by the force of arms.
The withdrawal of foreign forces from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1304 (2000) and, let us not
forget, the Lusaka Agreement, which all these parties
signed, would greatly benefit the human rights and
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Governments have to be held accountable
to their people and responsive to their needs. It is our
view that responsive Governments resting on broad
bases of support are necessary for the resolution of
humanitarian crises.
The solution to the crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo involves political will,
resources and time. Thus far the Governments involved
have failed to demonstrate the political will, the
international community has failed to marshal the
necessary resources, and the lack of a functioning
peace agreement has meant that the time for recovery
continues to be delayed.
A solution will also require combating the deadly
combination of three factors that have brought the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to its present state.
These three factors are foreign aggression, internal
armed rebellion and unaccountable Government. We
must work together to address all three.
During our January 2000 Security Council
presidency, Ambassador Holbrooke, working with our
Ambassadors in the region, asked Presidents Museveni
and Kabila to cooperate in the reopening of the Congo
River to civilian traffic. At the time, that proposal was
not accepted, but after 11 months it deserves to be
reconsidered. We call on Presidents Kabila and
Museveni, as well as Movement for the Liberation of
the Congo (MLC) leader Jean-Pierre Bemba, to work
together to implement a viable ceasefire that should

S/PV.4237

include the reopening of the Congo River to civilian
traffic.

Congolese people will be able to take care of
themselves.

The well-being of the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as well as their neighbours in
the Republic of the Congo and the Central African
Republic, is at stake. We make this appeal as part of a
wider call on all parties to facilitate the operations of
the humanitarian community, bearing in mind the fact
that the Congo River and its tributaries are an essential
lifeline for most of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

In closing, we believe that achieving the political
objectives of a viable framework for peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its region
remains the key to resolving the humanitarian crisis.
Until we achieve a peaceful settlement, we must all
work together to support the life-saving work of OCHA
and other organizations that are trying to protect the
innocent victims of this conflict.

This Council is united in its support and
admiration for the work of the humanitarian agencies
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Under
difficult conditions, at great expense and often at
considerable risk, the men and women of the United
Nations and of the non-governmental organization and
private voluntary organization communities have tried
to alleviate the suffering caused by callous political
leaders. We know that the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) is working here in
New York and in Geneva to improve the humanitarian
assistance to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We support those efforts, under the overall authority of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Kamel Morjane, and we will continue our own
engagement on behalf of the innocent victims in this
conflict.
Neither the United Nations nor any of its Member
States can impose a solution to the crisis. A solution
must come from the political leadership and be
respected by all of the combatants, foreign and
Congolese. The point of humanitarian assistance is to
sustain vulnerable civilian life until such time as the
political leadership can reach agreement. Until the
parties can do so, we must continue to support the
humanitarian community in its efforts. Those who
facilitate and protect the entry of humanitarian
assistance are to be commended; those who impede or
divert such aid must be condemned for their actions.
The courageous work of Carolyn McAskie and
OCHA and the other humanitarian organizations does
not detract from the urgency of our own tasks. Rather,
it reminds us that the sooner we see the withdrawal of
foreign forces, the transformation of armed
insurgencies into armed political parties and the
creation of accountable government institutions in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the sooner the

Mr. Chen Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. McAskie of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
for her presentation.
We are now in the third year since the outbreak of
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which has left millions of people displaced and
homeless. Many refugees from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have fled abroad. At the same
time, large numbers of foreign refugees have entered
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
humanitarian situation in that country and the region as
a whole has further deteriorated. We are very
concerned.
The Chinese delegation condemns atrocities
against civilians. We call upon the parties concerned to
truly comply with the relevant agreements and Security
Council resolutions, cease hostilities promptly and find
a political solution to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The continuation of the conflict
has become the direct cause of the current
humanitarian crisis in that country. Only by resolving
the conflict can it be possible to fundamentally ease the
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
For some time now, regional summits on the
question of the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
been held one after another. We encourage this
momentum in the search for a political solution to the
conflict. We also hope that the parties to the conflict
will implement the commitments they have made in
earnest. We are of the view that the United Nations,
including the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, should continue
to work for the peace process in that country.
We appreciate the efforts made by humanitarian
personnel under difficult conditions to improve the

13

S/PV.4237

humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We hope their safety and security will be
ensured.

establishment of conditions for the deployment of the
second phase of the United Nations peacekeeping
operation.

In conclusion, the Chinese delegation will
continue to support the relevant work of the United
Nations, and OCHA in particular.

Mr. Tekaya (Tunisia) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Tunisian delegation, I would like to start
by thanking you, Mr. President, for having convened
this important meeting and for giving us an opportunity
to hear the presentation by Ms. Carolyn McAskie on
the humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. I should also like to thank Ms. McAskie
for her very useful presentation, which reflects both the
scope of the humanitarian tragedy in the country and
the untiring efforts deployed by the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners to provide assistance to the
people affected.

Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to associate ourselves with the
words of gratitude to Ms. McAskie for her very
informative and substantive briefing. Unfortunately,
this briefing reaffirms our own assessment of the
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo as being close to catastrophic. We have a
very high assessment of the efforts of the international
community aimed at not allowing a further
deterioration of the humanitarian situation. At the same
time, it is obvious that a long-term and stable solution
to the humanitarian crisis is possible only through a
political settlement of the conflict.
Our position of principle in favour of a speedy
political settlement in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, on the basis of the Lusaka Agreement, remains
unchanged. We believe that, through the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1304 (2000), the Council
sent the parties to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo an appropriate signal
concerning the need for an immediate cessation of
hostilities, the withdrawal of foreign troops from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
implementation of the commitments undertaken in
accordance with the Lusaka Agreement without
disruptions or backsliding.
Based on the lack of any alternative to a political
solution in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
consider the long-term cooperation of all parties to the
conflict with the United Nations Mission, in
accordance with the decisions of the Security Council,
to be of the utmost importance, as well as the
establishment of the inter-Congolese national dialogue,
with the participation of all political forces of the
country, in accordance with the Lusaka Agreement.
Now it is important to refrain from rash decisions
and, with coordination between the United Nations, the
Organization of African Unity, the Southern African
Development Community and the States involved in
the conflict, to continue to consider the most suitable
forms of United Nations assistance to the peace process
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including the

14

Indeed, the war that is ravaging the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has shattered the life of the
Congolese and has had disastrous consequences for a
large part of the population. Its effects have struck
harshly the economy of the country and have taken a
heavy social toll. We can see the effects of the crisis in
the daily life of the Congolese people. The Security
Council mission that went to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo last May was able to assess the breadth of
the crisis, which has worsened since then, and forecasts
of what will happen next are of great concern. All of
the regions of the country are suffering the
consequences of the war, but the situation in the
eastern part of the country remains particularly
volatile.
The humanitarian crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is marked by an increasing
number of displaced persons, approaching 2 million,
and they are increasingly vulnerable. Moreover,
the movement of Congolese refugees towards
neighbouring
countries
has
created
worrying
humanitarian, health and security situations. In
addition, tens of thousands of refugees from
neighbouring countries have flowed into the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo is also facing a serious health
crisis because of the spread of various diseases to
which the refugees and displaced persons are
particularly vulnerable, and also because of the
weakness of the health infrastructure of the country.
Food shortages have become serious. Education is also
harshly affected by war.

S/PV.4237

The humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo thus poses many challenges for
the international community and humanitarian
organizations. The United Nations and humanitarian
organizations play an essential role in saving the lives
of those affected by war in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in meeting the humanitarian needs of
vulnerable populations. However, there are many
obstacles in their way, making it difficult to accomplish
their mission.
Today’s meeting, which once again confirms the
extent of the humanitarian crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, coincides with the launching by
the United Nations, working with its humanitarian
partners, of the joint humanitarian action plan for 2001
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This should
mobilize the international community to increase its
assistance to the Congolese people and its support for
the efforts to establish peace and reconciliation in the
country and in the region.
It is necessary to increase humanitarian aid in
order to provide relief to the affected populations. We
agree, however, that the effect on the general situation
in the country will be limited if no progress is made in
the peace process.
Last January, the parties to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement reaffirmed here before the Security Council
their support for the Agreement, and they undertook to
respect its terms. Since then we have seen successive
developments that have jeopardized the peace process,
and the Security Council has stated its views on these
developments. In addition, the long-awaited complete
deployment of phase two of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), which gave rise to much hope,
has not yet taken place, and the foreign forces have not
yet withdrawn from Congolese territory as demanded
by the Security Council in its resolutions. In the
meantime, the humanitarian, economic and social
situation of the Congolese people has been constantly
deteriorating.
We have followed with interest the numerous
commendable political and diplomatic efforts and
initiatives that have been undertaken in recent weeks to
save the peace process. The declarations of goodwill
must now lead to action on the ground. Today, again,
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement is going through a
difficult phase and requires new impetus. The

discussion in the Security Council of the next report of
the Secretary-General on MONUC will provide us with
an opportunity to take stock of the situation, to confirm
the commitment of the United Nations and to envisage
the decisions to be taken.
Moreover, in the light of the close relationship
between the problems shaking the Great Lakes region
and the peace process under way, the adoption of a
comprehensive approach to address these problems in a
regional context is becoming increasingly necessary.
Mr. Ward (Jamaica): My delegation thanks
Ms. McAskie for briefing us on the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
also thank you, Mr. President, for scheduling this
humanitarian briefing on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
The prevailing political deadlock in the peace
process makes it easy to overlook the war’s tragic
consequences on the population. However, we need to
retain our focus on the human dimensions of the
conflict, and perhaps this debate will galvanize the
warring parties to adopt a constructive attitude towards
the resolution of the conflict.
My delegation is deeply concerned by the grave
humanitarian situation prevailing in the country.
The population affected by the conflict — some
16 million — and the over 2 million internally
displaced persons and refugees in neighbouring States
exceed the populations of many of the Member States
of the United Nations.
We have been told that the magnitude of the crisis
and the effect of the conflict on the delivery of aid have
resulted in minimal humanitarian assistance being
provided to populations in need. Most have to fend for
themselves in a country in the grips of war with few or
no possibilities for economic activity. This situation
has the making of an immense human tragedy.
We are encouraged by the promise of President
Kabila of the Democratic Republic of the Congo that
United Nations observers will be given freedom of
movement to oversee the fragile situation. We look
forward to the implementation of this promise, and we
expect that this same freedom of movement will be
guaranteed by other forces involved in the conflict, not
just for the observers of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of

15

S/PV.4237

the Congo (MONUC) but also for humanitarian
personnel operating in the field.
Tens of thousands of Congolese citizens have
sought refuge in neighbouring States. At the same time,
over 330,000 refugees have fled to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The extension of regional
conflicts to the soil of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo makes the security of these foreign refugees and
the 2 million internally displaced persons tenuous.
These facts alone support the idea of a conference on
the Great Lakes region and a comprehensive approach
to the conflicts in the region as a whole.
Within the Democratic Republic of the Congo
itself, the systematic targeting of civilian groups by the
dozens of ethnic groups, armed rebels and soldiers
from up to nine different armies has led to human
rights abuses by all sides in this conflict. The cases of
extrajudicial, summary and arbitrary arrests, detentions
and executions are cause for great concern and must
not go unnoticed or unpunished. The culture of
impunity must be erased from the face of the earth.
My delegation commends the United Nations
humanitarian workers in the field for the tremendous
work they have been doing under very trying
circumstances. We are pleased to learn of the close and
collaborative efforts of the United Nations agencies,
the
Humanitarian
Coordinator
and
MONUC
humanitarian liaison officers and the streamlining of
the existing coordination arrangements between the
various relief agencies and MONUC. This has already
resulted in an improved mechanism for the delivery of
aid to those most in need.
My delegation is supportive of any action that
would further enhance the efficiency of humanitarian
agencies to deliver assistance as well as build
confidence in the United Nations agencies and
personnel. We note that these objectives could be
achieved by enhancing MONUC’s air capacity and by
making that capacity accessible to all humanitarian
agencies in order to reach the most remote parts of the
country. Accordingly, we urge the international
community to respond to the United Nations
consolidated appeal for the year 2000, as well as that
for 2001, which is to be announced shortly. It is
understood that the 2001 consolidated appeal will have
as two of its important components the support of
community-based self-recovery initiatives, as well as
the promotion of free circulation of persons and goods

16

across the front lines. These are crucial elements for
the eventual return to peace, when former enemies will
have to resume normal contact with people who were
once their mortal enemies.
Despite the successes of the humanitarian
programmes, the only way to permanently alleviate the
humanitarian situation is to finalize a comprehensive
peace agreement. We are disappointed that the Lusaka
Agreement has not resulted in overcoming the
obstacles to a final peace. We recognize, however, the
continued goodwill and commitment on the part of a
number of countries in the region to address the
situation and advance the peace process. We therefore
welcome the news from Maputo that ministers from six
Governments and two rebel factions plan to meet on
Wednesday to work out details of a revived peace plan
to allow United Nations monitors to supervise the
ceasefire in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
trust that the process of peace will prevail. The
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the other concerned parties must demonstrate a
commitment to the peace process.
The humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is yet another stark reminder of
the human toll that results from conflict. It reinforces
our own views that those who bear primary
responsibility for making peace and fail to do so must
accept responsibility for the continued suffering of the
civilian population under the control of their guns. We
have heard every possible reason for the failure of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, and in our view none of
these reasons justifies the human suffering described
by Ms. McAskie in her statement to the Council today.
What is even worse — indeed, reprehensible — are the
reports that all parties to the conflict fail to provide
secure access to humanitarian aid for those in need in
areas under their control. Leaders who perpetuate or
ignore wanton human suffering of the kind existing in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo will be judged
by the bar of history and hopefully by their fellow
countrymen and countrywomen.
Mr. Mohammad Kamal (Malaysia): My
delegation joins previous speakers in welcoming Ms.
Carolyn McAskie and in thanking her for the
comprehensive and lucid briefing on the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as
well the useful document that has been given to us.

S/PV.4237

We are distressed at the continued precarious
security situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the potential of that situation to further
undermine the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement and Security Council resolution 1291
(2000). The national armies and numerous armed
groups that are involved in the war between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda,
Rwanda and Burundi have virtually devastated the
country.
The entire socio-economic fabric of the country
has been ruined. Infrastructure is non-existent, and
areas that used to produce surplus food are no longer
producing. Extreme poverty, which existed even prior
to the current situation, has now reached catastrophic
levels. The economic and political interests of all those
present in the sovereign territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have led to the effective
partitioning of the country, the exploitation of its
wealth and enormous ecological damage.
The saddest part of it all is that the Congolese
people are aware of this situation but are helpless to
prevent it. The worsening humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly the
increased insecurity in war zones, make access to the
vulnerable populations very dangerous and difficult for
the humanitarian aid workers. My delegation believes
that it is critical for the parties to respect their ceasefire
agreements and ensure the safe and unhindered access
of humanitarian agencies to all areas of the country.
Many areas in the country remain inaccessible to
humanitarian personnel due to the prevailing untenable
security conditions. All parties to the conflict have an
obligation to ensure the safety, security and freedom of
movement of humanitarian personnel and unhindered
access to all affected populations.
We have heard in the briefing of Ms. McAskie
just now that there are about 2 million internally
displaced persons in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, many of whom are languishing without any
assistance. The vast majority of these internally
displaced persons are from the occupied territories in
the eastern part of the country, principally as a result of
clashes between Rwandan and Ugandan troops in
Kisangani, the intensified hostilities in the Kivus and
the current fighting in the northern Equateur province.
The increasing number of Congolese refugees has
serious ramifications, not only for the Democratic

Republic of the Congo but also for the neighbouring
countries, with some 300,000 people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo now refugees in the Republic of
the Congo, Zambia, the Central African Republic and
Tanzania, as stated by Ms. McAskie just now.
My delegation is cognizant of the difficulties and
complexities that must be overcome in order to achieve
durable peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Nevertheless, no matter how complex and
difficult it might appear to find solutions, the suffering
of the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
compels us to make our best efforts to put an end to
their misery. We agree that it is vital to create the
conditions for lasting peace based on the full
implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.
The elements of such a peace must necessarily include
the questions of security of the borders of the States
concerned, their sovereignty and territorial integrity
and their full use of their natural resources. In this
regard, we support the call for the immediate cessation
of hostilities and reaffirm support for the unity,
stability, independence and territorial integrity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
At the same time, the withdrawal of all foreign
forces from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
must take place in accordance with the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement and as called for in resolution
1304 (2000). It is indeed regrettable that the parties
continue to ignore the pronouncements of the Security
Council and the international community.
It is for this reason that Malaysia believes that the
timely deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
essential to the resolution of the conflict. Having
listened carefully to the views of our colleagues here
today, particularly those from the African continent,
the Council should accelerate its deployment of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and implement
faithfully and speedily resolution 1291 (2000). This is
crucial in the current circumstances and will be a
critical test of the Council’s political will and
determination. We believe that we must go forward
from here, determined to make a difference in
promoting peace and security for the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Finally, we wish to pay tribute to and encourage
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian

17

S/PV.4237

Affairs, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the World Food
Programme and the non-governmental humanitarian
organizations involved in caring for and facilitating the
repatriation of refugees to continue their noble work
despite the difficulties encountered.
Mr. Kassé (Mali) (spoke in French): I join other
speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on having
convened this public information meeting on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in thanking Ms. McAskie, through you, for her most
edifying briefing.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
country of continental scope. Its stability has
repercussions for that of the entire African continent
and directly affects that of its nine neighbouring
countries. The re-establishment of regional peace and
stability will require the restoration of respect for the
fundamental principles clearly reaffirmed by the
signatories to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, chief
among which is that of the unity and territorial
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the inviolability of its borders. At the same time, the
neighbours of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
also have the right to live in security within defined
borders, free from destabilizing activities launched
from Congolese territory.
The other factor essential to the stability of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is national
reconciliation. A third, additional factor for stability is
the humanitarian situation, because, as members are
aware, humanitarian crises often give rise to conflicts,
but just as invariably conflicts give rise to
humanitarian crises.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs has just painted a picture of the deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. That picture could just as easily depict
the human rights situation, as the statistics, refugees
and displaced persons attest. The poverty, destitution,
disease and famine rampant in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo constitute in and of themselves
violations of human rights.
This situation is a source of deep concern to my
delegation, for the heavy price being paid by civilians
in this conflict is unacceptable. It is equally intolerable
that the intense fighting is hindering the access of
humanitarian agencies to many regions, particularly the

18

eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, depriving
vulnerable populations of the precious assistance they
so sorely need.
It has been stressed innumerable times by the
Council that humanitarian problems must receive direct
attention, not only during the negotiation of peace
agreements, but also from peacekeeping operations.
This would indeed guarantee the prior planning
required by the humanitarian elements of peacekeeping
operations and allow the immediate mobilization of
necessary resources. Moreover, the success of a peace
agreement often depends, at least in part, on
humanitarian intervention, particularly that which
enables the return and reintegration of refugees and
displaced
persons,
assistance
to
demobilized
combatants, the restoration of sources of income for
war-affected persons and help for ex-combatants in
finding new means of subsistence. My delegation
reminds the signatories to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement that this instrument has numerous
provisions for the simultaneous protection of civilians
and their human rights, as well as for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance via humanitarian corridors and
the establishment of conditions conducive to providing
emergency assistance to displaced persons, refugees
and others.
Furthermore, similar provisions are to be found in
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. All the Council’s
resolutions must be accorded the same degree of
importance and must therefore be implemented without
discrimination or procrastination. In this respect, all the
signatories
and
the
international
community,
collectively or individually, must assume their
responsibilities, for, more than ever before, the gravity
of the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its disastrous humanitarian consequences
require every effort to be made to relaunch the peace
process.
Today’s meeting affords my delegation the
opportunity to pay tribute to and thank the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the World
Food Programme, the United Nations Children’s Fund,
the World Health Organization, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, all
the
humanitarian
agencies
and
the
many
non-governmental organizations that are actively
seeking to address the catastrophic humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We

S/PV.4237

also thank the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) for
its very positive role in supporting and assisting
humanitarian operations. This humanitarian dimension
of MONUC should be encouraged and developed.
In conclusion, Mali remains convinced that
United Nations coordination, backed by a fully
deployed MONUC — and I stress “fully deployed” —
will allow us to improve the effectiveness of the
humanitarian assistance that the Democratic Republic
of the Congo so sorely needs today.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.
The Netherlands, too, would like to thank
Ms. McAskie for her straightforward briefing,
depressing as it was. Apart from the misery heaped
upon the Congolese people themselves, reference was
made around this table today to the appalling
circumstances in which humanitarian workers have to
do their work in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the very acute dangers they face in this context. As
recently as two weeks ago, we heard the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees make the
case for improving the safety and security of United
Nations personnel, especially in situations of conflict,
in the face of the increasing risks they encounter in the
field.
Of course, the Council addressed this issue as
early as February this year and, on that occasion,
issued a presidential statement. Given the present
situation of an apparent deterioration in the security
conditions of United Nations personnel, however,
I intend to circulate, as a Security Council document,
the petition that I received from the Coordinating
Committee for International Staff Unions and
Associations of the United Nations System and the
Federation
of
International
Civil
Servants’
Associations, which appeal to the Security Council to
look into this issue further.
Switching to another subject, it is difficult to
respond to a humanitarian briefing without talking
politics. Some of the statements we have heard in this
meeting bear this out. My delegation would like to
make just one observation of a political nature.
Ever since the Security Council was invited to
endorse the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, some
delegations on this Council have tried to give our

involvement a slightly different slant by, on the one
hand, introducing the distinction between invited and
uninvited troops — also characterized as “allies” and
“aggressors” — and, on the other, glossing over
President Kabila’s reluctance to implement the national
dialogue.
It goes without saying that every delegation is
perfectly entitled to try and effect that adjustment, but
we would like to point out that if the distinction
between invited and uninvited troops had been made in
Lusaka, and if the national dialogue had been deleted
from the draft text, the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement
would simply not have been concluded. Delegations
that insist on these adjustments must therefore know
what they are doing. It may be true that Lusaka
requires an update. There seems to have been a
consensus from the outset that the task Lusaka allotted
to the United Nations by way of tracking down
members of the former Rwandan armed forces and
Interahamwe was hardly realistic. But an update of
Lusaka is, of course, conceivable only if it is
acceptable to at least all the signatory States.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I call on Ms. McAskie to respond to comments
and questions from members of the Council.
Ms. McAskie: First of all, I wish, through you,
Mr. President, to thank the members of the Council for
their very sincere expressions of concern and support
for the humanitarian effort, in terms of support for the
victims, support for the humanitarian agencies working
on the ground, and support for the coordinating role of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. I find particularly gratifying the growing
synergy between humanitarian and political discussions
which has increasingly characterized the work of the
Security Council.
Let me touch first on some points raised by the
representative of the United Kingdom, who made some
comments about the coordinated aid strategy. We were
very gratified by greater donor interest at a meeting
held in October in Geneva, where a number of donors
urged us to mount a much more aggressive
humanitarian programme in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. That is one of the reasons why the
consolidated appeal being distributed now is
considerably larger than that for 2000. There is
definitely interest in a broader strategic approach. What

19

S/PV.4237

one needs to understand is that the evolution of the
consolidated appeal process means that that process
now in fact represents a common humanitarian action
plan, which is outlined in the document and which has
in itself become a tool for a much more coordinated
approach.
We see much closer cooperation between the
United Nations and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), and I see — not just in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo but also in other crises — a
breakdown of the “them and us” mentality that has
characterized relations between the NGO and the
United Nations communities in the past. We recognize
that some NGOs have very specific niches and that
they should be respected; provided that we respect each
other’s roles, we find that it is getting easier and easier
to work very positively within the framework of an
overall common objective.
In terms of relations between the United Nations
and the local authorities — the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo — and in terms of
United Nations relations with parties to the conflict and
of what obstacles are seen in those relations, perhaps I
could just refer again to the issue of access. We find
that access has been constrained, sometimes hampered,
but sometimes also assisted. There is good and bad in
every situation. Certainly, the Minister of the Interior
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has helped overcome certain bureaucratic
constraints. But at the same time, I recall the comment
I made in my opening remarks about one notable
instance of being unable to get access to an estimated
300,000 displaced persons in Equateur: that was
because of delays in issuing travel permits — not that I
would ever consider that that was deliberate. But it was
an unfortunate byproduct of the very complicated and
difficult situation on the ground. In terms of our
working with rebel groups, it is true that they welcome
humanitarian assistance. But no rebel movement is able
to guarantee security for us.
What is interesting about the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is that in many
parts of the upcountry areas it is not that the roads are
deteriorating; it is that there are virtually no roads. As
the representative of the United States mentioned, a lot
of the traffic is by river. And a lot of the river traffic
right now is dominated by military movements and
rebel movements. What that means is that the
humanitarians are denied access to the only form of

20

transport in and out of some areas. What we would be
looking for is guarantees of river access. But we would
also want to be in a position to negotiate humanitarian
access across the lines of conflict.
With respect to other constraints to the
humanitarian effort, I mentioned the issue of childcombatant recruitment. I mentioned the exchange rate,
and I could repeat that: the exchange rate issue is one
that we would hope will be solved.
On the better side, as I said, in some areas our
relationships with the authorities are very good. In fact,
with the support of authorities at all levels, the United
Nations is currently organizing a workshop on health
and education issues in rebel-held Kisangani with the
participation of specialists from all over the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In other areas, the
Government is helping us with access to schools and to
clinics. So it is a bit of this and a bit of that; there is no
one specific answer.
In answer to a more specific question raised by
the United Kingdom about where the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) could assist, the obvious area, of
course, will be security for access. That goes without
saying, and I think it is something we have consistently
hoped for should MONUC be able to fully deploy.
But there is one specific area in which the
Council might wish to consider taking action. At the
moment, the funds voted for peacekeeping operations
are very specific in the sense of being limited to
activities undertaken by peacekeepers in the
performance of their peacekeeping duties. There have
been a number of instances where the humanitarian
community has sought the help of a peacekeeping
operation for transport, for example, because it is much
more secure. Now, in the case of MONUC, in
Kisangani for example, we had a recent instance of
MONUC providing transport to the humanitarians.
Because that is not budgeted in the peacekeeping
effort, they have to charge us at cost, and their cost is
twice as much as it would cost us to hire commercial
transport on the local market. We have the choice of
going for the cheaper one or going for the safer one.
That will also be an issue in the request which Mrs.
Ogata has made to MONUC — a request to which the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations has gladly
acceded — for assistance with MONUC transport in
the assistance to refugees in the Central African

S/PV.4237

Republic and in the Republic of the Congo. Again, the
issue of cost will come in. And this money is coming
out of donor contributions to the humanitarian effort.
One way or another, we pay; the question is do we pay
through the assessed peacekeeping budget or do we pay
through the voluntary humanitarian budgets. I leave
that particular conundrum to the Council to consider.
In terms of the greatest security threats, these
vary with the changing military situation. Currently,
the greatest difficulties we have been facing have been
in South Kivu, and also in Katanga. As I mentioned,
we hope that further deployment of MONUC will
expand the security envelope, which will promote the
ability of humanitarian organizations to gain access to
the populations.
In response to the question of my Canadian
colleague, we do in fact believe that the presence of
MONUC, with the additional security that it would
provide, will facilitate humanitarian assistance. It is
true that the presence of the United Nations is seen as
controversial and that questions have been raised as to
whether or not the humanitarian workers should go it
alone. I think that, given the situation prevailing in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we would welcome
the security MONUC that would provide in terms of
potential access and escorts and with regard to the
issue of international witnesses.
With regard to the related question of civilian
observers, which was raised by our French colleague, it
is true that the deployment of civilian observers would
increase MONUC’s potential to see and report on
human rights violations. Obviously, it should be noted
that there are already 11 humanitarian affairs officers
and child protection officers within MONUC who are
working very closely with the humanitarian
community. In fact, a multi-agency visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo that took place just
last week has recommended better organization of the
coordination arrangements and even closer cooperation
between the civilian aspects of MONUC and the
humanitarian community.
Let me just add one point with regard to security.
There are reports of the Secretary-General to the
General Assembly on the security of United Nations
and other humanitarian staff, and we know, of course,
that the potential for raising budgetary funds for this is
constrained by the fact that we will have to wait until
the next biennium, as that is the budget cycle. In the

interim, we have made a much greater concerted effort
this year — with the full encouragement of donors —
to include in the consolidated appeals a particular
appeal for paying the cost of the security elements of
each mission. Out of the total amounts being requested,
we are requesting between $13 and $14 million across
the board, not just for the Congo, for the cost of
security.
I mention now, because this applies particularly
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, that we
would encourage donors planning to contribute to
humanitarian projects to also ensure that they fund this
vital security line. Without a proper security regime in
place for the humanitarian workers in the Congo, there
is a very real danger that the projects themselves that
we wish to support will not be able to go ahead.
I thank you very much, Mr. President. I hope that
I have commented on all the points that were raised as
questions. Once again, let me thank the members of the
Council very much for their very strong words of
support for the humanitarian community in their
interventions this afternoon.
The President: I thank Ms. McAskie for her
comments.
I shall now call on Ambassador Andjaba, but I
know that Ms. McAskie has to leave at 5.15 p.m., and
she should feel free to go if she wants to catch her
plane.
Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I will be very brief in
order not to delay the departure of Ms. McAskie.
I thought this afternoon’s discussion and briefing
were very useful. I wish once again to thank Ms.
McAskie for that, and for providing additional
information in response to the questions and comments
of members of the Council.
But, Mr. President, the usefulness of this meeting
has been disturbed, to say the least, by what you said in
your national capacity. I believe that you can distort
whatever you want to distort, but the reality on the
ground remains as it is. There is aggression against the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. That is a fact; you
cannot change it. There are invited forces in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and there are
forces there that were not invited. That is a fact, and
you cannot change it, even if you want to. Security
Council resolutions are very clear on this matter. They
make a clear distinction between invited and uninvited

21

S/PV.4237

forces in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is
therefore incomprehensible to hear you time and again
trying to defend the aggressors instead of defending the
victim. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
victim of aggression. That is clear.
My delegation is flabbergasted by the way in
which your delegation and you personally, Mr.
President, have been approaching this issue. I did not
intend to say this, but I have the right to respond to
what you said in your national capacity. Again, that
there are invited and uninvited forces in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is a fact that you
may wish to distort, but your distortion will not change
the reality.

22

I promised to be brief, and I have been brief. I
reserve the right to come back again if you so wish,
Mr. President. I am ready to spend more time in this
meeting if you wish.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.
