TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR

MEETING: 113JULY 197 1

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 570) . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption

Page

1

of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Senegal:
Letter dated 6 July 1971 from the Permanent Representative of Senegalto the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/1025 1) .

1

S/PV. 1570

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1365, became fully operative on that date.

UNDREDANDSEVENTIETNMEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 13 July 1971, at 9.30 a.m.
President: Mr. J. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET

(France).

of the Council chamber, it being understood that they will
be invited to take places at the Council table when it is
their turn to speak.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. 8. TraorC (Mali]
and Mr. A. Eisa (Sudan) took the pkxes reserved for them
in the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l570)
1. Adoption

4. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now resume consideration of the item
on its agenda. I should like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to a letter sent by the representatives of thirty-five Member States, addressed to the President of the Security Council and contained in document
s/10259.

of the agenda.

, 2. Complaint by Senegal:
Letter dated 6 July 1971 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal to the United Nations addressedto
the President of the Security Council (S/10251).

5. The first name on the list of speakers is that of the
representative of Mali. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and make his statement.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

6. Mr. TRAORE (Mali) (interpretation from French):
Mr.President, I wish to thank you and members of the
Council for allowing me to speak on the question on the
agenda of the Security Council.

Complaint by Senegal
Letter dated 6 July 1971 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/10251)

7. The Portuguese authorities that have already been
condemned by the Security Council for their dehberate
assault on the territorial integrity and sovereignty of States
Members of the United Nations have once again committed
acts which led the Foreign Minister of Senegal to come to
the Council yesterday [1569th meeting] to denounce them
as crimes.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken by the Security Council
at its last meeting I invite the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Senegal and the representative of Guinea to take places
at the Security Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. K. Gaye
(Senegal) and Mr. E.-H. A. Tour& (Guinea) took places at
fhe Security Council table.

8. I shall not go through the overwhelming list of innocent
persons who lost their lives in Senegal, of the poor youths
whose possibly outstanding careers were cut short, nor shall
I go back over the number of cattle and granaries stolen, of
huts gutted and the efforts to destroy works of art, the
kidnapping of citizens by methods that are very dear to
those who have placed themselves outside the pale of the
law of both man and God.

2. The PRESIDENT (inteqretation from French): I have
just received two letters, one from the Permanent Representative of Mali [S/10260]
and the other from the
Permanent Representative of Sudan (S/10262], in which
they ask to be invited to participate in the debate in the
Security Council on the item before us.

9. These practices are not isolated; they are part and
parcel of the political conduct of the Portuguese Government. In fact the Agence France Press on 1 February this
year reported the statement made by Captain Jaime Morais,
a deserter from the Portuguese Army, who gave an
interview to the Swedish newspaper Aftonbladet
and
explained his attitude by “his refusal to follow instructions
calling upon him to burn villages and shoot civilians,” to
take up his terms “in the name of the prestige of Portugal.”
Mr. Morais spoke of this matter very clearly. Like all men

3. In accordance with the rules of procedure and with the
past practice of the Council, I intend, with the consent of
the Council, to invite the representatives of Mali and Sudan
to participate, without the right to vote, in the debate in
the Security Council, In view of the limited number of
places at the Council table, I propose, in accordance with
the Council’s practice, to invite the representatives of Mali
md Sudan to take the places reserved for them at the side
1

who respect life, he possessesa conscience, that, going
beyond the making of misleading statements, led him to
warn world public opinion of the danger that Portugal, with
its delusions of grandeur, has now escalated by its ill-conduct.

Security Council had already on its agenda the question we
are discussing,
16. The reasons for such temerity are known to sll. The
Chief of State of Mali when he alluded to Portuguese
aggression against Guinea stated last November: “It means
that the aggressorhas been strengthened by the impunity
and the guilty complicity which it has always enjoyed.”
Senegal, Zambia, the People’s Republic of the Congo, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Republic of
Guinea have all suffered the tragic consequences of such
complicity and such impunity.

10. But if the statement made were to be doubted, the
Council might well seek clarification from the reports of
the fact-finding committee that it had itself sent to Senegal
to investigate the resumption of shelling by Portugal, when
that country refused to comply with the resolutions of the
Council. The mine-laying is a disquieting aspect of the
question but it is only one aspect of it. What is true is that
the question that should concern us today is to know
precisely the danger that Portugal’s conduct holds for pesce
and security in Africa.

17. Surely the Council is in a position to adopt measures
so that the encouragement given to Portugal will not
pollute the international political atmosphere. The mines
treacherously placed in the paths of Senegalese, the flames
that consume Senegalese huts, are so many alarms against
which we must all mobihze. Portugal is the instrument of a
policy that we all see clearly: to take back the dearly
achieved independence of African States, to shatter the will
of millions of human beings to live freely as their natural
right grants people that of self-determination. In the fight
of the facts told us by the Senegalese delegation here, the
Security Council is here dealing with two totally incorn.
patible philosophies: The first, in keeping with the spirit
and the letter of the Charter, and respectful of human
dignity, only wishes to ensure that all men live happily and
as far as the requirements of international law permit; the
second policy is one of violence and absurd stubbornness.
As the international community must apply peaceful means
when dealing with the first of these philosophies, so too
must it implacably ensure its own survival when it hasto
combat the second of these philosophies. It is this clear-cut
choice which we believe we all have to make tpday and
particularly the members of the Security Council.

11. The analyses of the conduct of Portugal mentioned in
documents S/l0227 of 17 June 1971 and S/10251 of
6 July 1971 prove that that country bases its policy on
crime. The Portuguese morality calls for it to steal, to wipe
out the products of the heavy labour of peaceful peasants.
The least one can say is that it is in flagrant contradiction
with the other morality according to which the international community has mobilized to alleviate the sufferings
of all those who for one reason or another are in need.
12. In fact, beyond the purely military aspect of this
question, Portugal only wishes to create in its own image
entire zones where dictatorship and arbitrary acts would
stand in the way of the political, economic and social
evolution of a people, which, as I have said, would be
contrary to its desire for colonial domination.
13. Senegal is the victim of this political aberration. The
solidarity that links that country-to my own forces us to
understand in a rather singular way the risks inherent in
such behaviour for international peace and security. That
understanding of events is shared by sll members of the
Organization of African Unity, and it is doubtless not
without reason that the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity declared that the presence of
Portuguese colonialism on the African continent was a
serious threat to the peace and security of independent
African States. But should we not be falling victims to
illusions were we to consider that peace can be threatened
in Africa and preserved elsewhere?

18. Portugal has itself shown that the warnings contained
in the resolutions that the Council has already adopted
against policies of attacks on the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Member States of the United Nations do not
disturb it unduly. As we generally say, great ills call for
great cures, ‘and it is perfectly easy to understand the
intentions and concern of the Senegalese Government, that
of the end of your deliberations, the Council will fake
measures that will once and for all discourage these
professional aggressors,that it will grant justice to ‘Senegrd
and in doing so, grant justice to all those who at all levels
work untiringly for peace.

14. Portugal is jeopardizing the security of all. The
Council, whose primary responsibility is the maintenance of
international peace and to restore it when necessary, has,
according to the Charter, adequate means to ensure that
that objective is attained.

19. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): The Security Council has met te

consider a serious situation arising from further hostile acts
committed by Portugal against the sovereign African State
of the Republic of Senegal,

15. It must do so in time. In order to do so it must take
up the two-fold challenge of Portugal with determination.
The chief of Senegalese diplomacy drew the Council’s
attention to the cases of Portuguese aggression against his
country at a specific moment when fact-finders of the
Council were in the country. The Government of Portugal
has repeated the same stand as before, for at the end of the
statement yesterday the Minister of Senegal informed us of
an attack on a Senegalesevillage, at the very time when the

20. This is not an isolated incident or a single act, but s
new link in the old chain of hostile acts by Portugal against
African States, in this case,against Senegal. The questionis
one of aggressive acts committed deliberately and systematically by the Portuguese colonialists.
21. The Council has heard the extremely infonnstlve
statement of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sent@, He
2

cited convincing and incontrovertible facts which confirm
that aggression has taken place. The data adduced in his
statement show that there have recently been many more
cases of violation by Portuguese troops of the territorial
integrity, inviolability and sovereignty of Senegal, armed
attacks by units of the Portuguese regular army against
populated centres in Senegal, incursions into Senegalese
territory by these units, artillery bombardment, mine laying
in Senegalese territory and other acts of aggression by
Portugal.

Security Council. It used documentary data and specific
facts to unmask the Portuguese aggressorswho had committed a piratical attack against the capital of the Republic
of Guinea, under cover of the dark tropical night. The
Portuguese colonialists are waging a war of attrition against
the peoples of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau).
Thus, the colonial wars which the Portuguese colonialists
have been waging for many years against the African
peoples under their oppressive rule are increasingly becoming warsagainst independent African States.

22. The territorial integrity and inviolability of Senegal
has been grossly and frequently infringed by Portuguese
armed forces, according to many communications from the
Sonegalese Government.

26. There seems to be no doubt that the sovereignty and
security of the independent States in Africa and, consequently, peace and security on the African continent,
cannot be consolidated unless these colonial wars against
the African peoples are immediately brought to an end and
unless all these peoples are granted independence without
further delay, in accordance with the requirements of the
United Nations Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.

23. As has already been pointed out on many occasions in
the Security Council, as early as December 1961, Portuguese armed forces on three occasions committed acts of
aggression against Senegal. In April 1963, the Security
Council adopted a special resolution [178 (1963/l condemning all incursions by Portuguese troops into the
territory of Senegal. At that time already the Council
requested the Government of Portugal to take all the
necessary steps to prevent any violation of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Senegal. Nevertheless, Portugal
did not comply with this decision of the Council, which is
binding under the United Nations Charter. It has continued
to pursue its poIicy of hostility and aggression against
Senegal. Subsequently, in 1965 and 1969, the Security
Council was again obliged to consider acts of aggression
which Portugal had committed against Senegal. In its
resoIution 273 (1969) adopted in December 1969, the
Councif firmly condemned the Portuguese authorities for
their acts of aggression against Senegal and again demanded
that Portugal should immediately put an end to violations
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Senegal.
Moreover, the Council openly and unequivocally stated in
that resolution that if Portugal failed to put an end to such
violations, the Council would meet to consider further
measures.
24. It is now obvious, however, that even this serious
waning has not served as a lesson for Lisbon. Not only
Senegal, but the Republic of Guinea, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the People’s Republic of the Congo,
the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia have been
subjected to frequent attacks by Portuguese armed forces.
The representative of Guinea, Mr. Toure, reminded the
Security Council of the aggression against Guinea in his
statement here yesterday.

30. The imperialists do not want the independence of the
countries which have shaken off colonialism to be strengthened. In his report to the XXIVth Congress of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union, General Secretary
Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev emphasized:
“There are no crimes to which the imperialists would
not stoop in their attempts to maintain or restore their
domination over the peoples of former colonies or of
other countries which are breaking out of the clutches of
:apitalist exploitation. There have been many new examples of this in the last five years”.
3 1. The facts adduced in the Council concerning Portugal’s hostile actions against Senegal confirm these correct

1 T;or the report of the SpecialMission, seeOfficial Recordsof the
Council, Twenty=ffth

28. We know that in its struggle against the national
liberation movement Portuguese colonialism is at one with
South African and Southern Rhodesian racism, This criminal triple alliance of colonialists and racists is being used by
the forces of imperialism for combating the young African
States which are striving to consolidate their political and
national independence and for suppressing the liberation
movement of the African peoples against the colonial and
racist domination of southern Africa. Imperialism is using
the Portuguese colonialists as its shock-troops against the
freedom-loving peoples of Africa. That is why Portugal
enjoys the patronage and support of the imperialist forces,
particularly that of some of its friends and allies in NATO.
29. This explains Portugal’s insolent behaviour on the
African continent and its disregard of the decisions of the
United Nations.

25. The events in connexion with the aggression committed
by Portugal against the Republic of Guinea in
November last year must still be fresh in the minds of all
the members of the Council. For the first time in the
history of the United Nations, a mission of the Security
Council,
composed of five of its members,1 wassent to the
place where the aggression had taken place, in strict
conformity
with the United Nations Charter. This mission
brilliantly
carried out the tasks entrusted to it by the
Szcurity

27. These continuing and increasingly frequent armed
provocations by the Portuguese colonialists against independent African States cannot fail to attract the close attention
of the Security Council and of all peace-loving States. These
acts of aggression are a direct continuation of Portugal’s
colonial policy, which has been condemned in United
Nations resolutions and is directed towards crushing
national liberation movements in the territories under its
rule and towards keeping the peoples of these territories
under the colonial yoke.

Year, @ecial Supplement No. 2.

3

conclusions with a new force. Imperialism is bending all its
efforts and using all the means at its disposal in its
endeavour to maintain domination over southern Africa.
With this end in view, it is supporting the colonial and racist
systems in that region and is thus condoning the inhuman
ideology and practice of racist terror and apartheid. The
imperialists are seeking to maintain the southern part of the
African continent as a bastion of colonialism and racism
and to use it as a base for constant threats and armed
attacks against freedom-loving African countries and peoples.

sovereignty and territorial integrity of Senegal. Thirty-five
African States appealed to the Security Council about this
matter in a special letter, which our President mentioned at
today’s meeting. The letter states that that criminal act
marked a new escalation of the aggression perpetrated by
the Portuguese fascists against the integrity and sovereignty
of the Republic of Senegal and against the independent
States of Africa which bordered on the African Territories
under Portuguese domination. That is the appraisal of the
new Portuguese acts of aggression given by al1 Africa,
represented by the 35 States which signed this document.
In its noble and just struggle for the freedom and
independence of the African peoples, Africa places great
hopes in the Security Council, and it is the Council’s duty
to bear this in mind and to take effective and specific
measures. In this matter, moreover, Africa places its hopes
in the permanent members of the Security Council. The
Emperor of Ethiopia recently made a personal appeal to
Mr. Agnew, the Vice-President of the United States of
America, asking that the United States as a permanent
member of the Security Council, should give its assistance
and support to the struggle for the complete liberation of
Africa from colonialism, According to the American press,
Mr. Agnew merely “replied in general terms”.

32. That is why this acute international political struggle,
which often takes the form of armed conflicts and military
engagements between the peoples of Africa on the one
hand and the forces of colonialism and racism on the other,
has now gone far beyond the limits of local conflicts. It has
become one of the acute international problems of today.
For a long time now, the United Nations has been paying
serious and close attention to the problem. Colonialism,
racism and apartheid are not the “internal affairs” of
Portugal, the Republic of South Africa and Southern
Rhodesia, as the rulers of these countries claim they are.
Colonialism, racism and apartheid are constant and dangerous sources of acute conflicts, wars and international
tension. Their prevalence is a challenge to all independent
Africa and to all progressive mankind. The complete
elimination of the vestiges of colonialism and racism in
Africa would promote the cause of the maintenance and
strengthening of universal peace and of the security of all
nations.

36. But what is required of the United Nations and of the
members of the Security Council in an effective struggle for
the complete elimination of colonialism from Africa is not
“general terms” but practical deeds. And yet certain States,
including some members of the Security Council, are not
only failing to assist the African peoples in their just
struggle for freedom and national independence, but are
actually trying to hinder the completion of the decolonization process. It is well known that the Declaration on the
Strengthening of International Security [Genera2 A ssembly
rcsoIution 2734 (XXV)], adopted by nearly’ all the Men
bers of this Organization, with the exception of South
Africa, at the twenty-fifth session of the United Nations
General Assembly, contains a direct appeal to all States to
promote the cause of the speedy elimination of colonialism
or any other form of foreign domination. Some countries,
however, reacted to this appeal in their own way, going SO
far as to leave the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples.

33. Through the use of lies and deception and under the
cover of demagogic slogans about alleged assistance to the
peoples, imperialism is striving to impose neo-colonial
domination on liberated peoples by means of fire, bombs
and poisonous substances.
34. The Portuguese colonialists are drawing upon the
experience and practice of their older allies in deception
and in laying the blame at someone else’s door, They go so
far as to use methods generally attributed to petty thieves
and police provocatews. Suffice it to recall that the
Portuguese provocateurs stuck a stamp reading “Russian”
on every one of the mines they laid in Senogalese territory.
This falsification was so crude and showed such elementary
ignorance of the marking of mines that it immediately gave
away the provocateun who had concocted it. Such pathetic
stratagems can only arouse disgust and contempt,

37. The Soviet Union’s approach to this question is based
on its position of principle, that of consistent support for
peoples fighting for their national liberation against coloaialism and racism, This position was once again clearly and
unequivocally set out in the Programme of the struggle for
peace and international co-operation and for the freedom
and independence of peoples, which was explained in
L. I. Brezhnev’s report and adopted at the XXNth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. The
Programme urges that the United Nations resolutions on
the elimination cf remaining colonial rigitnes should be
carried out as quickly and fully as possible and that racism
and apartheid in all their forms and manifestations should
be universally condemned and boycotted. The Soviet
Union, which is consistently guided by this Programme and
pursues a policy of peace and friendship between peoples,
will continue to wage a vigorous struggle against itnperi-

35. Imperialist pressure in southern Africa is being opposed by the growing unity and militant anti-colonialism of
African countries and peoples, which are insistently calling
for the e!&nination of the remaining vestiges of colonialism
from African soil. The African States, supported’ by all the
anti-imperialist forces of the world, have united firmly in
demanding acceleration of the process of the complete
liberation of Africa from colonialism and racism. Africa’s
stern demand resounded again recently at Addis Ababa,
during the Eighth Conference of African Heads of State and
Government.2 This Conference also categorically condemned Portugal for its gross and frequent violations of the
2 Held from 21 to 23 June 1971.

4

alism and colonialism, to assist peoples fighting for their
national liberation and independence against imperialist
aggression and to repel the intrigues and diversionary
activities of the aggressors.
38. The Security Council should not merely examine the
question of the repeated instances of Portugal’s aggressive
policy against Senegal. The interests of peace and security,
the need to observe the United Nations Charter and the
obligation binding on all Member States of the Organization, to abide by its principles not only in words, but aho
in deeds, demand that the colonialist aggressor should be
punished according to his deserts and that effective
measures should be taken to prevent any repetition of his
acts of aggression. Generally speaking, the United Nations
and the Security Council must take measures under the
Charter to ensure that those who prepare and perpetrate
any act of aggression will not go unpunished.
39, The Soviet delegation considers that the Security
Council should approach this question in all seriousness.We
cannot stand by impassively while Portugal commits such
flagrant violations of the key provisions of the United
Nations Charter.
40. The Charter obliges all Members of the United Nations
to refrain in their international relations from the threat or
use of force, both against the territorial integrity and
political independence of any State and by any other means
incompatible with the purposes of the United Nations. By
committing acts of aggression against Senegal, Portugal
flagrantly violates these provisions of the Charter. Moreover, by doing so Portugal has also violated the Declaration
on the Strengthening of International Security adopted by
the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session.
41. Another fact that should be taken into account in
considering this question is that, apart from the warning
Portugal has received from the Security Council in connexion with its aggression against Senegal, Lisbon has had
yet another’ grave warning. Security Council resolution
290 (1970) was adopted in connexion with Portugal’s
aggression against the Republic of Guinea, and paragraph 8
of that resolution states that the Security Council:
“Solemnly warns the Government of Portugal that in
the event of any repetition of armed attacks against
independent African States, the Security Council shall
immediately
consider appropriate effective steps or
measures in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations.”

Nations which bears responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, should take immediate
and resolute measures against a State which by its actions is
flagrantly violating the Charter and is creating a serious
threat to peace and security in Africa, a threat which not
only is not diminishing, but is assuming new forms and ever
more dangerousproportions.
44. The USSR delegation will give its full support to any
effective measures of the Security Council directed towards
the final cessation of acts of aggression by the Portuguese
colonialists and towards the strong condemnation and
severepunishment of the aggressors.
45. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom French): I have
received from the representative of Mauritania a letter
[S/10261] requesting that he be allowed to participate in
this debate of the Council without the right to vote. If I
hear no objection I shall invite him to take the place
reservedfor him in the Council Chamber.
At the invitation of the President,Mr. M. E. M. Bal
(Mauritania)took a placein the Councilchamber.

46. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
next name on the list of speakers is that of Mr.Abu Eisa,
Foreign Minister of Sudan. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
47. Mr. EISA (Sudan): Mr.President, thank you very
much for affording me this opportunity to address the
Security Council.
48. In the last few days, Mr.President, I have been
consulting you and other members of the Council, and also
the Secretary-General, in my capacity as the current
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Organization of
African Unity, on the question of Namibia-a question that
represents both an affront to African dignity and a
challenge to the prestige of the United Nations. Today, in
the same capacity, I wish to addressthe Security Council,
assembled on another problem that concerns us all in
Africa-that of Portugal.
49. Portugal and South Africa are indeed two sides of the
same coin. They represent the same interests; they originate
in the samephilosophy; they adopt the same strategy; and
they practice the samecynical bestialities.

42. The Security Council should now take the necessary
measures to put a decisive end to the aggressiveacts of the
Portuguese colonialists, who are attacking the sovereignty
and independence of Senegal and other African countries
and are violating Security Council resolutions. By adopting
such a decision, the Security Council will make an
important contribution to the cause of the strengthening of
peace in Africa and to the consolidation of international
peaceand security.

50. The distressing picture depicted yesterday by my
brother the Foreign Minister of Senegalis only one episode
in a long history of disdain for international morality, the
violation of international law and cynicism in the face of
civibzed public opinion throughout the world. The stories
this Council heard yesterday should be viewed in the
context of the many complaints which have been before
the Council during the last five or more years. In none of
those caseshas the Council found one mitigating circumstance for Portugal’s criminality. Portugal has been uniformly condemned for its outrage against the sovereigntyof
independent States and its outrage against the dignity of
people under its domination.

43. The Soviet delegation considers it essential that the
Security Council, as the principal organ of the United

51. The question which the Foreign Minister of Senegal
asked yesterday about the ability of an under-developed

56. We should like also to take this opportunity to share
with you the happiness at seeing the Secretary-General back
with us again after his brief indisposition. The work that he
ceaselessly accomplishes in the cause of justice and peace
has earned him our profound gratitude.

European country to maintain such a protracted colonial
war is, indeed, the question asked by every single African.
It has been our thinking in Lagos, following the criminal
aggression on Guinea, and it is our thinking today in Addis
Ababa that those Powers which are furnishing Portugal with
the machines of war and continuing to do SO bear the blame
for facilitating the commission of Portuguese crimes in
Africa. The Assembly of African Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity held at
Addis Ababa from 2 I to 23 June 1971, expressly declared
in its resolution on decolonization:

57. The members of the Council and, indeed, the Interna.
tional community as a whole are grateful to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Senegal for having made clear to the
Security Council yesterday the threat that exists to the
peace and security of his country, of the entire region, and
of all Africa as well. The objective, sober report, which the
Foreign Minister put before the Council yesterday, based
on facts and giving dates and place-names, showed us how
much human and material loss * and suffering has been
endured by our brothers of Senegal for some ten years
because of the aggressive acts perpetrated against their
territory by the colonial army of Portugal. Surely, their
cause calls for more than mere expressions of sympathy and
solidarity. The Security Council must live up to its
responsibilities by taking an appropriate and vigorous stand
to avoid any further deterioration of the situation.

“4. Strongly condemns. , , those member States of
the Atlantic Alliance . . . for refusing to co-operate with
the United Nations efforts towards decolonization and
for their assistance to the Portuguese rggime in its
criminal wars of repression and recolonizatian against the
African peoples; “5. Denotdnces the recent holding in Lisbon of the
sessionof NATO Foreign Ministers
6‘. . .
“11. Strongly condemns the repeated and flagrant
violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Senegal by incursions of regular Portuguese troops into
Senegal, particularly by the laying of mines.”

58. It is true that at the root of the explosive situation lies
the colonial presence of Portugal in Africa. The Portuguese
colonialists, who have learned nothing from the evolution
of human relations, still try by the use of arms to bend the
African massesof Guinea (Bissau), Mozambique and Angola
to their anachronistic colonial domination. They hope to
deny for ever the rights of the African massesto dignity, to
self-determination and to their aspiration to build their own
independence as they see fit. They push the blindness of
their racial fanaticism to the very limit of denying the
African personality of the Africans under their colonial
yoke.

52. The Security Council was not unaware of this. The
following is an excerpt from its resolution 180 (1963) of 3 1
July 1963, in which it requested
“that all States should refrain forthwith from offering
the Portuguese Government any assistance which would
enable it to continue its repression of the peoples of the
Territories under its administration, and take all measures
to prevent the sale and supply of arms and military
equipment for this purpose to the Portuguese Government.”

59. Neither the evolution of ideas nor the changing times,
based on principles of equality and freedom nor the
resolutions of the United Nations to put an end to
colonialism, such as the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
contained in General Assembly resolution 15 14 (XV); nor
the work of decolonization already accomplished and
which should have served asan example; nor the appeals of
the Portuguese themselves, the progressive Portuguese,
pleading for the emancipation of their country from the
heavy colonial burden it bears none of these has changed
the retrograde policy of the extremist minority leading
Portugal and imposing its rule by blood and steel.

53. Let us face the facts. The friends of the enemies of
Africa cannot quahf-y for anything but the enmity of the
African people. For that mason we in Africa do feel that
there is a case for all those Powersconcerned to reappraise
their policies and reeexamine their consciences,
54. In addressing this Council the Foreign Minister of
Senegal was not complaiuing against an aggressor that is
only violating the territorial integrity of Senegal but also
against a colonial Power that is threatening by its policies
the whole African continent, and in addressing you today I
wish to stress that the whole of Africa stands as one man
behind Senegal.

60. Despairing of winning back their inalienable rights by
reason and by peaceful means, the African masses engaged
in a struggle for their freedom, which the United Nations
recognized as inevitable, legitimate and worthy of all
material and moral support; that is the cause of the frenzy
of the Portuguese colonialists who, aware of the fact that
they are losing ground and initiative as the national
liberation movements gain momentum turn their spiteful
vengeance against the neighbouring African countries? At
one time it is the United Republic of Tanzania or Zamb!a
that experiences their murderous incursions; at another
time it is the People’s Republio of Guinea that is subjeoted
to their plots and their invasions; at still another time it is
Senegal that is the victim of their constant acts of

55. Mr. JOUEJATI (Syria) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, may I extend to you, on behalf of the Syrian
Arab Republic, our warmest congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. Your
talents as a diplomat, together with your eminent intellectual qualities, will stand as a guarantee to the Council
that you wilf perform your task brilliantly and will sustain
the hope of strengthening the role of this body, the
supreme organ responsible for international peace and
security.
6

Y’
:

aggression:overflights of Senegalese air spaceby Portuguese
bombers, the kidnapping of persons, the destruction of
villages, mine laying, bombing of populated places with
napalm-an interminable list of depredations that the
Foreign Minister of Senegal listed for us, which had earlier
been put before the Council by the group of experts sent
there by the Secretary-General.

66. The seriesof actsby Portuguese armed forces of brutal
infringement on the territorial integrity of Senegal, with the
resulting casualties and losses in property, once again
demonstrates the imminently aggressivenature of Portuguese colonialism in Africa.
67. The aggressivenessof Portuguese colonial policies in
Africa has been particularly evident recently. It has
manifested itself in major attempts to re-establish and
consolidate colonial rule in Angola, Mozambique, and
Guinea (Bissau) through the extensive use of military force
through large-scale economic schemes,and through deceitful announcements of plans for constitutional reform. The
accent has certainly been on the “military solution”, and
the Portuguese colonialists have not stopped at any method
or means that, in their opinion, would further their
objectives. They have resorted to the massive and barbarous
use of toxic substances,herbicides and defoliants in Angola,
causing vast losses in human life and in crops in the areas
controlled by the national liberation movement of that
country. They do not hesitate to make use of the scourge
of hunger in the Cape Verde islands as an instrument for
fighting against the national liberation movement, And they
have never stopped at subversion and aggression directed
against independent African countries, attempting in this
way, too, to tilt the balance in their favour in the struggle
against the African peoples under their colonial domination.

61, What does this recrudescence of aggressiveacts signify,
if not the frustration felt by the Portuguese militarists as
they see the national liberation movement in’ Guinea
(B&au) day by day making solid progress along the road to
final emancipation fron the colonial yoke? Unable to put
an end to the struggle waged by the fighters for freedom,
the Portuguese extremists vent their rage against the
peaceful villages of the neighbouring countries. And unfortunately, their acts remain unpunished. The resolutions
adopted by the Security Council in 1963, 1965 and 1969
condemning Portugal’s violations of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Senegal have served only to redouble
its arrogance toward and defiance of the international
community. For what can resolutions alone achieve if the
aggressors,far from finding themselves isolated, are assured
in advance of the solid backing of their powerful Atlantic
partners, who furnish them with the most modern armaments in the name of a strategy described as one of
defence, but one of whose consequences is the cruel
repression of the native peoples in the colonies and
constant aggressions against independent African countries.

68. The Portuguese aggression against Guinea last November demonstrated to the whole world the danger of these
colonialist policies and evoked the anger of the whole of
Africa and of all progressive and peace-loving forces
throughout the wodd.

62. The numerous General Assembly resolutions calling
upon Member States to ceasetheir supply of arms and their
economic and financial assistance to colonial regimes are
complied with by the overwhelming majority of Member
States, but frustrated by those capitalist Powers which,
through firmness, could have succeeded in disarming the
Portuguese regime and dissuading it from the nefarious
policy it pursues,

69. Speaking in the debate in this Council concerning
Portuguese aggression against the Republic of Guinea, the
delegation of Poland, on 7 December 1970, used these
words to characterize the nature of present-day colonialism
in Africa and, in particular, the colonial policies of
Portugal:

63. Security Council resolution 273 (1969) of 9 December
1969 threatened Portugal with the application of appropriate measures, should its aggressiveacts against Senegal be
repeated. Such aggressive acts have, since then, only
increased in number. Is it not high time therefore for the
Council to start putting those measures into effect? Also,
are the allies of Portugal going to remain content to issue
verbal condemnations of its colonial policy while at the
same time continuing to deliver to Portugal the weapons of
destruction?

“As a condemned historical phenomenon, colonialism
cannot remain passive. To remain where it is, is for
colonialism an imminent death sentence, It cannot
maintain the status quo other than by continued acts of
aggression against the liberation movement of colonial
peoples in the first place, against the independent and
anti-colonialist African States as a corollary.” (1561st
meeting, para. 65.1

64. In the eyes of Africa, and in the eyes, as well, of all
countries devoted to justice and peace, to do so would
mean making common cause with Portuguese colonialism.
As a matter of fact, this is a grave threat to international
peace, a threat which cannot be banished by words alone
but only by firm action and the compIete isolation of the
aggressor. The Council is thus once more facing a test, and
it is to be hoped that Senegal, its illustrious President, its
statesmen imbued with goodwill, and its valiant, noble and
patient people have not placed their trust in this Council in
vain.

70, We think it proper to recall those words today, when
the Council is considering the recent continuous series of
subversive acts committed by Portuguese colonial armed
forces in the frontier regions of Senegal. The strongest
condemnation of Portugal and a most solemn warning to it
were issued by this Council in December 1970 (resolufion
290 (1970,J]. Yet, since that time we have continued to
receive recurring complaints from Guinea, Senegal and
Zambia indicating that the aggressiveposture of Portugal
has not changed, just as information received by other
United Nations bodies from the colonial liberation movements in Guinea (Bissau), Angola and Mozambique indicates that Portugal’s policy of colonial domination and
aggressionin those territories has not changed.

65. Mr, KASPRZYK (Poland): We listened yesterday with
the utmost attention to the statement of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Gaye.
7

,?
*

feeling of active solidarity in view of the many ties which
bind us to the Republic of Senegal,

71, we &,g not be revealing any new situation in pointing
to the continuous and all-round protection, support and
assistancegiven to Portugal bY its major allies in NATO and
by powerful economic interests of those allies, as being one
of the principal causesof Portugal’s unchanged policies in
Africa and of the continuation and intensification of the
colonial wars being carried on bY Portugal in Angola,
MozatrJJique and Guinea (Bissau) against the peoples of
those territories, with increasing dangers to the neighbouring independent African States. In fact, that intensified
aggressivenessseems to have gained for Portugal even
greater recognition in some NATO circles for a posture well
fitting into a schemefor imperialist control of Africa with a
particular role assignedto. the racist-colonialist complex in
the southernpart of the continent.

77. I wish to thank the Foreign Minister of Senegal, who
has come personally before the Council to explain why the
Government of Senegal has seized the Security Council of
this most recent aggression of which his country is the
victim. The Foreign Minister of Senegal, in a scathing
indictment of Portuguese colonialism, has recounted with
great cIarity the various acts of banditry and aggressionthat
have been committed by the fascist regime of Portugal
against the peaceful people of Senegal.
78. Senegal has always concretely demonstrated its alle.
giance to the principles of the Charter of our Organization,
its desire to contribute to the maintenance of peace and ifs
preference for negotiation and peaceful settlement of
international disputes,

72. We wish to stress the wider truth that it is the
maintenance of Portuguese colonialism in Africa and the
continuation of colonial wars waged by it against the
African peoples which generate the constant threat of
aggressionagainst independent African States. Only when
Portuguese colonialism is finally liquidated and the peoples
now under its rule aregranted freedom and independencewhich they have the right to be granted immediately-will
the threat to the securityof African States be removed, The
Council is in duty bound to note that fundamental truth.

79. Distinguished representatives of the African continent
have during the course of this debate stressed that the
position of the African States in the face of an aggression
against a State member of the Organization of African
Unity derives from the charter of that organization.
..
80. It has become customary for the Security Council to
see a representative of Portuguese colonialism sitting in the
defendant’s dock. The chain of aggressions committed by
Portugal against an African State is a very long one.
Portugal is continuing its policies of provocation. Portugal
is not a neighbouring State of Senegal nor of Guinea;
Portugal is not an African country. Angola, Mozambique
and Guinea (Bissau) are not and do not wish to be
Portuguese provinces. Portugal continues to have its military arsenals renovated and modernized. Could Portugal
carry out such a costly colonial war, a war which is in many
respects a burden to its people without the support of
NATO? I would answer “no” to that question.

73. Information provided to the Council indicates without
any doubt that Portugal, in defiance of %Curity
CounCil
resolution 273 (1969), continues to violate with impunity
the territorial integrity of Senegal. The repeated encroachment by Portugal on Senegal’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity constitutes a threat to international peace and
security. It is therefore my delegation’s opinion that the
Security Council should take firm action to prevent further
violations of Senegal’sterritorial integrity. It should unequivocally condemn the Portuguese authorities and their
acts of aggressionagainstSenegal and take all necessary and
effectivemeasuresto ensurethat such acts are not repeated.

81. It is time for the Security Council to stressclearly that
if the fascist regime of Portugal persists in its policy of
aggression and colonial oppression, the victims of which are
the African people, it is thanks to the arms supplied by
NATO, svhich gives Portugal all the logistic and-technical
support necessary of its expeditionary force which operates
against the courageous peoples of Angola, Mozambique and
Guinea (Bissau).

74. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Iknch):
The
next name on the list of speakers is that of the Charge
d’affaires of Mauritania. I invite him to take a place at the
Security Council table and to make his statement.
75. Mr. BAL (Mauritania) (interpretation from French):
Mr.President, first of all I should like to take this
opportunity to expressmy gratitude to you and to alI the
members of the Security Council for allowing me to
participate in this debate, without the right to vote. I also
wish to tell YOU how honoured I feel to speak here under
the Presidency of a person of such high moral and
intellectual attainments, attainments which are greatly
appreciated by my country and my delegation; a representative of a country with which my own country
maintains relations of friendship and co-operation.

82. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Senegal, in the
statement he made yesterday afternoon, said:
“So the question that arises now is how Portugal has
facilities so powerful that it is able to carry out a warof
aggression and colonial reconquest in Guinea (Bissau) and
elsewhere at the same time.
“Rightly or wrongly, all the African States are convinced that that country, which is beyond doubt one of
the most underdeveloped of all European countries, could
not alone, with just its own resources, carry the crush@
burden of repression it has carried for more than ten
years now and erected into a system both within its own
frontiers as well as in the African Territories,” [1569rh

76. MY delegation has requested permission to participate
in this debate becauseof a moral obligation we have in the
United Nations, an obligation to demonstrate our solidarity
towards a fraternal country which, once again, has become
the victim of aggression,an aggression that is at present
being considered bY the Security Council, My delegation
has asked to participate in this debate also because of a

meeting, paras.61 and62.1

8

-

-~

83. These aggressions are an ever greater threat to peace,
justice and international security.
84. It will be recalled that last November the fraternal
people of Guinea were victims of a barbarous aggression
perpetrated by Portuguese forces. In November 1969-more

specifically on the 25th of that month-the village of
Samhe in Senegal was deliberately shelled by Portuguese
forces. These acts of planned aggression resulted in a
number of victims.
85. My country, the Islamic Republic of Mauritania,
cannot and will not tolerate recurrence of such aggression,
For us it is a matter of dignity and of respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of a country with which
we are bound by many ties.
86, We seek peace, but this peace cannot truly exist on a
continent where, in vast areas, men are fighting for their
freedom, their dignity and the right of freely choosing their
own destiny. In the face of these repeated aggressiveacts of
Portugal against the independent African States the Security
Council should consider it its duty to take vigorous
measures to halt this constant threat which weighs on peace
and security in Africa.

.P‘

91. The idea that the clear and precise demonstration
submitted to us by the Foreign Minister of Senegal might
be open to doubt wasrefuted by the very objectivity of the
statement he made, which not only avoided falling into
simple rhetoric, but waslimited to a narration of the facts
themselves, facts which, moreover, have been corroborated
from other sources of information available to the United
Nations, particularly the evidence given by accredited
diplomats and officials of the United Nations in Dakar who
on several occasions were fired upon while peacefully
taking their usual walks in the region of Casamance.
92. The special missions that the United Nations sent to
Africa, particularly to Guinea last December, which also
went to Senegal in January of the same year, should
convince you of the contempt that Portugal has for the
independent countries of Africa, for the United Nations
itself and for its institutions. At the beginning of last year
the Human Rights Commission sent a fact-finding mission
to investigate the crimes which Portugal had perpetrated in
Senegal. That mission, as you know, was welcomed by
bombs.
93. You are now confronted by a repetition of the facts
that have already taken place, events which have recurred,
and which will continue as long as Portugal fails to
understand that it must respect not only human life and
property but also the sovereignty of the independent
African States. For a long time, both here in the Security
Council and in other bodies of the United Nations, as you
all know, the accusations levelled against Portugal have
never been denied. Even today Portugal does not have the
courage to defend itself. It is embarrassed to appear in
public. It is ashamed of its crimes: it confesses.Indeed, the
old saying teaches us that “silence is consent”. That is the
casewith Portugal.

87. Mr. MAGENGE (Burundi) (interpretation jkom
French): Mr. President, I shall refrain from paying you the
compliments that you have earned as an eminent diplomat.
However, perhaps you will allow me briefly to greet His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Senegal who
has joined us to submit a complaint on behalf of his
country whose territorial integrity has been recently violated. With all due respect, I should like to pay a short
tribute to Secretary-General U Thant who has now returned
to us to resume the direction of our institutions which are
endeavouring to preserve peace in the world.

94. Portugal cannot defend itself for it is undefendable,
since it is accusedby authorities who cannot be challenged.
It is not only African, Asian, Latin American and European
public opinion which condemn Portugal, but it is also the
judgement handed down by numerous organizations and
bodies of the United Nations.

88. That peace, to which I have just referred when
greeting Secretary-General U Thant, has been breached. The
Security Council was informed in two letters from the
Permanent Representative of Senegal in Jdne [S/10221]
and July /S/10251] of an evolution in terrorist practices,
destroying both men and their possessions in a country, the
Republic of Senegal, whose only crime has been to have an
evil neighbour, whose only fault is to have common
frontiers with a Portuguese possession, in this caseGuinea
(B&au).

95. If I were to limit myself only to the condemnations of
Portugal formulated by political circles, the partners of
Portugal would not believe me sufficiently, and would nbt
believe the accusations levelled against it. For those who are
still sceptical I would cite another condemnation, this time
condemnation from the ecclesiastical world. Through press
reports, all delegations here have heard of the rising of the
European missionary priests in Africa-in Mozambique and
in other Territories illegally held by Portugal. As a sign of
protest, these men of the church have been waging open
war against the colonialist and racist practices of Portugal.
The very Catholic country of Portugal is accused by
Catholics. Portugal, a Catholic country, is accused by the
capital of Christianity, Rome, and by Pope Paul VI, the
most Catholic of Catholics. Portugal knows that the Pope is
infallible. Less than a year ago, Pope Paul VI welcomed the
leaders of national liberation movements. The freedom
fighters of Africa, Augostino Neto of Angola, Marcelino dos
Santos of Mozambique, Amilcar Cabral, whom most here
know, ,of Guinea (Bissau), were received by His Holiness

89. The members of the Council will recall that this is not
the first time that Senegal has come to the Security Council
and submitted documents that are as precise as they are
convincing, proving with facts, and even with figures, the
grave consequences of the repeated aggressionsby Portugal.
90. In the course of the meeting yesterday afternoon, the
Security Council and Members of the United Nations heard
from the very mouth of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Senegal, Mr. Gaye, the complaints which had already been
submitted in writing in his letters. The facts that were
placed before us are clear and precise, and they recall
painfully the recent and repeated aggressions against other
independent African countries from Guinea to the United
Republic of Tanzania, without sparing Zambia, the two
Congas and Senegal,
9

::,

:y

100. Portugal, copying its ideological partner, South
Africa, is engaged in a struggle to jeopardize peace not ody
in Africa but all over the world. The challenge hurled at the
United Nations by these two members must be taken up or
else the crime itself will have been endorsed and condoned
by the United Nations. Portugal was once a colony of
another Power, namely, Spain-which does believe in
self-determination, freedom and human rights; since becoming decolonized Portugal has not listened, has not learnt,
has not tried to understand that the period of colonization
is over, that all peoples are equal and all peoples have the
right to self-determination. Portugal obstinately adheres to
a policy that the great colonialists themselves have given up,
the policy of annexation. Portugal is flying in the face of
history; of morality and law. It must be called to order and
it must be warned to respect the inviolability of the
frontiers of independent and sovereign States, of the
inherent freedom of human lives and of the equality of
men.

Paul VI to be blessed and encouraged for Pope Paul VI is a
friend of freedom fighters, and we know this from the
facts. The gesture of the Pope was termed a historic event
by certain commentators and called revolutionary by
others, but I wish to point out that no SeriOUS newspaper
qualified the Pope’s conduct as anti-Portuguese. That would
be inconceivable.
96. With the permission of the Council, I shall mention
only two commentaries that refer to the stand taken by His
Holiness.
97, There is the French newspaper which you all read,le
Monde. On 6 July 1970, on its front page-to show the
importance it attaches to this fact-when referring to the
conflict between Portugal and Africa LeMo~de stated:
“It is clear that the present dispute is serious for other
reasons, The deliberate gesture of the Pope will not fail to
influence Portuguese Catholics, many of whom already
courageously denounce the waging of a costly and
apparently endless war in African Territories considered
by the leaders in Lisbon to be an integral part of the
metropolitan country ,”

101. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): My delegation will make a
statement during a later stage of this debate outlining the
position of the Somali Government on the grave charges
made by the Government of Senegal against Portugal.
Meanwhile, it would certainly help my delegation, and I am
sure others, if the Secretary-General could make available
to the Security Council the results of the investigation
carried out by an AdHoc Working Group of Experts of the
Commission on Human Rights in June 1970 on incidents
involving the Portuguese colonial forces and the African
populations both in Guinea (Bissau) and along the frontiers
between that Territory and Senegal. Reference to this
Group of Experts was made by the Foreign Minister of
Senegal in his statement to the Council yesterday [1569th

98. The second article I should like to mention is one
from the Canadian newspaperMontrkal-Matin of the same
date, in which on page 6 there is a very carefully weighed
statement. It terms the Papal audience with the three
leaders “a historic precedent for the third world” and
states:
“The highest moral authority of the West, the spiritual
leader of 600 million Catholics of the world, by recent
count, has dared to do what the highest political leaders
have refused to do, although they vaunt themselves on
their Church.

meeting].

102. In a situation of this gravity it is most important that
the Council should have at its disposal all pertinent
information and facts that will help it to decide the
appropriate measures necessaryto safeguard the territorial
integrity of Senegal, halt further acts of violence and
lawlessness, and ensure for the African people of Guinea
2;;s~: the peace, justice and progress that must be theirs

‘Pope Paul VI”-this Canadian newspaperitself goes on
to say-and I am merely quoting it-“welcomed
and
blessed the three coloured revolutionary leaders who are
outlawed and persecuted as communists and common
criminals.
“Furthermore,” we read later, “the three revolutionary
leaders from Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau), in
Rome, in the Papal city, denounced the very catholic
Portugal and stigmatized the military assistance given it
by NATO.”

103. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): 1 cd
upon the Acting Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Security Council Affairs to make a statement regarding the
request of the Ambassador of Somalia.

The declarations of the three leaders had been made a few
days before the Papal audience. The Pope knew that the
aims of the three leaders were serious and he did not
hesitate to grant this audience,

104. Mr. CHACKO (Acting Under-Secretary-General, Department of Political and Security Council Affairs): In
accordance with the request made by the representative of
Somalia, the report of the A@ Hoc Working Group of
Experts established by the Human Rights Commission and
any other relevant documents will be made available to the
members of the Security Council before its next meeting.

99. The delegation of Burundi wishesto endorse what was
said by previous speakers and give them and particularly
Senegal, the victim of Portuguese aggression, all possible
support MY delegation also adds its voice to those that
have urged the Council to insist upon an immediate
CeSSatiOn
of aggression against Senegal. To meet the
escalating provocations, murders and kidnappings engaged
in by Portugal the Security Council should also escalate
those sanctions provided for in the Charter.

105. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): 1
trust that the representative of Somalia is satisfied with that
reply.
10

106. Mr. VINCI (Italy): In order to help the members of
the Council, I was wondering whether reference could also
be made to the special parts of the report dealing with the
visit of the Group to Senegal, which was mentioned by the
Foreign Minister of Senegal.

109. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I
thank the Acting Under-Secretary-General; that will be the
procedure followed.
110. A number of delegations are holding consultations in
order to prepare a draft resolution. I understand also that
some delegations wish to consult one another and also to
consult their Governments. Therefore, there will be no
meeting of the Security Council this afternoon-moreover,
the four permanent members of the Security Council are to
meet on the question of the Middle East. I propose
therefore that the next meeting of the Council take place
tomorrow, Wednesday, 14 July, at 10 a.m.

107. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I call
on the Acting Under-Secretary-General.
108. Mr. CHACKO (Acting Under-Secretary-General, Department of Political and Security Council Affairs): When
the documents are circulated to the members of the
Security Council, attention will be drawn to the relevant
parts of the report to which reference has been made.

The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

11

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Natlonr
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

be obtained
or write

ler
publicotlons
der Notions
Unier
rant
d&posltotres
du monde
ehtier.
Informer-vow
Nationr
Unier,
Section
des venter,
New York

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLlCAClONES

from bookstores
ond distributors
to: United
Nations,
Soles Section,

DES NATIONS

UNIES

en vente
dons
18s libroirier
et ler agences
oupr&s
de votre libroirie
ou odrerrez-vour
8:
ou Geokve.

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de Ios Naciones
Unidos
eaten
en lodor
partes del mundo.
Conrulte
a II) librera
Ventos,
Nueva
York Q Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

throughout
New York

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en vent-a en libreriaa
o dirfjasc
e: Nocionar

y casas dirtribuidoms
Unidar,
Saccibn

Price: $U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent in other currencies)

de

8202%July

1973-2,030
