S/PV.7405

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7405th meeting

Tuesday, 17 March 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Shen Bo
Mrs. Kawar
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. McLay
Mr. Laro
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. González de Linares
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2015/141)
Special report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2015/163)

15-07271 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1507271*

S/PV.7405

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2015/141)
Special report of the Secretary-General on
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2015/163)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/141, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, and to document
S/2015/163, which contains the special report of the
Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
for this new opportunity to inform the Security Council
on the situation in Darfur. As you have indicated, two
recent reports of the Secretary-General will be the
focus of our meeting today: the regular report on the
activities of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2015/141) and the
special report of March (S/2015/163). In accordance with
paragraph 7 of resolution 2173 (2014), the special report
is dedicated specifically to the implementation of the
new strategic priorities of UNAMID, highlighting the
progress made and the major difficulties encountered
during this exercise. It also provides a comprehensive
analysis of the current situation in Darfur, information
on the progress of the implementation of the UNAMID

2/6

17/03/2015

mandate and an update on the process of transferring
certain activities of the Mission to agencies and United
Nations country teams, as well as the development of
an exit strategy for UNAMID.
Since the adoption of its three strategic priorities
under resolution 2148 (2014) of 3 April 2014, UNAMID
has made significant progress in their implementation.
Members will recall that these three priorities are, first,
mediation between the Government of the Sudan and
non-signatory armed movements on the basis of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur; secondly, the
protection of civilians, the facilitation of the delivery
of humanitarian assistance and the safety and security
of humanitarian personnel; and thirdly, the provision
of support, in conjunction with the United Nations
country team, to the mediation of community conflict,
including through measures to address its root causes.
Regarding the first priority of mediation support,
the Joint Chief Mediator of the African Union and the
United Nations has continued to support the efforts of
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel to
establish an inclusive peace process. Throughout 2014,
the Joint Chief Mediator has urged non-signatory rebel
groups to join the peace process on the basis of the
Doha Document without preconditions. The Sudanese
Government has been encouraged to establish the
conditions necessary a peaceful resolution of the
various conflicts in the country.
Following these efforts, direct negotiations among
the Government of the Sudan, the Sudan Liberation
Army/Minni Minawi and the Justice and Equality
Movement-Gibril Ibrahim took place in late November
2014 in Addis Ababa under the auspices of the High
Level Panel. However, they have been suspended
due to differences between the parties on the agenda
and modalities of the discussions. The Sudanese
Government in particular rejected proposals of rebel
groups, which had insisted that humanitarian matters,
reconciliation and other issues relating to development
and land be the subject of separate negotiations. During
the discussions, the Sudanese Government maintained
its position that the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
is the sole frame of reference, while the rebel groups
reiterated that the provisions of the agreement did not
necessarily commit them.
With respect to the protection of civilians,
UNAMID continued to protect the sites and camps
for displaced people and civilians in general through

15-07271

17/03/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.7405

patrols and strategic deployment. To meet the needs of
threatened civilians, the Mission established protective
areas in and around the camps in Saraf Omra, Kosma
and Um Baru in North Darfur, as well as in Khor
Abeche in South Darfur. This required the deployment
of additional military and police units to protect the
humanitarian operations and provide them with the
necessary logistical support. Through its contacts
with the leaders of the various communities and the
Sudanese authorities, UNAMID has helped prevent
and thwart attacks on civilians population in Kalma,
Labado and Kabkabiya in South Darfur, East Darfur
and North Darfur, respectively.

Over the past 12 months, UNAMID has
implemented a series of measures to address the
challenge of the operational capabilities of its troops
and their effectiveness on the ground. The military
component has undergone structural and compositional
changes and — I am pleased to say — increased the
serviceability rate of its equipment to over 90 per cent;
it has also improved the maintenance of oversight and
the provision of guidance to its units. I have to add that,
in recent months, we have taken drastic measures in
four cases to send home some units that had proved
on the ground to be behaving in a way that was not
suitable. That includes the units and their commanders.

To promote intercommunity dialogue and contain
local conflicts, the Mission has been in constant contact
with traditional leaders, central and local authorities,
civil society and youth groups. This commitment,
aimed at supporting mediation efforts, led to the
signing of local cessation of hostilities agreements
that have reduced the violence caused by the four
major communal conflicts in the region, namely, those
between the Ma’alia and the Rizeigat and between the
Ma’alia and the Hammar in East Darfur; between
the Beni Hussein and the Northern Rizeigat in North
Darfur; and between the Salamat and the Misseriya
in Central Darfur. Clearly, it is a highly disjointed
scenario throughout Darfur.

A military capability study will be conducted over
the next three months in order to ensure that the current
force deployment is fully aligned with the strategic
priorities and evolving security challenges on the
ground. On its part, the police component has completed
the streamlining of its strength and command-andcontrol structures, and increased operational flexibility
through proactive deployment in response to security
threats. I have to add that many of these measures
were taken on the basis of recommendations that
were formulated by the first mission that the Director
for Peacekeeping Strategic Partnership — whom I
continue to call the Inspector General — sent last
year to Darfur. He made a number of assessments and
recommendations that have provided a very solid basis
for us to work on during this period.

(spoke in English)
Concurrently, the Mission has also worked
towards addressing the three main challenges to its
mandate implementation, as identified in last year’s
strategic review. Cooperation with the Government
has improved, at least in terms of reduced duration of
approvals for contingent-owned equipment and visa
requests, although some are still outstyanding. But the
biggest problem is the Government’s denial of access to
UNAMID to conflict-affected areas, which continues
to impede significantly the ability of the Mission
to implement its protection of civilians mandate.
Members will recall that this was the case in Thabit,
North Darfur, following the allegations of mass rape
in October, and has also been the case in eastern Jebel
Marra in the wake of the increase in fighting between
the Government and the armed groups since December.
Similar access restrictions have also been imposed
on humanitarian actors, which has delayed response
efforts in areas most affected by the recent operations.

In order to improve internal coordination,
UNAMID has also substantially revised its management
structures and coordination mechanisms between its
various components, yet some of the major challenges
remain, including the need to improve the Mission’s
reporting and analysis of incidents, its internal
and external communications approach, and the
recruitment of personnel to key posts. Despite strategic
and operational-level improvements in coordination
with the United Nations country team, further progress
is also needed on establishing an effective Darfur-wide
early warning and response system.
Let me now provide an update and analysis of
the current situation in Darfur. The security situation
has deteriorated significantly over the past year.
Fighting between the Government of the Sudan
and the non-signatory armed groups has increased
significantly. In an effort to defeat the armed groups,
the Government has implemented its Decisive Summer
military offensive through the use of the Rapid Support

15-072713/6

S/PV.7405

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Forces (RSF), a counter-insurgency militia with aerial
and ground support from the Sudanese armed forces.
That did not result in a decisive military victory, but
the two-stage Government offensive significantly
weakened and isolated the armed groups geographically.
It also caused a significant loss of lives and large-scale
displacement.
The first phase of the operation, which was
conducted from January to May 2014, degraded the
military capacity of the Sudan Liberation Army/
Minni Minawi (SLA/MM) and dislodged it from its
strongholds in east and South Darfur. After a sixmonth lull in the fighting, which coincided with the
rainy season, in December the Government launched
the second phase of the operation, which focused
primarily on removing the Sudan Liberation Army/
Abdul Wahid (SLA/AW) from its strongholds in north
and east Jebel Marra. In December 2014 and January
2015, Government forces attacked SLA/AW positions
in North, West and Central Darfur, while the SLA-MM
announced plans to retake some of the strongholds in
had lost in the first phase of the offensive in North,
South and East Darfur. In December, fighting between
the Government and the SLA-MM erupted near Tawilla,
North Darfur. In January, Government forces captured
Orchi village, in the Um Baru locality in North Darfur,
from the SLA/MM. Fighting continues to be reported
in Jebel Marra, forcing the population to flee. Between
4 and 10 March, clashes were reported between the
RSF and the SLA/MM in Central and South Darfur.
Against that background, on 10 March, a joint World
Food Programme-UNAMID convoy travelling in North
Darfur was ambushed by unidentified armed men. I am
pleased to inform the Council that the troops escorting
the convoy behaved most gallantly and effectively.
The humanitarian situation in Darfur also
deteriorated significantly in 2014. We estimate that no
less than 450,000 people were displaced as a result of
the violence — the highest number in any single year
since the peak of the conflict, in 2004. Of those persons,
at least 300,000 remain displaced, mostly in camps
for internally displaced persons. The total number of
displaced persons in Darfur has now reached above
2.5 million. That negative trend persists, most recently
with the continuation of fighting. We estimate that at
least 43,000 new displacements have occurred since the
beginning of the year.
The current upsurge in violence in Darfur is largely
attributable, at least for now, to the ongoing Government

4/6

17/03/2015

of the Sudan and the RSF military offensive. It is not
directly linked to the forthcoming Sudanese general
elections. As the Council knows, those are scheduled to
start on 13 April. However, events on the ground may
change with the intensification of election campaigns.
Recent calls by Sheikh Musa Hilal for the boycott of
the elections and the disruption of the electoral process
across Darfur should his demands of the Government
not be met could affect the political and security
situation in North Darfur in the coming weeks. Should
that threat materialize, existing inter-tribal tensions
may be heightened with strict security measures and the
deployment of additional Government security forces.
With the breakdown in the talks on Darfur and on the
Two Areas and with the implementation of measures by
the Government that had the effect of curtailing political
freedom, the prospects for the holding of the national
dialogue between the Government and the opposition
before the elections remain doubtful. However, from
24 to 28 February, Sudanese opposition parties, armed
movements and civil society held a meeting in Berlin,
following which they adopted the Berlin declaration
calling for the convening of an inclusive preparatory
meeting at African Union headquarters in Addis Ababa
to revive the national dialogue. The declaration seems
to demonstrate a certain degree of consensus among
the opposition to re-engage in the national dialogue.
On 9 March, the National Congress Party welcomed the
Berlin Declaration as well as meetings and agreements
that could lead to the national dialogue without
preconditions. It is said that President Al-Bashir
subsequently pushed away the Berlin Declaration, so
that remains to be clarified.
With regard to the steps towards the handover
of certain tasks to the United Nations country team,
preliminary discussions on identifying relevant tasks
that could be transferred following the revision of the
mission’s strategic priorities have been completed. It
is envisaged that the transfer would be implemented
in phased manner, taking into account the security
situation in Darfur and the availability of funds and
capacity for the country team. Our proposal will
be presented to the Council in the next report of the
Secretary-General at the end of May.
Further to the Council’s request on the development
of an exit strategy, the United Nations, the African Union
and the Government of the Sudan have commenced
discussions. From 15 to 18 February in Khartoum, an
agreement was reached on the terms of reference for

15-07271

17/03/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

establishment of a joint working group, which started
meeting today in Khartoum. The group will review
the situation in Darfur and develop a road map for the
gradual exit of the mission. Upon the completion of
its work, it will submit its report on the exit strategy
to the Government of the Sudan, the African Union
Commission and the Secretariat. The report will then
be submitted to the Council and to the African Union
Peace and Security Council for consideration at the
end of May. Needless to say, we count on the total
cooperation of the Government of the Sudan in that
very important phase, so that we can make progress.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, the evolution of the situation in
Darfur over the past 12 months has, unfortunately,
shown no sign of improvement or tangible progress
towards a resolution of the conflict. In that context, the
three strategic priorities recommended by the review of
UNAMID and endorsed by the Security Council remain
entirely relevant. Their implementation is the primary
objective of the mission. It is therfore more necessary
than ever that the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council jointly intensify
pressure on the parties so that they enter into genuine,
direct negotiations for a cessation of hostilities, which
is the first step towards a comprehensive and final
peace in Darfur.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Ladsous
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.
Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to commend you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month, during which the Council carried an important
visit to the African continent. I also thank Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his briefing on the situation in Darfur
and on the Secretary-Generals’ quarterly regular report
(S/2015/141) and the special report (S/2015/163) on
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID). The latter report covers the
strategic review and covers an entire year.
There was an increase in the activities of armed
groups in the first quarter of 2015, with attacks ocurring
at seven localities in Darfur. At the start of the year,
we were therefore forced to deploy the Rapid Support

S/PV.7405

Forces, which, as I have often stated, are regular armed
forces that are deployed rapidly. They are part and
parcel of our armed forces, the sort of groups that exist
in all countries. But the situation now is different, and
we must look at it in the light of these facts. The report
that we are considering covers the past three months.
The assessment, which covers the whole year, is not
accurate.
Paragraph 7 of resolution 2173 (2014) clearly
requests the Secretary-General to conduct a
comprehensive review of UNAMID’s activities and the
implementation of its strategic goals, in cooperation
with the African Union and the parties concerned. That
request is made in operative paragraph 7. The principle
of an exit strategy is therefore mentioned in a resolution
of the Security Council, which the Council admits.
The goal is also to determine which missions
could be transferred to country teams, and the report
of the Secretary-General also covers the exit strategy,
in keeping with what Mr. Ladsous said. This is based
on the progress that has been achieved in the peace
process in Darfur. The special report of the SecretaryGeneral, which covers the past year, states that the
peace process is not unfolding as envisioned. In fact,
the Doha agreements have been mostly implemented,
except for several provisions, where there has been a
delay regarding certain issues. But overall the process
is moving forward very satisfactorily, and currently
peace and stability prevail in most of Darfur.
Pockets of conflict remain in Darfur where armed
groups that did not sign the Doha Document continue to
operate. These groups are trying to sabotage the Doha
process and to hinder the current exit strategy. Why
is that? It is because these factions want to see a halt
to large-scale returns; they want internally displaced
persons to remain in the camps, so as to have the pretext
of continuing to fight on their behalf. That is wrong.
Regarding the special report of the SecretaryGeneral on the exit strategy, specifically paragraph 76,
there are currently two rounds of negotiations between
the Government of the Sudan, the African Union and
the United Nations. These negotiations have led to the
establishment of a working group tasked with defining
and implementing an exit strategy. We are currently
implementing this strategy in a gradual manner. The
first step is the withdrawal of armed elements and then
that of the other parties. Such exit should take place
gradually, as agreed during the two negotiation sessions

15-072715/6

S/PV.7405

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

in Khartoum. Our forces are ready to proceed. We
would ask the United Nations to strengthen the capacity
of the country team in order for it to fulfil the missions
of UNAMID that will be transferred to it in accordance
with resolution 2173 (2014) regarding mission transfer.
Regarding the working environment of UNAMID,
the most recent report of the Secretary-General, which
covers the past three months, states in its paragraph 36
that:
“During the reporting period, the Government
of the Sudan issued 523 visas for UNAMID
personnel, including 12 civilians, 141 military, 236
police, 131 contractors and three consultants. As at
26 January, that is, a month and a half ago, 21 visa
requests were pending”.
We are speaking here of a mission composed of
thousands of personnel, and there were only 21 visa
requests pending.
I have just read out a paragraph from the report
of the Secretary-General. Therefore any reference to
constraints imposed on UNAMID is inaccurate. This
mission is made up of thousands of personnel, and
only 21 visa requests were pending. We respect and
appreciate UNAMID and have cooperated with it ever
since it was deployed, and we will continue to work with
it. We will even strengthen our cooperation, because
this is a very important time in terms of drawing up
an exit strategy with respect to groups that did not sign
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. We have said
repeatedly that there are no more reasons for these
armed groups not to join the peace process and the
national dialogue.
The Government has provided guarantees so as to
enable the armed movements to take part freely in these
various processes, and so we reject what the report
states about the freeze in the political process and the
fact that preparatory measures have been stopped.
Those things are not true. It is therefore paradoxical that
the report states in paragraph 37 that these processes
made it possible to organize workshops in Addis
Ababa from 17 to 20 November, with the participation
of groups that did not sign the Doha Agreement. The
report also mentions direct talks with JEM/Gibril
and the SLA/MM, from 23 to 30 November. So any

6/6

17/03/2015

information referring to a stalling of the peace process
is not accurate. It is true that the factions are very
stubborn, and this requires a strong commitment on the
part of the Council. The report also attempts to suggest
that the situation is unstable owing to crime and armed
conflicts. However, as we have said repeatedly, tribal
violence in Darfur is as old as Darfur itself. We have
never claimed that there was no more tribal violence,
criminal activity or theft, but we cannot condition the
withdrawal of the Mission on such considerations,
which are as ancient as Darfur itself.
We would also like to point out that there has
recently been reconciliation between two tribes in the
region. The report mentions this reconciliation process
in paragraph 73. We have been trying hard, together
with UNAMID, to bring this conflict to a definitive
end. Regarding what Mr. Ladsous said regarding the
national dialogue process and the fact that certain
factions have withdrawn from it, and the situation of
Mr. Musa Hilal, who is a tribal chief. I would like to
point out that the Mr. Hilal expressed his support for
the elections yesterday — yet further information in the
report that is not accurate.
Finally, I reaffirm our hope that the process of
national dialogue that was launched on 27 January at
the initiative of the President of the Republic will allow
for the elections to be held in April. Of course, that does
not mean that we are abandoning the dialogue; these are
two parallel processes, and as the President stated, the
dialogue will continue even after the elections.
Council members will be aware of the details of
the President’s visit to El Geneina in West Darfur
on 4 March and the warm welcome he was given by
the crowd. This is an excellent omen for the process
of national dialogue and the elections. We therefore
reiterate our request to the Security Council to pressure
the armed groups that have refused to sign the Doha
Document to join the peace process so that we can
dedicate our energies and resources to the development
and reconstruction of Darfur.
The President (spoke in French): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

15-07271
