TRAVELLING EXPENSES AND SUBSISTENCE
ALLOWANCES OF ALTERNATE REPRESENTATIVES ON CERTAIN SECURITY COUNCIL
COMMISSIONS

FRAIS DE VOYAGE ET'INDEMNITtS DE SUBSISTANCE DES REPRtSENTANTS SUPPLtANTS A
CERTAINES COMMISSIONS DU CONSEIL DE

75 (1949). Resolution of 27 September 1949

75 (1949). Resolution du 27 septembre 1949

[S/1401]

[S/1401]

stcuRITt

Le Conseil de securite,
Considerant que, selon la resolution 231 (III) adoptee
par l'Assemblee generale le 8 octobre 1948, ii lui apparits own decision whether, in the case of commissions of tient de determiner, en ce qui conceme les commissions
inquiry or investigation instituted by it, the representative d'enquete ou de conciliation instituees par lui, s'il est
of a Member State participating in such a commission necessaire que le representant d'un Etat Membre faisant
needs to be assisted by an alternate,
partie d 'une telle commission soit assiste par un suppleant,
Considering that, in cases where this need has been
Considerant que, la OU cette necessite a ete ainsi
found by the Security Council to exist, the Secretary- constatee par le Conseil de securite, le Secretaire general,
General is authorized by the same resolution to reimburse selon la meme resolution, est autorise a rembourser
Member States retroactively for the travelling and retroactivement aux Etats Membres les frais de voyage et
subsistence expenses of the alternates of their represen- indemnites de subsistance du suppleant de leurs repretatives on the said commissions,
sentants aux dites commissions,
Notes that since the institution of the under-mentioned
Constate que, depuis !'institution des commissions
commissions the representatives of Member States that ci-dessous mentionnees, il a ete necessaire que les
are participating or have participated have each had to representants des Etats Membres qui en font ou en ont
be assisted by an alternate:
i fait partie fussent assistes chacun par un suppleant:
1. The Committee of Good Offices, which has now
1. La Commission de bons offices, devenue la Commisbecome the United Nations Commission for Indonesia; sion des Nations Unies pour l'Indonesie;
2. The United Nations Commission for India and
2. La Commission des Nations Unies pour l'lnde et
Pakistan.
le Pakistan.
The Security Council,
Considering that, in virtue of General Assembly
resolution 231 (Ill) of 8 October 1948, it is a matter for

Adopted at the 448th meeting
by 7 votes to 1 ( Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic),
with 3 abstentions ( Cuba,
Egypt, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

1

Adoptee a la 448 8 seance par
7 voix contre une ( Republique

sociallste sovietlque d' Ukraine),
avec 3 abstentions ( Cuba,
Egypte, Union des Republiques
socia/istes sovietiques).

15
