the Council and the Preparatory Commission
of the International Refugee Organization. 1

nomique et social d la Commission preparatoin•
de l'Organi~ation i nternalionale pour les refu ..
gies1,

Approves this agreement.
Hundred and sixty-first plenary meeting,
18 November 1948.

Approuve cct arrorcl.
Cent-soixante et unieme seance pleniere.
le 18 novembre 19 48.

206 (III). Number
r~gional
in 1949

of
economic

sessions of
commissions

206 (III). Nombre

des sessions des
economiques regio-

comm1s10ns
nales en 1949

The GeTUJral Assembly,
Having examined resolution 17 4 (VII) adopted

L 'Assemblee generale,
Apres avoir 1•xarnine la resolution 17 4 (VII)

by the Economic and Social Council on 28 August
1948 relative to the calendar of conferences for
19'19,
Recommends that the Council authorize the
regional economic commissions to hold two
sessions in 194 9 if necessary.

adoptee par le Conseil economique et social le
28 aout 1948 relativement au calendrier dPs
conferences pour 19!19,
Recomrnande au Conseil d 'autoriser les mmmissions {·conomiqucs regionalcs a tenir, s'il !'St
n?cessaire, deux sessions en 1949.

Hundred and sixty-first plenary meeting,
18 November 1948,

Cent-soixante et unieme seance pl.eniere,
le 18 novembre 1948.

207 (III). Distribution of membership

207 (III). Repartition des sieges dans

in subsidiary organs of the Economic and Social Council

Jes organes suhsidiaires du Conseil
economique et social

Whereas it would be equitable and highly
beneficial if all Members of the United Nations
were invited to co-operate on the functional
rommissions and other subsidiary bodies of the
Economic and Social Council,

Considerant qu'il scrait equitable P1 de la plus
grande utilite qrn· tous lcs Mcmbres des Nations
l;nies fuss,•nt appeles a participer aux t~avaux ties
commissions techniques et des ,mtres orgarws
s11bsidiair1•.s du Comcil ('conomique et social,

The GeTUJTal Assembly
Rerommends the Economic and Social Council,
in the election of Member States entitled to
nominate members of functional commissions,
and in elections and arrangements for elections
of members of other subsidiary bodies, to take
all Members of the United Nations into consideration, with due regard to an equitable geographical distribution, to the special contribution
each of the Member States may bring to the work
of the Council, and to their ability to take effective
action in response to their election.

Hundred and sixty-firat plenary meeting,
18 November 1948.

L 'Assembf.ee generate

Hecommande qu1: le Conseil economiquc et
social, pom I' election des Etats Membres qualifies pour designer des rcpresentants aux commissions techniques et pour les elections et dispositions a prendre en vue de !'election des membres
des autres organes subsidiaires, prenne en consideration tous les Etats Membres de !'Organisation, en tenant compte a la fois rl'un,) repartition
geographique equitable, de la contribution particuliere que chacun des Etats Membres pent
apporter aux travaux du Conseil et de leur capacite a remplir de fa.;on efficace les fonctions que
leur confere cette election.
Cent-soixante et unieme seance pleniJre,
le 18 novembre 1948.

208 (III). Participation of Member
States in the work of the Economic
and Social Council

208 (III). Participation des Etats Membres aux travaux du Conseil economique et social

The General As,embly
Takes note of the interest shown by certain
delegations in improving the work of the Eco-

L'Asmnblee genJrale
Prend acte du souci manifeste par certaines
delegations d'ameliorer le travail du Conseil

1
See RuolutiOM adoptd by- th. &onotnic and Social Council
during its seventh session, page 5 4.

1
Voir Jes Re,olutimu adoptM park Co11#il economique et ,ocial
pendant sa septiooie session, page 54.
