S/2016/156

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 February 2016
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
This twenty-fourth report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of Security
Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of Security Council resolution 2165
(2014), paragraph 5 of Security Council resolution 2191 (2014) and paragraph 5 of
Security Council resolution 2258 (2015), in which the Council requested the
Secretary-General to report, every 30 days, on the implementation of the resolutions
by all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on the information available to
United Nations agencies on the ground, from the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, other Syrian sources as well as open sources. Data from United Nations
agencies on their humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the period from
1 to 31 January 2016. More recent data have been included where available.

II. Major developments
A.

Developments on the ground
3.
Widespread conflict and high levels of violence continued throughout the
Syrian Arab Republic in January. Indiscriminate and disproportionate aerial
bombings and ground attacks by Government forces, supported by its allies, and
indiscriminate shelling by non-State armed opposition groups and designated
terrorist groups, 1 continued to kill, injure and displace civilians. The conduct of
hostilities by all parties continued to be characterized by a widespread disregard for
the rules of international humanitarian law and the obligation of all parties to
protect civilians.
4.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) documented attacks by all parties to the conflict, as well as unattributed

__________________
1

16-02227 (E)

On May 2013, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the Nusrah Front were designated
as terrorist groups by the Security Council in accordance with resolution 1267 (1999). The two
groups operate in the Syrian Arab Republic.

220216

*1602227*

S/2016/156

attacks that resulted in the killing of more than 400 civilians and injuring of
hundreds more during the reporting period. 2 These included air strikes and shelling
with the use of artillery, barrel bombs, mortars and rockets, as well as car and
suicide bombings in populated areas. Private property, civilian infrastructure, and
protected structures, such as schools and hospitals, also continued to be damaged
and destroyed. The ongoing hostilities also continued to displace people, with
humanitarian partners reporting some 200,000 people displaced in 11 governorates
during January and early February.
5.
Open sources also reported on civilians killed during the reporting period. For
example, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights published the death of
1,345 civilians while the Syrian Network for Human Rights published the death of
1,382 civilians. The United Nations was not able to verify these cited figures.
6.
Fighting intensified throughout Aleppo governorate during January and
February. Government of Syria ground offensives in northern Aleppo, backed by
heavy aerial bombardment on a daily basis by Syrian and Russian air support, had
reportedly resulted in some 500 civilian deaths as of 11 February, according to open
sources. In addition some 61,000 people have also been displaced, mostly
northwards towards Azaz and the Bab al-Salam border area. Civilian infrastructure,
including several medical facilities, was also severely damaged. Humanitarian
operations from Turkey to Aleppo and other governorates are continuing, but have
been disrupted as a result of the ground fighting and heavy bombard ment along
major towns and transport corridors from Turkey towards Aleppo. While the recent
fighting killed hundreds and displaced tens of thousands, the recent Government
offensive also resulted in the end of the three-year encirclement of the nearly 30,000
people living in the government-controlled enclaves of Nubul and Zahra. Fighting
between Government forces and its allies, non-State armed opposition groups and
ISIL was also reported in Aleppo city and surrounding areas, resulting in death and
injury. For example, on 16 January, according to information received by OHCHR,
an airstrike hit a building used as a medical clinic in the non -State armed group
controlled Sokkari neighbourhood of Aleppo city reportedly killing seven civilians,
including four children. On 25 January, Government air strikes hit the town of
Termanin, west of Aleppo city, allegedly killing at least 6 civilians, and injuring
more than 20. Meanwhile, non-State armed opposition groups also continued their
shelling of Government-controlled neighbourhoods, including Manshieh, Azizieh,
and Saad Jabri, reportedly resulting in multiple civilian casualties, according to
open sources. Meanwhile on 16 January, ISIL cut off the water supply to Aleppo
governorate from Al Khafseh water treatment facility on the Euphrates River
affecting some 2 million people.
7.
Heavy fighting was reported in Damascus and Rif Dimashq governorates.
Fighting between Government forces, backed by Russian air support, and non -State
armed opposition groups continued in and around eastern Ghutah, accompanied by
intensified aerial bombardments and shelling. Information received by OHCHR
indicates that some 50 civilians were killed and hundreds injured as a result of
__________________
2

2/15

These figures are based on incidents documented by OHCHR during the reporting period
according to their human rights monitoring methodology. It is not a full representation of all
incidents that may have impacted civilians during the reporting period. Despite requests, the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has not granted access to its territory to either OHCHR
or the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic.

16-02227

S/2016/156

multiple air strikes in eastern Ghutah during January. On 7 January, several air
strikes were carried out on residential areas in Erbin, causing the death of at least
12 civilians, and injuring approximately 85. On 12 January, a kindergarten was hit
in Deir Al-Asafier killing two civilians, including one child. M eanwhile, in western
Ghutah, the main road between Daraya and Madimayet Elsham was cut off on
27 January following intensified shelling and air strikes around the two besieged
towns. On 24 January, open sources reported that the southern part of Madimayet
Elsham was hit by several air strikes and missiles, killing five people and injuring
26 more, and an estimated 500 families were reportedly displaced inside the city.
Displacement was also recorded in Balaliyeh and Nashabieh as a result of ongoing
fighting and heavy bombardment.
8.
Non-State armed opposition groups also launched several attacks in Damascus
and Rif Dimashq, with the city of Damascus subjected to continued shelling.
According to information received by OHCHR, non-State armed opposition groups
struck populated areas in the capital, killing and injuring many civilians and
damaging infrastructure and residential buildings. For instance, on 6 January, nine
civilians were killed and at least 36 were injured when several mortar rounds fell on
al-Shaalan, Abu Rummana, Hamra and Baghdad Street.
9.
In Idlib, towns controlled by non-State armed opposition groups were
subjected to almost daily air strikes by the Government and its allied forces, causing
widespread destruction. For example, on 10 January, 47 civilians were reportedly
killed and 100 others were injured, and a number of shops destroyed, when a market
in Ma’aret Nu’man was hit. On 11 January, missiles struck a primary school in
Anjara, killing 10 civilians, including 9 children. On 16 January, Government
aircraft struck the local council building in Fayloun, reportedly killing eight
civilians and injuring a dozen more. Another attack on 28 January, which struck a
number of residential buildings in Kafr Takhareem, reportedly killed at least
12 civilians and injured 20.
10. Heavy fighting was reported in northern rural parts of Homs Governorate, with
Government forces launching offensives in and around Talbiseh, Rastan, and the
Houle Plain, cutting off the remaining supply routes and encircling the area. Aerial
strikes by Government forces resulting in civilian casualties were also reported: on
11 January, five civilians, including a child, were killed in air strikes by
Government forces on Rastan. Reports indicate that the 120,000 civilians in these
areas face rapidly worsening humanitarian conditions, including a severe lack of
food, high prices of available goods in markets, and medical supplies.
11. Civilian casualties and injuries were also reported in Homs city as a result of
attacks by listed terrorist groups. For example, on 23 January, two car bombs
exploded in the Wadi al Dahab neighbourhood, injuring at least 15 civilians.
According to information received by OHCHR, the Nusrah Front claimed
responsibility for the attack. On 26 January, ISIL claimed responsibility for a car
bomb and a suicide bombing in the Zahra neighbourhood, killing over 20 civilians
and injuring 50. In Rif Dimashq, on 31 January, ISIL claimed responsibility for twin
car bombs and one suicide bomber that detonated at the Sayyida Zeinab shrine
which killed 45 civilians and injured dozens.
12. In Dayr al-Zawr governorate, ISIL launched a series of offensives on the
besieged neighbourhoods of Joura and Qusoor in Dayr al-Zawr city, resulting in
dozens of civilian casualties and damaging public and private property and

16-02227

3/15

S/2016/156

infrastructure. OHCHR also received reports that some civilians trying to flee the
ISIL advance were executed by ISIL: for example, 17 male civilians were killed in
Bghiliya while trying to flee an ISIL attack on 16 January. On 22 January, according
to information received by OHCHR, air strikes of an unknown origin were carried
out on different areas in western rural Dayr al-Zawr, including Tabiya, Albo Leil,
Kharita, as well as ISIL-held areas around Dayr al-Zawr city. At least 55 civilians
were allegedly killed, including 40 in Tabiya and 12 in Albo Leil. On 23 January, air
strikes on Khsham, in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr, reportedly killed at least
50 civilians.
13. Fighting continued in southern Syria during the reporting period. In Dar ’a
governorate, government forces seized control of Sheikh Miskine and Atman town
north of Dar’a city, close to the Ramtha border crossing. OHCHR received reports
of numerous civilian casualties as a result of rockets, artillery and air strikes by
Government and allied forces, including on 13 January when six civilians were
killed by ground and air strikes on Nawa and Dar ’a city. Some 36,000 people were
displaced in Dar’a as a result of the recent fighting. In Lattakia, government ground
forces, with Syrian and Russian air support, made advances against non -State armed
opposition groups, capturing one of the last non-State armed opposition group-held
towns in Lattakia by the end of the month. On 30 January, government forces
allegedly shelled the Obeen camp housing internal displaced persons in northeast
Lattakia governorate, causing the death of at least one person and injuring tens of
others.
14. The Russian Federation as well as the United States-led coalition forces
continued to carry out air strikes in Syria throughout January according to reports
received by official sources. While not providing data for the full month, the
Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation confirmed that it had carried out
more than 1,120 “combat sorties” during January, engaging 3,256 targets in the
Governorates of Aleppo, Hasakeh, Raqqa, Idlib, Damascus (presumed to include Rif
Damashq), Dar’a, Dayr al-Zawr, Hama, Homs and Lattakia. Meanwhile, the United
States Central Command confirmed that at least 114 strikes were carried out by the
United States-led coalition in the month of January against ISIL targets in the
governorates of Aleppo, Hasakeh, Raqqa, and Dayr al-Zawr. OHCHR received
numerous reports of air strikes reportedly by international actors in which civilians
were killed or injured, including in Raqqa, Rif Dimashq, Dayr al -Zawr, and Idlib
governorates, which killed some 200 people and injured hundreds. However,
OHCHR was not able to adequately verify the origin of the reported air strikes.
15. There were developments regarding several local agreements during the
reporting period. In the Qadam district of south Damascus, which had been under a
local agreement since August 2014, further agreement was reached between the
government and non-State armed opposition groups inside which some
3,000 civilians were enabled to return to their homes in the district. The
Government of Syria is still restricting the movement of civilians inside the
neighbourhood, pending clearance of possibly remaining mines or other unexploded
ordinances. Local agreements in Wadi Barada, Rif Dimashq, and Al Wa ’er, Homs,
also continue to hold, despite reported violations of the agreement and some
provisions of the agreements remaining to be implemented.
16. Despite violations to the ceasefire, the Four Towns agreement covering
Zabadani, Madaya, Foah and Kafraya also continued to hold, with the United

4/15

16-02227

S/2016/156

Nations and International Committee of the Red Cross/Syrian Arab Red Crescent
delivering assistance on 11, 14 and 18 January. However, follow-up medical,
nutrition and food deliveries to Madaya, Foah and Kafraya have not been possible
owing to disagreements among the parties to the Four Towns agreement. The parties
continue to negotiate further simultaneous medical evacuations.
17. In besieged Madimayet Elsham, the local agreement broke down after
Government forces closed the main road to the town late in December 2015 and
shelled the areas. On 22 January, a government negotiator reportedly warned
non-State armed opposition groups inside the city to surrender their weapons or the
city would be evacuated and declared a military zone.

B.

Human rights
18. The scale and severity of abuses and violations of international human rights
and humanitarian law, including abductions, summary executions, and deaths in
custody, remained grave during the reporting period. On 8 February, the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic
launched a report entitled “Out of sight, out of mind”, detailing how Syrian civilians
have been arbitrarily arrested, unlawfully detained, taken hostage, or kidnapped
since the conflict began by all parties to the conflict. The report describes how
thousands of detainees held by the Syrian Government have been beaten to death, or
died as a result of injuries sustained as a result of torture. The report also details the
acts of other parties to the conflict including non-State armed opposition groups,
Nusrah Front and ISIL, including cases of cruel treatment, executions, torture,
murder and summary executions.
19. OHCHR received reports that, on 18 and 19 January, 25 alleged members of
the National Defence Forces were reportedly summarily executed by ISIL following
fighting in Dayr al-Zawr governorate.
20. On 12 January, ISIL reportedly sentenced two drivers to 40 lashes and
imposed an 800 Syrian Lira fine in Dayr al-Zawr city for attempting to transport
civilians to areas outside ISIL control. Other reports received also indicated that
ISIL has prohibited civilians from leaving areas under its control. OHCHR also
received reports alleging that ISIL was forcibly moving civilians from Ramadi, Iraq,
to western rural Dayr al-Zawr. The reasons behind such deportations remained
unclear.
21. During the reporting period, OHCHR received reports alleging the abduction
of civilians by the Nusrah Front in Idlib city. According to information received, at
least 11 civilians were abducted from their homes in Idlib in January by the Nusrah
Front and taken to undisclosed locations.
22. On 9 January, a Kurdish schoolteacher was taken from his home in Qamishly.
The Kurdish National Council later accused the Democratic Union Party/People’s
Protection Unit (PYD/YPG) of abducting the teacher, whose whereabouts remained
unknown.
23. On 2 January, OHCHR received information that the PYD/YPG allegedly
forcibly evicted 16 civilians from their houses in Ras el Ain, north -west of Hasakeh.
According to information received by OHCHR, all those evicted were ethnic Arabs.
The houses were then reportedly rented or used as offices.

16-02227

5/15

S/2016/156

C.

Humanitarian response
24. In January 2016, United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued
to reach millions of people in need through all modalities from within the Syrian
Arab Republic and across borders pursuant to Security Council resolutions 2165
(2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015). Non-governmental organizations also
continued to deliver assistance to people as in previous months. The Government of
Syria continued to provide basic services to areas under its control as well as in
many areas beyond its control.
United Nations agency

Number of people assisted in January 2016

World Food Programme (WFP)

3.6 million

World Health Organization (WHO)

657,000 treatments

United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)

2.05 million

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR)

267,000

United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)

112,925

International Organization for Migration (IOM)

66,000

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)

290,000

25. Cross-border deliveries continued during the reporting period. As at
31 January, the United Nations and its implementing partners had sent
256 shipments from Turkey and Jordan to the Syrian Arab Republic under the terms
of resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015), benefiting millions of
people. The attached map provides more information on United Nations crossborder convoys. In line with resolutions, the United Nations notified the Syrian
authorities in advance of each shipment, including content, destination and number
of beneficiaries.
26. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism continued its operations in Jordan
and Turkey. In January, it monitored 17 United Nations humanitarian shipments
consisting of 540 trucks, confirming the humanitarian nature of each, and notifying
the Syrian authorities after each shipment. The Monito ring Mechanism continued to
benefit from excellent cooperation with the Governments of Jordan and Turkey.
27. In January and early February 2016, the following inter -agency convoys were
completed, assisting over 125,000 people in need:

6/15

16-02227

S/2016/156

Date (2016)

Destination

Type of assistance

11 January

Madaya/Buqayn (Rif Dimashq);
Foah and Kafraya (Idlib)

Food, medicines, medical and nutrition supplies

11 January

Al-Wa’er (Homs)*

Food, medicines, medical, nutrition and
non-food items

14 January Madaya/Buqayn (Rif Dimashq);
Foah and Kafraya (Idlib)

Wheat flour, health and nutrition supplies, water
and sanitation supplies and non-food items

18 January Madaya/Buqayn, Zabadani
(Rif Dimashq); Foah and Kafraya
(Idlib)

Fuel (Madaya/Buqayn and Foah and Kafraya);
food, wheat flour and health supplies (Zabadani)

4 February Al-Wa’er (Homs)

Food, health, non-food items, nutrition, water
and sanitation support, and education supplies.
Medical supplies, including surgical items and
diarrhoea kits were removed by Government
security forces

* The delivery to Al-Wa’er on 11 January was the final part of a convoy requested and approved by the Syrian
authorities in 2015; it was not related to a request made in 2016.

28. United Nations agencies also undertook cross-line deliveries in January. For
example, WFP and partners reached 5,000 people in Zakieyh and Tiba in Rif
Dimashq. UNICEF completed the rehabilitation of water pumps and other water
supply infrastructure in Idlib Governorate, providing access to water to some
300,000 people. In response to the water supply being cut in Aleppo city, UNICEF
scaled up its water trucking operation, supplying 5 million litres of water per day,
sufficient to meet the needs of 375,000 people.
Humanitarian access
29. The delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in need of assistance in the
Syrian Arab Republic remained challenging in many areas of the country as a result
of active conflict, shifting conflict lines, and deliberat e restrictions by the parties on
the movement of people and goods, including burdensome administrative procedures.
30. Access to the 4.6 million people living in besieged and hard -to-reach locations
remained of critical concern (see attached map of current besieged and hard-toreach locations). In 2016, 55 inter-agency convoy requests have been submitted to
besieged and hard-to-reach locations, with the following status as of 15 February:
Status of inter-agency convoy requests as of 15 February

Approved and convoys proceeded

4

Approved in principle; awaiting facilitation letters

5

Submitted and pending approval by Government of Syrian Arab Republic

46

Total

16-02227

Requests

55

7/15

S/2016/156

31. Intensified conflict and worsening security conditions in several governorates
hindered the effective delivery of humanitarian assistance, as well as people ’s
access to essential services. Major supply routes from Damascus to Dar ’a, Sweida
and Homs remained vulnerable to insecurity due to ongoing clashes. WFP remained
unable to access high-conflict areas of Rif Dimashq, rural Homs, rural Hama, and
its cross-border partners continued to be unable to conduct distributions in Kafr
Zeita and Kafr Nabutha subdistricts in northern rural Hama owing to insecurity.
Meanwhile, the shifting conflict lines in Aleppo governorate early in February also
severely disrupted humanitarian operations, particularly from Turkey into eastern
Aleppo city. In Hasakeh, a large number of vehicle-borne improvised explosive
devices deployed in Hasakeh city and insecurity in Qamishly city has also hampered
humanitarian programming.
32. Deliberate interference and restrictions by the parties also continued to prevent
aid delivery. For example, WFP continued to be unable to reach people in need in
ISIL-controlled areas of the country owing to the inability to work independently
and to monitor activities. This affects some 720,000 people in almost all of Dayr
al-Zawr and Raqqa governorates, parts of rural Aleppo and east rural Homs, as well
as pockets in southern rural Hasakah and northwestern rural Hama.
33. As a result of these factors, the United Nations agencies and partners reached
only 32 of the 154 hard-to-reach locations (21 per cent). Nearly half of the people in
hard-to-reach areas are in ISIL-controlled areas, to where the United Nations has
extremely limited access. However, in January, UNICEF delivered an additional
100 tons of water disinfectant to Raqqa, sufficient to meet the needs of the entire
population for over two months, as well as aquatabs.
34. Details of assistance to people in hard-to-reach areas in January 2016 are
contained below.
Sector (United Nations delivery only)

Number of people reached in hard-to-reach areas

Food security

238 800

Health

119 000

Non-food items

99 600

Water, sanitation and hygiene

587 900

35. Owing to security concerns, since 27 December 2015 the Nusaybin/Qamishly
crossing has been temporarily closed by the Turkish authorities. No humanitarian
assistance went through the crossing in January. Reports of high food prices and
shortages in some essential commodities, like yeast and sugar, were received in
Hasakeh governorate.
36. No major improvements in the administrative procedures required by the
Syrian Government for the delivery of humanitarian assistance were reported in
January. The administrative procedures in place with regard to humanitarian
operations continued to delay or limit the delivery of aid by United Nations
agencies and partners.
37. As of 31 January, 9 United Nations visa requests (either new visas or
renewals) remained pending, all of which were within the 15 working days ’ limit. In

8/15

16-02227

S/2016/156

January, a total of 79 visas for United Nations staff from 10 different agencies were
approved, 30 of which were new visas and 49 of which were renewals.
38. A total of 16 international non-governmental organizations are authorized to
operate in the Syrian Arab Republic. They continued to face a series of
administrative hurdles and restrictions that impact thei r ability to operate. They
remain restricted in their ability to partner with national humanitarian organizations,
open sub-offices, conduct missions, join inter-agency convoys and undertake
independent needs assessments.
39. The number of national non-governmental organizations authorized to partner
with United Nations organizations increased from 139 to 141 in January. Authorized
national non-governmental organizations continue to operate under complex
procedures in partnering with United Nations agencies.
Besieged areas
40. Of the 4.6 million people living in hard-to-reach areas, some 486,700 people
remained besieged in the Syrian Arab Republic. This includes some 274,200 people
besieged by the Government of Syria in various locations in Rif Dimashq;
6,000 people besieged by the Government of Syria and non -State armed opposition
groups in Yarmouk; some 200,000 people in Dayr al-Zawr city who are besieged by
ISIL; and some 12,500 people who are besieged by non -State armed opposition
groups and the Nusrah Front in Foah and Kafraya in Idlib governorate.
41. The parties to the conflict continued to entirely or heavily restrict access to
besieged areas. In January, some 61,000 people (12 per cent) were assisted in
besieged areas. The flow of commercial supplies through official routes remained
largely blocked, leading to high prices for commodities reaching besieged areas
through unofficial and irregular supply lines. Freedom of movement remained
heavily restricted, though limited numbers were sporadically allowed to exit and
re-enter some besieged areas.
42. In eastern Ghutah, Rif Dimashq, some 176,500 people remain besieged by
Government forces in the following locations: Duma, Harasta, Arbin, Zamalka, Ain
Tarma, Hammura, Jisrein, Kafr Batna, Saqba and Zabadin. No United Nations
assistance was provided in these areas during the reporting period. Meanwhile, the
Unified Medical Office for Douma announced the suspension of the dialysis
services for patients suffering renal failure in eastern Ghutah owing to the lack of
supplies for haemodialysis. Reportedly, two patients died of renal failure during the
reporting period. On 13 February, SARC delivered 5,400 infant formula milk cans,
2,000 insulin boxes, supplies for 250 dialysis sessions and medicines to Duma .
43. In Madaya (and Buqayn) in Rif Dimashq, some 42,000 people remain besieged
by Government forces. Reports of severe malnutrition continue to be received. In
Foah and Kafraya in Idlib governorate, some 12,500 people remain besieged by
non-State armed opposition groups and the Nusrah Front. Joint United Nations/
ICRC/SARC convoys delivered assistance sufficient for one month to Madaya, Foah
and Kafraya on 11, 14 and 18 January as part of the Four Towns Agreement. After
initially gaining access to Madaya, the United Nations and ICRC/SARC submitted
repeated requests to the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic for clearance for
safe and unimpeded access to return with additional supplies, training teams and
technical experts to address the situation on the ground. Although some approvals

16-02227

9/15

S/2016/156

have been granted, including the entrance of SARC mobile clinics, approval for
sustained and unfettered access remains pending. On 4 February, the United Nations
and ICRC/SARC submitted a further request to the Syrian author ities for a convoy
to the towns covered under the Four Towns Agreement.
44. In Zabadani in Rif Dimashq, some 700 people remain besieged by
Government forces. On 18 January, assistance for 1,000 people was delivered to
Zabadani.
45. In Daraya in Rif Dimashq, about 4,000 people remain besieged by
Government forces. The United Nations has been unable to deliver assistance to
Daraya since November 2012.
46. In Madimayet Elsham in Rif Dimashq, about 45,000 people remain besieged
by Government forces. Living conditions are reportedly worsening, with reports of
deaths due to severe malnutrition and lack of basic medical supplies. On 21 January,
the United Nations received approval to deliver aid to the buffer zone between the
last Government checkpoint and the entrance to the besieged town, but not inside
the besieged area. On 8 February, the Syrian authorities reiterated that the United
Nations had approval to deliver to the buffer zone, but not inside Madimayet. The
United Nations has not accepted this because of the serious protection concerns
arising with distribution in the buffer zone. On 3 February, a SARC convoy
delivered aid to the areas surrounding Madimayet, and a limited amount of medical
aid inside the besieged area. On 8 February, SARC delivered furthe r aid to the areas
immediately outside Madimayet.
47. In Yarmouk in Damascus, some 6,000 people are besieged by Government
forces and non-State armed groups. All UNRWA operations in Yarmouk remained
suspended in January. Reports indicate that there are no functioning medical
facilities due to insufficient medical supplies and trained medical personnel. The
United Nations last delivered assistance to the area in December 2015, when
UNICEF delivered nutrition, health and winter clothing supplies via implement ing
partners. UNRWA was not permitted to conduct any missions to Yalda, Babila and
Beit Sahm in January but it received blanket approval to resume regular
programming in these areas early in February 2016 following an interruption of
over six months. On 13 and 14 February, UNRWA distributed food supplies for
2,100 families in Yalda town, serving civilians residing in Yalda, Babila, Beit Sahm
and Yarmouk. Other humanitarian organizations have been allowed to deliver
assistance to these areas.
48. In the Government-controlled western neighbourhoods of Dayr al-Zawr city,
some 200,000 people are besieged by ISIL. Some 3,200 families were displaced
within the besieged part of the city during the reporting period following offensives
by ISIL. The humanitarian situation in the besieged areas continues to deteriorate
sharply, with shortages of food and medical care, and severe malnutrition reported
during the reporting period. The planned United Nations air bridge — approved in
principle by the Syrian authorities — remains unfeasible at the current time owing
to the airport’s proximity to the front lines. The Russian Federation confirmed that it
had airdropped relief supplies to Dayr al-Zawr on several occasions during the
reporting period.

10/15

16-02227

S/2016/156

Free passage of medical supplies, personnel and equipment
49. United Nations and health partners received reports — which are in the
process of being verified by the United Nations and partner organizations — of
13 attacks on medical facilities in January. Multiple attacks on me dical facilities in
February have already been reported. For example, on 15 February, UNICEF
received reports of attacks against four medical facilities in February, two of which
were in Azaz, Aleppo and two in Idlib.
50. Physicians for Human Rights released its report in January on attacks on
medical facilities in 2015. A total of 112 attacks on medical facilities were
documented from January through November 2015, making it the worst year on
record for attacks on medical facilities, surpassing the 89 atta cks in 2012. In total,
Physicians for Human Rights has documented 336 attacks on 240 separate medical
facilities between March 2011 and November 2015. According to Physicians for
Human Rights, Syrian Government and Russian forces are responsible for over
90 per cent of these attacks.
51. WHO and its implementing partners delivered over 110,000 treatments
through cross-line operations in Aleppo, Idlib, Rif Dimashq, and Homs governorates
in January. During the reporting period, WHO submitted 15 requests to th e
Government of Syria to send medicines and medical supplies to hard -to-reach and
besieged locations in nine governorates targeting over 2.5 million people. The
majority of these requests are pending. The Syrian authorities recently approved a
request to send medicines and medical supplies to Duma in Rif Dimashq. On
4 February, forces of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic removed medical
kits from an inter-agency convoy to Al Wa’er.
52. The restricted access for medical aid to reach populations in need owing to
active conflict and constraints imposed by the parties to the conflict continues to
lead to loss of life and lack of life-saving medical assistance. The inhibition of
delivery of essential medicines, medical supplies and equipment, as well as damage
to many health facilities, particularly to hard-to-reach, besieged and non-State
armed opposition group-controlled areas continues to lead to severe gaps in service
delivery.
Safety and security of staff and premises
53. On 3 February 2016, three SARC volunteers were killed and one seriously
injured while distributing bread in Aleppo governorate.
54. One staff member of an international non-governmental organization was
killed and another injured by an improvised explosive device by unknown a ctors in
Idlib on 25 January 2016.
55. A total of 34 United Nations staff members, 30 of whom are UNRWA area staff,
1 from the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), 1 from UNICEF;
1 from UNHCR/United Nations Office for Project Services; and 1 from O CHA
continue to be detained or missing. Five UNRWA staff members were released in
2015 and one released recently. The total number of humanitarian workers killed in
the conflict since March 2011 is 85. This includes 17 staff members of the United
Nations, 51 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent,
8 volunteers and staff members of the Palestinian Red Crescent Society and 9 staff

16-02227

11/15

S/2016/156

members of international non-governmental organizations. Of the 85, 19 have been
killed since 1 January 2015.

III. Observations
56. As this conflict enters its sixth year, targeted and indiscriminate attacks against
civilians, residential areas and civilian infrastructure have continued unabated and
with near complete impunity. Since the start of the year, thousands of civilians have
been killed, injured or displaced by the ongoing violence and the parties ’ disregard
for the basic tenets of international humanitarian law. Even as the United Nations
talks commenced in Geneva at the start of February, I was shocked by the
scenes of thousands of people fleeing for their lives from the unrelenting aerial
bombardment in Aleppo governorate. There can be no justification or defence, for
continuously failing to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure. Such att acks are
unacceptable and unlawful and I call on the parties to immediately halt all actions
that can result in civilian loss of life or damage to essential infrastructure.
57. The recent report published by the independent international commission of
inquiry on deaths in detention in Syria is another stark and gruesome reminder that
violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law continue to be
perpetrated on a daily basis by all parties to the conflict. Detainees held by the
Government were beaten to death, or died as a result of injuries sustained as a result
of torture. Others perished as a consequence of inhuman living conditions.
Non-State armed opposition groups and listed terrorist groups took individuals
hostage and subjected detainees to serious abuses, including torture and summary
executions. Such actions are reprehensible and may amount to war crimes and
crimes against humanity. There must be accountability for these and other crimes.
58. I am extremely concerned about the incredibly dire situation facing the
486,700 people living in horrific conditions under siege in Syria. The continued
reports of high levels of malnutrition and numbers of death due to lack of basic
medical care emanating from besieged areas are shocking and ca use for deep
concern. The main responsibility for this immense suffering lies with the party
imposing a siege. It is, however, shared by those who put civilians in harm ’s way by
using them as shields for military activities or by those who take advantage o f their
suffering by taking bribes or selling food at exorbitant prices. Persons protected
under international humanitarian law, particularly civilians and the wounded and
sick, must be allowed to leave besieged areas, should they wish to do so. I remind
all parties that the deliberate starvation of civilians as a method of warfare
constitutes a serious violation of international humanitarian law and could amount
to a war crime.
59. Despite their international legal obligations and the demands of the Security
Council, all parties to the conflict continue to obstruct humanitarian assistance to
those most in need and to withhold consent for operations in an arbitrary manner.
Notwithstanding the valiant efforts of humanitarian organizations and staff that
continue to assist millions of people, millions more are still left with no or
insufficient access as a result. I call on the parties and those Member States with
influence on them to urgently and without any hesitation or dilution take all
necessary steps to bring sustained access throughout the country, particularly in
besieged or hard-to-reach areas. The United Nations remains committed and ready

12/15

16-02227

S/2016/156

to deliver aid and protection for civilians, whoever and wherever they are, based on
need and vulnerability and not on political considerations.
60. On 29 January, my Special Envoy, Staffan de Mistura, commenced
intra-Syrian talks in Geneva between representatives of the Syrian Government and
the High Negotiations Committee. Consultations also took place with women, civil
society groups and other national stakeholders. On 3 February, my Special Envoy
announced he was to recess talks as of 5 February because of unresolved procedural
matters and the dramatically deteriorating humanitarian situation on the ground.
However, the fact that all relevant Syrian actors did come to Geneva ready to
discuss the end of the conflict and the future of their country, is in itself positive and
should be supported. I look forward to the resumption of the intra-Syrian talks.
61. I welcome the sustained momentum and resolve to put an end to the Syrian
conflict demonstrated by the International Syria Support Group (ISSG), whose
ministers gathered in Munich on 11-12 February. I support their agreement to
establish two task forces to ensure that all in need of humanitarian assistance in
Syria are assured sustained access, as well as to implement a nationwide cessation
of hostilities, in parallel with steps towards a political transition process. The United
Nations shall do its utmost to support the implementation of the agreements reached
by the ISSG as part of the implementation of Security Council resolution 2254
(2015) in all its aspects. The Syrian conflict has long gone beyond the abilities of
the Syrians themselves to end it. The time has come for the international community
to put their differences aside, for all parties to act with restraint and redouble efforts
towards a political solution, lest the world is prepared to deal with the repercussions
of this war inside Syria and far beyond.

16-02227

13/15

S/2016/156

Maps
14/15

Annex

16-02227

16-02227

S/2016/156

15/15
