Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(e) lncreased utilization of science and technology for
social and economic . development; arrangements for the
transfer and exchange of technology, including know-how
and patents, to the developing countries.
Article 25
(a) Toe establishment of legal and administrative measures for the protection and improvement of the human
environment at both national and international levels;
(b) Toe use and exploitation, in accordance with the
appropriate international régimes, of the resources of areas
of the environment such as outer space and the sea-bed
and ocean floor and the subsoil thereof, beyond the limits
of national jurisdiction, in order to supplement national
resources available for the achievement of economic and
social progress and development in every country, irrespective of its geographical location, special consideration being given to the interests and needs of the developing countries.
Article 26
Compensation for damages, be they social or economic
in nature-including restitution and reparations-caused as
a result of aggression and of illegal occupation of territory
by the aggressor.
Article 27
(a) Toe achievement of general and complete disarmament and the channelling of the progressively released
resources to be used for economic and social progress for
the welfare of people everywhere and, in particular, for
the benefit of developing countries;
( b) The adoption of measures contributing to disarmament, including, ínter alía, the complete prohibition of
tests of nuclear weapons, the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of chemical . and bacteriological (biological) weapons and the prevention of the
pollution of oceans and inland waters by nuclear wastes.

1829th plenary meeting,
11 December 1969.
2543 (XXIV). lmplementation of the Declaration on S~ial Progress and Development

The General Assembly,
Having adopted the Declaration on Social Progress
and Development, 5
C onscious of the importance of the Declaration for
the formulation and implementation of national policies
and measures and for undertaking joint and separate
action to promote higher and improved standards of
living, full employment and conditions conducive to
rapid economic and social progress,
Strongly desirous of achieving the effective realization of the provisions of the Declaration,
l. Recommends that all Governments should take
into consideration in their policies, plans and programmes the principles, objectives and means and
methods of the Declaration on Social Progress and
Development;
2. Decides that the D.eclaration shall be taken into
account in the formulation of the strategy for the
Second United Nations Development Decade and in
the implementation of programmes of international
action to be carried out during the Decade;
3. Urges a11 Govemments to take into account the
provisions of the Declaration in their bilateral and
multilateral relations in the field of development;
11 Resolution 2542 (XXIV).

SS

4. Recommends that international organizations and
agencies concerned with development should consider
the Declaration as an important intemational document
in the formulation of strategies and programmes designed to achieve social progress and development, and
that it may be taken into consideration in the drafting
of instruments that the United Nations may undertake
in the field of social progress and development;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange, in
co-operation with Governments, the widest possible
dissemination of the Declaration;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to inform
the General Assembly, in a summary form in annexes
to the reports on the world social situation, of the
measures adopted by Govemments-not included in
other reports provided on a regular basis-and by the
international organizations concemed for the realization
of the provisions of the Declaration and for the implementation of the present resolution.
1829th plenary meeting,
11 December 1969.
2544 (XXIV). Programme for the observance
in 1971 of the lnternational Y ear for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its firm resolve to achieve the total and
unconditional elimination of racial discrimination and
racism, against which the conscience and sense of
justice of mankind have long been aroused and which
in our time represent a serious obstacle to further
progress and to the strengthening of international peace
and security,
Recalling its decisions and the decisions of other
United Nations organs designed to combat racism and
condemning the policy of apartheid and racial discrimination as being incompatible with the principies of
the Charter of the United Nations and constituting a
crime against humanity, and recalling further its r~
peated appeals to the States concemed to take appropria te measures to eliminate racial discrimination,
apartheid, nazism and other manifestations of racism,
Noting with satisfaction the entry into force of the
lnternational Convention on the Elimination of Ali
Forms of Racial Discrimination, 6 which opens up new
possibilities in the struggle against racism,
Considering that, in the interests of peace and the
social progress of peoples and to ensure that a11 enjoy
human rights and fundamental freedoms without any
discrimination on such grounds as race, colour, national or ethnic origin, new and still more vigorous
and intensified efforts should be made, both at the
international and the national levels, to achieve the
rapid and total elimination of racial discrimination, including the policy of apartheid, nazism and all of its
contemporary forms, as well as other manifestations
of racial intolerance,
Referring to resolution XXIV entitled "lnternational Year for Action to Combat Racism and Raciaµ
Discrimination", adopted by the Intemational Confetence on Human Rights held at Teheran in 1968,7 and
e Toe Convention entered into force on 4 January 1969.
7 Final Act of the lnternational Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
p. 18.

General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

also General Assembly resolution 2446 (XXIII) of
19 December 1968 entitled "Measures to achieve the
rapid and total elimination of all forms of racial discnmination in general and of the policy of apartheid in
particular", in which the Assembly requested the Secretary-General, in consultation with Member States,' to
prepare a programme for the observance in 1971 of
the Intemational Y ear for Action to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination,
l. Designates the year 1971 as Intemational Year
for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimina-

tion;
2. Considers that the lntemational Y ear for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination should

be observed in the name of the ever-growing struggle
against racial discrimination in all its forms and manifestations and in the name of intematioQíll solidarity
with those struggling against racism;
·
3. Approves the programme for the observance of
the Intemational Year for Action to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination prepared by tbe SecretaryGeneral8 and calls upon all States to co-operate in
every possible way in its implementation;
4. Urgently appeals to all States to intensify and
expand their efiorts at the national and the international
levels towards ensuring the rapid and total eradication
of racial discrimination, including the policy of
apartheid, nazism and all of its contemporary forms,
as well as other manifestations of racism;
S. Invites the organs of the United Nations and the
specialized agencies concerned to co-operate and
participate in the preparatory work and in the observance of Íhe International Year for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session a progress
report on the preparations for the International Y ear
for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination based on any information which he may receive
from States, the organs of the United Nations and the
specialized agencies concemed.
1829th plenary meeting,
11 December 1969.
2545 (XXIV). Measures to be taken against
nazism and racial intolerance

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2331 (XXII) of 18 December 1967 and 2438 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968 on
measures to be taken against totalitarian ideologies
such as nazism and racial intolerance,
Observing that on 1 September 1939 Hitlerite nazism
began the Second World War, and recognizing the
danger that the revival and development of nazism,
wbich inflicted intolerable suffering on mankind, represent today1
Rea{firming that nazism, including its present-day
manifestations, racism and similar totalitarian ideologies
and practi~es, which are based on terror and racial
intolerance, are incompatible with the purposes and
principies of the Cbarter of the United Nations and
constitute a gross violation of human rights and fundaJt)l_icial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fourth
Saaloli, Annexes, agenda it.em 55, document A/7649.

mental freedoms which may jeopardize world peace
and the security of peoples,
Expressing its profound concern at the furthcr intensification of activities by groups 8nd organizations
which are carriers of the malignant ideologics ami
practices of nazism, including its present-day manifcstations, racism and other similar ideologies ami practices,
Projoundly disquieted by the foct that not ali the
States concerncd are responding to its appe:11s, with due
regard to the principles contained in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, to outlaw ami prohibit
nazi and racist organizations and groups and to makc
membership in them a criminal offence,
l. Renews its strong condemnation of racism,
nazism, apartheid and all othcr totalitarian ideologics
and practices;
2. Urgently calls upan those States concerned which
have not yet done so to take immediate and effcctive
measures, including legislative measures, with due
regard to the principies contained in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, for the complete prohihition of nazi and racist organizations ami groups and
for their prosecution in the courts;
3. Calls upan all States to take effective measures
to inculcate the purposes and principies of !he Charter
of the United Nations and the Universal Dcclaration
of Human Rights in young people and in that way
to protect them against any influence of nazism and
similar ideologies and practices;
4. C alis upon all Sta tes and national ami international organizations to set aside a day, to be obscrved
each year on an appropriate date to be dctermined by
each State and organization, in memory of the victims
of the struggle against nazism and similar ideologies
and practices based on terror and racial intolerance;
5. Recommends Governments of ali Statcs to promote the publication and dissemination of material
connected with Unitcd Nations efforts to combat nazism
in the past and material publicizing the danger of the
prcsent revival of nazism in a number of countrics;
6. Requests States Membcrs of the United Nations
or members of specialized agencies to submit to the
Secretary-General, for consideration by the General
Assembly at its twenty-fifth session, information on the
measures they have adopted and are adopting undcr
the present resolution;
7. Decides to retain on its agenda as a matter of
priority the ítem concerning measures to be taken
against nazism and racial into!erance.
1829th plenary meeting,
11 December 1969.
2546 (XXIV). Respect for and implementation
of human rights in occupied territories

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principies of the Charter
of the United Nations,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War of 12 August 19499 and the provisions
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Recalling the humanitarian resolutions regarding the
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms
11 United Nations, Treaty

Series, vol. 7S (19S0), No. 973.
