General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

120

tries in order to help them become self-sufficient at the
national or regional level in food production;
20. Requests the World Food Council to give further
consideration to a series of feasible measures which. taken
together, comprise a world food security net to ensure international market stability and continuity of world food
supplies, especially for developing countries. at reasonable
prices and on the conditions they can afford. and to make
recommendations thereon;
21. Calls upon all States to consider strengthening their
national food security within the framework of their national
priorities;
22. Urges the conclusion, as soon as possible, of a new
international wheat agreement that includes substantial economic provisions for safeguarding the interests of both exporters and importers and that recognizes the need for special
provisions for developing countries;
23. Welcomes the decision of the International Monetary Fund to integrate compensation for excesses in the costs
of cereal imports with that for shortfalls in receipts from
exports under the Fund's compensatory financing facilit:;;
24. Calls upon the international community to encourage and accord high priority to support for the efforts of
developing countries to strengthen and supplement their
programmes of mutual co-operation in the field of food and
agriculture;
25. Urges the World Food Council, in accordance with
its programme of work and within available resources, to
continue to support meetings requested by interested Governments at the national and regional levels in order to
facilitate the exchange of experience in the food sector;
26. Urges the World Food Council, within the context
of its mandate, to mobilize and sustain greater efforts in the
struggle to overcome hunger, to continue to review and
report on major problems and policy issues and the steps
being taken or proposed to resolve them, and to continue
to serve as a co-ordinating mechanism to provide over-all
integrated and continuing attention for the successful coordina~on and follow-up of policies concerning food production, nutrition, food security, food trade. food aid and
other related matters, by all organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system;
27. Urges the international community, in adopting
multilateral measures in the food sector, to take particularly
into account the problems and interests of food-producing
and food-exporting developing countries.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December /9R/

36/186.

Situation of food and agriculture in Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974. containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 197 5 on development
and international economic co-operation,
Recalling the Programme of Action of the World Food
Conference, 111 containing the Universal Declaration on the
Eradication of Hunger and Malnutrition adopted by the
Conference, 112

111 Ibid.,
112

part one.
Ibid .. chap. I.

Recalling also the Declaration of Principles and the Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on
Agrarian Reform and Rural Development, 111
Noting with concern that, over the past two decades, the
~ituation of food and agriculture in Africa has drastically
deteriorated, resulting in a decline in food production per
capita and a reduction in average dietary standards below
essential requirements.
Deeply concerned at the unabated encroachment of the
desert in many countries of Africa, which has continued to
accentuate the food problem on that continent,
Noting that a decision on food and agriculture was adopted
by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity at its thirty-sixth ordinary session. held at Addis
Ababa from 23 February to I March 1981.
Deeply concerned at the critical food shortages currently
affecting many countries in the African region, which necessitate a distressingly large allocation of the scarce foreign
exchange of those countries for the import of foodstuffs,
to the detriment of their over-all development,
Recognizing the commitment and determination of Africa
to devoting its limited resources on a priority basis to agricultural development in accordance with the Lagos Plan
of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy
for the EcGnomic Development of Africa, adopted by the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its second extraordinary session, devoted to economic matters. held at Lagos on 28 and
29 April 1980, I 14
Recognizing that the responsibility for the development
of food and agricultural production lies primarily with the
developing countries themselves and that there is an increasing effort and growing commitment by the developing
countries to accelerate the development of their food and
agricultural sectors,
Recognizing the role of food-sector strategies, which
emerged from the World Food Council. as a means for
interested developing countries to adopt an integrated approach for increasing food production, improving consumption and attracting the necessary additional international
resources,
Recognizing the central role of science and technology
in raising global agricultural productivity and output, as
well as the importance of appropriate infrastructure such as
storage facilities and a system of transport conducive to the
efficient distribution of agricultural products within each
country and throughout the African continent,
Recalling its resolution 35/108 of 5 December 1980 on
the Transport and Communications Decade in Africa,
Stressing that the current shortagis of foodstuffs demonstrate the continued vulnerability of many countries in
the region to food crises due, inter alia, to crop failure,
drought, soil erosion, low reserves and the high level of
post-harvest losses,
Recalling its resolution 35/69 of 5 December 1980, concerning the critical situation of food and agriculture m
Africa,
Noting that an important document on the problem of
fami11e in Africa was published jointly by the Organization
of African Unity and the Food and Agriculture Organization

11
' See Food and Agriculture Organizalion of the United Nations, Report
o( the World Conferenet· on Agrarian Reform and Rural Dei·elopment,
Rom,•, 12-20 Ju/_1· 1979 tWCARRD/REP). part one; transmitted to the
mcmhers of the General -\,scmhly hy a note of the Secretary-General (A/
"14/48.'i).

"' A/S-1 I.' 14. anne, I

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

of the United Nations, 115 which explains in more detail the
nature of famine and the means of eradicating it in Africa,
Noting with appreciation the assistance provided to African countrie~ through bilateral and multilateral channels.
inter alia, by the Food and Agriculture Organization or the
United Nations, the United Nations Development Programme, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World Food Programme. the World Bank and
other competent organizations,
Recognizing the vital role played by transport infrastructure in food situations, particularly in emergency food
situations,
Recognizing the useful contribution that the effective execution of the Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation
of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic Development
of Africa can make to the improvement of the food situation,
in particular, and to the rapid over-all developr.ient of
Africa,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
food problems in Africa 116 and expresses its concern at the
inadequacy of the results achieved in the implementation
of its resolution 35/69;
2. Urges all the countries of Africa to implement, in
accordance with their national development programmes
and priorities, measures to increase substantially their food
and agricultural production;
3. Calls upon the international community to continue
to support efforts undertaken by African countries at the
national, subregional and regional levels to increase fo0d
production through, inter alia, the provision, on a priority
and long-term basis, of additional financial and technical
assistance to Africa by organizations of the United Nations
system, such as the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the United Nations Development Programme
and other organizations involved in the financing of agricultural development, and through an increase in lending
by the World Bank to the agricultural sector in Africa;
4. Stresses that international assistance should not only
take the form of food aid and the corresponding additional
support but, more important, should also support national
efforts for the restoration and development of agricultural
production, specifically crops and livestock, in the regions
affected;
5. Urges Governments and the international organizations concerned to provide the necessary technical, financial
and food assistance to food security projects in the region,
especially in the countries of the Sahe! and the SudanoSahelian countries, in the framework of their own activities,
including strengthening the Food Security Assistance Scheme
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations through the participation of current and prospective
donors;
6. Calls for the urgent consideration of the adoption of
a positive and flexible approach to the financing of agricultural development by external institutions and Governments, which would finance, inter alia, recurrent expenditure
in connection with investment and the cost of factors of
production, and for the granting of concessional terms as
appropriate;
7. Recognizes the role of the international community.
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and the World Food Programme in mobilizing food aid and
agricultural assistance in Africa, and requests existing and
new duuor countries to increase the resources required to
meet African needs for food aid and agricultural development;
"' "Famine in Africa" (document CM/1106 IXXXVI) of the Organization of African Unity).
116

A/36/149.

121

8. Recommends that the Programme for the Control of
African Animal Trypanosomiasis and Related Developmt:nt, endorsed by the Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations at its twentieth
session in its resolution 8179 of 28 November 1979, should
be implemented on an urgent basis under the over-all coordination of that organization and with the active financial
and technical support of the international community;
9. Urges all relevant organs, organizations and bodies
of the United Nations system to intensify their activities in
Africa to assist Governments, inter alia, in the areas relating
to food production, agricultural processing, integrated research and extension services;
10. Also urges the international community to assist
countries in the African region to achieve, by 1985. the
following goals:
(a) A significant improvement in their food situation
and the laying of the foundations for the attainment of selfsufficiency in cereals, livestock and fish;
(b) Significant progress towards attaining a 50 per cent
reduction in post-harvest losses, through, inter alia, the
construction of storage facilities;
( c) An improved transport infrastructure to facilitate
food distribution at the national, subregional and regional
levels;
(d) Expanded and more effective agronomic research,
with special emphasis on improved seeds and an adequate
supply of fertilizers, pesticides and other chemicals suitable
for African conditions;
11. Further urges all relevant organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system to expand their training
programmes in the building up of national capabilities for
the preparation, execution, monitoring and evaluation of
agricultural development projects;
12. Requests the Executive Secretary of the Economic
Commission for Africa, in consultation with the SecretaryGeneral of the Organization of African Unity, to take every
necessary measure, including the holdin_g of joint meetings,
with a view to considering the possihilifies for implementing
General Assembly resolution 35/.'.J9 and the p1esent resolution;
13. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Organization of African Unity and organs and bodies of the United Nations system, in his final report called
for in resolution 35/69:
(a) To identify the problems perceived in the attainment
of the goals set forth in paragraph IO above;
(b) To estimate the amount of external resources needed
to attain those goals;
(c) To report on the level of technical and financial
resources which the United Nations system will deploy towards the attainment of those goals and to suggest ways of
attracting extra funding;
(d) To report on the action-oriented plans of the relevant
organs and organizations of the United Nations system
which will implement the present resolution.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

36/187.

Restructuring of the economic and social sectors of the United Nations system

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
I May I 974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order. 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, con-
