S/2022/607

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 August 2022
Original: English

Letter dated 9 August 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
In a letter dated 16 June 2022 addressed to me, the Acting Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Emigrants of Lebanon requested that the Security Council extend the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for a further
period of one year, without amendment to its mandate, its concept of operations and
its rules of engagement. In this regard, and further to my report to the Council of
14 July 2022 (S/2022/556) on the implementation of Council resolution 1701 (2006),
I hereby request the Council to consider the renewal of the mandate of UNIFIL, which
is due to expire on 31 August 2022.
While I commend the continued commitment of both the Lebanese Armed
Forces and the Israel Defense Forces to maintaining the cessation of hostilities and
for their close cooperation and coordination with UNIFIL, there has been no tangible
progress towards a permanent ceasefire and a long-term solution to the conflict, as
called for in resolution 1701 (2006).
While the underlying drivers of the conflict have not dramatically changed since
2006, UNIFIL does face new challenges in the conduct of its operations. A trend of
increased restrictions to its freedom of movement and delays in access to locations of
interest means that the mission faces increasing challenges to its operational space.
Furthermore, there remains an ongoing risk of a resumption of hostilities between the
parties, whether intentionally or as a result of miscalculation or misunderstanding, at
a time of heightened regional and global tensions.
Both parties have yet to fulfil their respective obligations und er the resolution.
Israel must withdraw its forces from northern Ghajar and an adjacent area north of
the Blue Line and cease violations of Lebanese airspace. The Government of Lebanon
must exercise effective authority over all Lebanese territory, includin g by preventing
hostile actions, ensuring the safety and security of the civilian population, in addition
to that of United Nations personnel, and ensuring that the area between the Blue Line
and the Litani River remains free of unauthorized armed personne l, assets or weapons
other than those of the Lebanese State and UNIFIL. UNIFIL, in close coordination
with the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon, continues to
work with the parties in fulfilling these outstanding obligations.
The past year has seen a number of incidents of serious concern, including
several breaches in the cessation of hostilities. Most recently, on 25 April 2022,
UNIFIL radar detected a rocket fired from an area north-east of Qulaylah (Sector
West), which landed south-east of the Israeli village of Shlomi. The Israel Defense
Forces responded by firing approximately 50 artillery rounds. UNIFIL visited the site

22-12408 (E)

120822

*2212408*

S/2022/607

of the rocket launch with the Lebanese Armed Forces and observed three improvised
rocket launching ramps, two with rockets still in place. On 5 and 6 August 2021, there
were also incidents of rocket fire from Lebanon into Israel. Israel responded with
three air strikes and artillery fire into southern Lebanon. UNIFIL maintained contact
with the Israel Defense Forces and the Lebanese Armed Forces throughout these
developments. While the incidents were contained through active liaison by UNIFIL,
they demonstrated the risk of escalation across the Blue Line and underlined the need
for progress by both parties in addressing their respective obligations under resolution
1701 (2006).
Between March and June 2022, UNIFIL observed, from the air, firing ranges in
four locations in Sector West. UNIFIL helicopter patr ols further observed individuals
in combat attire carrying assault weapons and engaging in small arms exercises at
these sites. The presence of unauthorized weapons in the UNIFIL area of operations
is of grave concern and requires follow-up action by the Lebanese authorities.
The many challenges faced by Lebanon are exacerbated by the continuing
deterioration of the country’s economic situation, which has been compounded by the
impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. While all State institutions
are overstretched by the financial conditions, the Lebanese Armed Forces and other
security institutions are especially critical for the country’s stability and require
renewed political and material support.
The presence of the Lebanese Armed Forces in the UNIFIL area of operations
has been reduced, given security demands elsewhere in the country. Over the past
four months, 17.95 per cent of all UNIFIL operational activities were conducted in
close coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces. This i s down from over 22 per
cent prior to the onset of the economic crisis at the end of 2019.
In this context, I would like to emphasize the importance of increased
international support to the Lebanese Armed Forces, which are called upon to perform
a growing number of tasks related to national law and order, including ensuring
security during elections, as well as responding to demonstrations and roadblocks
carried out by members of the public in response to the sweeping economic crisis.
The centrality of the relationship between UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces
to the mission’s mandated efforts cannot be overstated. It is of the utmost importance
that the Lebanese Armed Forces remain able to perform critical operations in the
South and work alongside UNIFIL, so that the authority of the State is effectively
extended in the area. The integrity and effectiveness of the Lebanese Armed Forces,
the strategic partner of UNIFIL, remain vital for the implementation of resolution
1701 (2006). The Lebanese Armed Forces can fulfil the competing demands placed
upon them only if they receive the support they need.
As you are aware, pursuant to paragraph 11 of resolution 2591 (2021), UNIFIL
provided the Lebanese Armed Forces with temporary, non-lethal material and
logistical support within the framework of joint Lebanese Armed Forces -UNIFIL
activities. As noted in my most recent report to the Council on the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2022/556), I was encouraged by the immediate increase in
the number of UNIFIL activities conducted in close coordination with the Lebanese
Armed Forces as a result of the temporary support provided. This followed a decrease
in such activities amid COVID-19 restrictions and soaring fuel costs. The support
provided appears to have had a positive impact on the capa city and reach of the
Lebanese Armed Forces. I therefore call for support for the request of the Government
of Lebanon for an extension of the temporary and special measures of UNIFIL in
support of the Lebanese Armed Forces.
The liaison and coordination arrangements that UNIFIL has established with the
Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel Defense Forces, bilaterally and through the
2/4

22-12408

S/2022/607

tripartite forum, remain vital to mitigate tensions in sensitive areas along the Blue
Line. I encourage the parties to make effective use of the liaison and coordination
structures to avoid potential escalation. I welcome positive signals from both parties
on the potential to resume marking the Blue Line on the ground and discussions on
areas that remain the subject of reservations, without prejudice to future border
negotiations, as a confidence-building and proactive conflict mitigation measure.
To the extent possible, given the dramatic economic situation in the country, the
Government of Lebanon continues to express its commi tment to the expansion of the
capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces on land and at sea, which remains vital for
enhancing the State presence in southern Lebanon. The inauguration of the model
regiment headquarters on 13 June 2022 was a positive development in this regard, as
was the initial deployment of a company to the model regiment drawn from existing
Lebanese Armed Forces troops in the UNIFIL area of operations. Mobilizing
additional international support to further build such capacity is necessary if we are
to see continued progress.
The freedom of movement of UNIFIL in its entire area of operations and along
the full length of the Blue Line remains critical to the implementation of its mandate.
While the mission’s freedom of movement was respected in most cases during the
past year, UNIFIL encountered a concerning increase in the number of restrictions. It
is the responsibility of the Lebanese authorities, including the Lebanese Armed
Forces, to ensure the ability of UNIFIL to carry out its mandated a ctivities
unhindered. The mission’s ability to conduct patrols and activities independently must
be maintained.
UNIFIL has yet to gain full access to several locations of interest, including
certain Green without Borders sites as well as some patrol routes. A new phenomenon,
first observed on 30 April 2022, is the installation of containers and prefabricated
infrastructure at strategic locations north of the Blue Line, which in several cases
have impaired UNIFIL access. The local authorities stated that some of the containers
were on private land and that some belonged to Green without Borders. I am
concerned about this trend.
I reiterate my call to the Lebanese authorities to fulfil their obligations to ensure
the safety of UNIFIL personnel and full accountability for those who attack
peacekeepers, including with respect to the incidents in Bar’ashit on 10 February
2020 and Blida on 25 May 2020, as well as in Majdal Zun in 2018. I note the verdict
of 24 March 2022 by the Permanent Military Court of Lebano n sentencing the
perpetrator of an attack on UNIFIL peacekeepers in July 2011. I welcome this
development and urge the timely conduct and completion of judicial processes into
all outstanding cases of attacks against United Nations personnel. This remains
critical for preventing future incidents and retaining the confidence of troop contributing countries.
The freedom of movement of UNIFIL also extends to its Maritime Task Force.
The actions of the Israel Defense Forces with respect to a UNIFIL Maritime Task
Force vessel on 6 and 7 June 2022 constitute an impediment to the freedom of
movement of UNIFIL and therefore a violation of resolution 1701 (2006). All parties
must abide by their obligation to respect the safety of UNIFIL and other United
Nations personnel.
As at 20 June 2022, the total number of UNIFIL military personnel was 9,995,
including 701 women. The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force comprises five vessels, one
helicopter and 574 military personnel, including 25 women (4.3 per cent). The
UNIFIL civilian component numbers 240 international and 549 na tional staff. I am
grateful to the 47 troop-contributing countries and continue to encourage them to
increase the number of women deployed to UNIFIL.
22-12408

3/4

S/2022/607

According to the assessment report (S/2020/473), UNIFIL has been optimizing
its configuration and operations. To date, this has included the optimization of the
civilian staffing of the mission (through the civilian staffing review of December
2020) and greater reliance on lighter vehicles for monitoring and re connaissance
rather than heavy infantry patrols, in addition to a further strengthening of liaison and
coordination capabilities. The reconfiguration of UNIFIL operations towards the Blue
Line has also begun. Two of the five positions identified for consol idation have been
closed, with infrastructure handed over to the Lebanese Armed Forces. Three more
positions are scheduled to be closed by the end of 2022.
In order to achieve a gradual transition of UNIFIL Maritime Task Force
responsibilities to the Government of Lebanon, the Lebanese Navy continues to
participate in maritime interdiction operations along with the Maritime Task Force,
simulating a partial takeover of its responsibilities in one sector of the area of
maritime operations. The Lebanese Navy has maintained a 100 per cent inspection
rate of ships referred by UNIFIL throughout the past year. The trial period for
transferring some of the responsibilities of the Maritime Task Force to the Lebanese
Navy will continue.
Pending final agreement on the boundary between Lebanon and Israel, and as
long as the Lebanese Armed Forces are not able to deploy to southern Lebanon in
significantly larger numbers, UNIFIL operational and liaison activities continue to
provide valuable deterrence and a critical de-escalation mechanism in a context in
which escalation has been a reality. In the absence of progress towards a permanent
ceasefire, the ability of UNIFIL to deter, prevent and deconflict remains crucial. The
priority remains for the parties to take the necessary steps towards a permanent
ceasefire and a long-term solution to the conflict, as called for in resolution 1701
(2006). UNIFIL, in close coordination with the Office of the United Nations Specia l
Coordinator for Lebanon, is ready to lend its full support to the parties in this process.
I would like to express my appreciation to the Head of Mission and Force
Commander of UNIFIL, Major General Aroldo Lázaro Sáenz, and to all the military
and civilian personnel of UNIFIL, for the work that they are carrying out in southern
Lebanon and for their commitment in the service of peace.
The General Assembly, by its resolution 76/290 of 29 June 2022, appropriated
the amount of $502.9 million for the maintenance of the Force for the period from
1 July 2022 to 30 June 2023. As at 7 July 2022, unpaid assessed contributions to the
special account for UNIFIL amounted to $131.6 million. The total outstanding
assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to
$2,236.4 million. Reimbursement of troop costs and contingent-owned equipment
have been made for the period up to 31 March 2022, in accordance with the qu arterly
payment schedule.
I would like to express my appreciation for the continued united and steadfast
support of the Security Council to UNIFIL and its mandated activities. With the
foregoing information in mind, I recommend that the Council extend the mandate of
UNIFIL for a further period of 12 months, until 31 August 2023.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

4/4

22-12408
