S/PV.7029

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7029th meeting

Tuesday, 10 September 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Quinlan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Australia)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Ahmad
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Menan
Mr. Wilson
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Liberia
Twenty-sixth progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (S/2013/479)

13-46981 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1346981*

S/PV.702910/09/2013
The situation in Liberia

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Liberia
Twenty-sixth progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (S/2013/479)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Liberia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Brownie J. Samukai, Minister of National Defence
of the Republic of Liberia.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Karin Landgren, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia, to participate in
this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I also invite His Excellency Mr. Staffan
Tillander, Chair of the Liberian country configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission and representative of
Sweden, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/479, which contains the twenty-sixth
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Liberia.
I now give the floor to Ms. Landgren.
Ms. Landgren: Ten years ago, on 18 August 2003,
the last in a long series of Liberian peace agreements
was signed in Accra. Liberia is celebrating 10 years of
uninterrupted peace, and commitment remains steady,
as described in the report of the Secretary-General now
before the Council (S/2013/479). Liberia deserves praise
and, more importantly, continued support. A decade is
a long time to keep the peace, but a decade is a short
time to reverse the effects of a war that left the country
shattered or to overturn over a century of social and
political exclusion and poor governance. Many potential
drivers of conflict remain to be addressed through
long-term reforms coupled with inclusive development.

2/9

Recent months have seen an increasingly vigorous
public discourse among civil society, youth groups and
political parties about how far the country has come
and how best to meet its current challenges. This was
partly driven by contemplation of the tenth anniversary
of peace and partly coalesced around current events,
such as the recent court-ordered incarceration of a
prominent newspaper editor. Liberia’s stability is
sufficient to provide an environment conducive to the
reforms being undertaken by the Government. The
importance of those reforms to consolidating peace has
been recognized by the Council, notably in the security
and justice sectors and in the areas of decentralization
and more transparent and accountable Government. I
will say a few words about where these stand.
The Constitution Review Committee has been
working, with the support of the United Nations,
to prepare the ground for the necessary national
consultation. In the coming weeks, civic educators will
begin working to inform and educate the public. The
Committee still faces serious financial and capacity
constraints, in addition to the broad buy-in that it needs
to forge, which could affect its ability to adhere to the
timeline, which is tight, despite the one-year extension
of the mandate through 2015. The United Nations will
continue to support the Committee and the broader
constitutional review process.
In July, the Government established a
decentralization support programme board for the
overall coordination of the financial and human capital
being invested to make decentralization a reality in
Liberia. The board consists of Government ministries
and international partners, including the United Nations
family. Decentralization is expected to promote more
inclusive and accountable governance. It will also take
time for it to begin functioning fully, both legislatively
and in the light of the country’s limited human and
institutional capacity.
Decentralized governance structures also feature
in the National Reconciliation Road Map. President
Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf launched the implementation
of that 18-year framework in June, placing it under
the leadership of the Ministry of Internal Affairs.
Continued clear leadership of the Road Map will
be important. It is comprised of some 12 different
initiatives, including those aimed at shaping a common
narrative on national identity. Recent discussions
on a national history project have opened the door to
preparing a national history curriculum for Liberia’s

13-46981

10/09/2013S/PV.7029
The situation in Liberia

schools. And a technical team of Government, civil
society and United Nations representatives is assessing
how best to partner with peace committees, traditional
leaders and civil society in order to make the Palava
Hut initiative a reality, as also recommended by the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission.
As the Secretary-General’s report notes, land
reform has advanced, with a new land rights policy to be
followed by draft legislation. Land and the exploitation
of Liberia’s abundant natural resources remain
cornerstones of the country’s economic development,
as well as powerful sources of potential conflict.
The Government and many development partners
acknowledge the need for transparent, responsible
management and regulation of concession agreements
and the resources they yield, including those intended
for local development. This remains an important area
for the country that requires priority attention.
In August, the Government issued a directive
that 10 counties are to be audited, including those
administering social development funds provided by
concessions. And in June, the Forestry Development
Authority issued letters of intent to terminate almost
half of the 62 irregular private-use permits issued in
the forestry sector. The lack of adequate consultation
with affected communities remains an issue, and a
study is under way on citizens’ engagement in natural
resource management, at the Government’s request.
It will be important to institutionalize mechanisms
allowing consistent dialogue between concessions
and communities. The report notes the good progress
made by the five land coordination centres, whose staff
are being trained in alternative dispute resolution and
mediation skills.
Corruption in general remains a very significant
handicap, affecting the functioning of national
institutions, public confidence in those institutions and
the pace of economic development. The President’s
recent dismissals of senior Government officials are
described in the report. Since then, 18 officers have
been dismissed from the Liberia National Police for
extortion and excessive absenteeism; numerous others
have been suspended. It is hoped that such resolute
steps will send a strong message to those carrying the
public’s trust at all levels.
One year ago, the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL) initiated a calibrated, three-phase
military drawdown process endorsed by the Council.

The Mission has focused on executing a steady,
well-planned and responsible military drawdown. It
completed the first phase on 30 June, with all designated
personnel and equipment repatriated in good order and
on schedule. UNMIL no longer has a fixed military
presence in four of Liberia’s counties, and has deployed
formed police unit personnel to areas considered
potential hotspots for insecurity and to serve as backup
to specialized units of the Liberia National Police. The
first of the Mission’s three newly appointed formed
police units, from Nepal, has been on the ground for
six months; the second, from China, is due to deploy in
October. That police presence remains essential, both
to enable the Mission to serve as a needed backup to
national authorities and to maintain public confidence
in Liberia’s security during the transition. The Mission
has also retained its civilian and United Nations Police
advisory presence in all counties in order to continue
supporting local Government and police structures,
which remain weak.
This phased approach to drawdown has permitted
the Government and UNMIL to develop close, routine
and effective joint transition planning mechanisms.
UNMIL has now closed 11 locations and handed over
eight to Government entities. However, the Liberian
security forces have not been able to scale up their
presence and operational effectiveness in order to
assume the increased security responsibilities, and
they remain severely constrained by weak mobility,
resources and administration.
Demands on the Government will become more
acute as this transition progresses. The UNMIL military
contingent expects to vacate a further three counties by
April 2014. That will require the Government to sustain
an effective security presence in more of the country
and across a broader range of vital duties, including
static guarding and cash escorts.
However, the 2013-2014 national budget reduces
allocations for the police, and limited transition-specific
funding has been set aside. Even though the National
Police Training Academy has been physically expanded
to train 600 recruits a year, only 99 officers have
graduated in the past 12 months. The graduation of
another 148 has been delayed since May, in part due to
budget constraints, while the current class of 293, which
is in field training, is due to graduate next February.
The immediate challenges posed by the UNMIL
drawdown and the long-term importance of the rule

13-469813/9

S/PV.702910/09/2013
The situation in Liberia

of law for a stable Liberia make it essential that the
Government and its partners redouble their efforts to
develop capable and accountable justice and security
sectors. A more focused, prioritized approach to
institutional development is needed. To that end, a
high-level retreat on the security sector will be held
next week, co-organized by the Government, the
United Nations and the Government of Sweden. The
retreat will bring together a wide range of national
and international actors involved in security sector
development, including Ambassador Tillander of the
Peacebuilding Commission. The retreat will consider
recommendations of several joint studies, including a
baseline capacity assessment of the Liberia National
Police, a review of management and accountability
mechanisms within the police, judiciary and
prosecution, and a United Nations mapping of gaps in
Liberia’s security sector.
The legislature has begun following up on the very
many audit reports it has received from the general
auditing commission over the years. That and regular
dialogue between the executive and the legislature are
particularly important for the role of the legislature
in policy development and oversight, as well as in
representing the interests of its constituents. In July,
UNMIL and the legislature initiated a periodic direct
dialogue on a range of issues central to Liberia’s reform
agenda.
Looking ahead, Liberia’s next presidential elections
in 2017 will be a political watershed moment. A foretaste
of the tenor of those elections may come in October
2014, when 15 senatorial seats, or one per county,
will be contested. As well, Liberia’s security remains
intertwined with that of its neighbours. Strengthening
regional approaches remains imperative to security as
well as to development.
The situation along the border with Côte d’Ivoire
has remained calm for the past six months and tensions
have eased. Eight Ivorians suspected of alleged
involvement in cross-border attacks from Liberia into
Côte d’Ivoire, including the June 2012 attack that killed
seven peacekeepers of the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI), still await a ruling on whether
Liberia will accede to an Ivorian extradition request.
Since the second quadripartite meeting in April
among the Governments of Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire,
UNMIL and UNOCI, the parties have worked to deliver
on agreed commitments, including successful high-

4/9

level strategic engagement and increased operational
cooperation on the ground. The four parties met in
June in western Côte d’Ivoire and again last week
in Monrovia to plan joint security operations along
the border, which will take place this November and
in January 2014. Preparations have also advanced
for the first-ever cross-border meeting of chiefs and
elders — another quadripartite meeting outcome — and
the meeting is on track to be held next month.
The April quadripartite meeting also agreed to
revive a tripartite commission on humanitarian and
refugee issues comprising the two Governments and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. This year, over 11,000 Ivorian refugees
have repatriated voluntarily, leaving fewer than 59,000
Ivorian refugees in Liberia, down from over 200,000
at the height of the crisis. Some new arrivals continue
to be registered in Liberia, and continued efforts are
needed to create conditions favourable for return to
Côte d’Ivoire.
The anniversary of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement has been an opportunity to celebrate just
how far Liberia has come. The country should be proud
of its significant achievements. And yet it remains
fragile, with a sense of a unified nationhood still a work
in progress and small-scale outbreaks of violence still
routine. Important underlying cleavages and tensions
await resolution. Increased economic activity and
growth bring with them new challenges of management,
oversight, the judicious use of financial resources and a
fair distribution of national wealth.
Speaking at the recent launch of a high-level panel
on fragile States, President Johnson-Sirleaf underlined
the importance of going beyond conventional growthdriven poverty reduction and addressing the linkages
between peacebuilding, State-building and governance.
It is helpful that Liberia’s development partners
increasingly employ a fragility perspective in their
work. Liberia will need to stay the course, now and for
decades to come. The United Nations stands with the
Government, partners, civil society and others in our
shared dedication to preventing any return to the ways
of the past.
The President: I thank Ms. Landgren for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tillander.

13-46981

10/09/2013S/PV.7029
The situation in Liberia

Mr. Tillander: Let me express my appreciation for
the invitation to give the perspective of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) on key peacebuilding challenges
facing Liberia.

appropriate levels of funding in the national budget
and releasing the necessary funds, would represent
an important signal to the Liberian people and the
international community.

The PBC country configuration for Liberia — with
its approximately 40 member States — offers support
based on the statement of mutual commitments, and
in close collaboration with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). The Liberian Agenda
for Transformation, together with the Government’s
commitment to the New Deal for Engagement in
Fragile States, and the forthcoming compact, provide
focus on State- and peacebuilding goals with which the
statement of mutual commitments should be aligned.

I welcome the preparedness of United Nations
agencies to support the reconciliation process and
Government efforts. United Nations agencies, such as
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
UNICEF and UN-Women, have allocated funds to
important aspects, such as the Palava Hut process, and
the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) is providing flexible
financing. Bilateral partners should do the same, on
the basis of an effectively managed, coordinated and
implemented National Reconciliation Road Map.

In line with the Council’s request to the PBC in
resolution 2066 (2012), I will first discuss how progress
can be accelerated on national reconciliation, and then
on the security sector and rule of law. After that, I will
make some remarks on other peacebuilding challenges.
National reconciliation is recognized as a core
peacebuilding priority and a critical component of
Liberia’s Agenda for Transformation. This includes
mending relations between the State and society and
among communities and individuals. Ten years after
the civil war ended, Liberia needs to deal with those
issues and embark on the reconciliation process without
further delay. The PBC has interacted frequently and
continuously with the responsible Minister and other
actors to support implementation.
Since March, when I touched upon that issue in my
briefing to the Council (see S/PV.6941), only limited
progress has been made. As I said then, this is an area
where there is a need for leadership and resolve. The
time has now come for the Government to translate its
political commitment into a priority for implementation
and action. The activities contained in the National
Reconciliation Road Map are ready, the Road Map
has been launched, the roles and responsibilities are
clarified, and the activities should be implemented in
an inclusive and coordinated manner without further
delay.
The Government has the primary responsibility
for financing the reconciliation process. While funds
allocated in last year’s budget were widely recognized
as an important commitment, they were for the most
part not released and implementation was delayed.
Translating the commitment into action, including

On security sector reform and the rule of law, the
challenges are considerable. With a view to ensuring
a seamless UNMIL transition, accelerating progress
is vital. Next week, I will have the opportunity to
take part in the security sector reform retreat in
Monrovia, mentioned by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. As pointed out in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2013/479), a lack of Liberian
police capacity, mobility, professional management
and limited resources hampers the necessary progress
required to keep step with the UNMIL transition. Also
in terms of numbers, police strength has increased
only marginally, as detailed by Special Representative
Landgren. Progress in reforming and strengthening the
judiciary has also been slow. However, the appointment
of a new Chief Justice of the Supreme Court presents
an opportunity to press ahead and accelerate progress.
We should make sure that this opportunity is fully
supported and utilized.
The responsibility for speeding up progress in
justice and security is shared among all of us. But
first and foremost, the Government’s commitment is
key when it comes to reforms, implementation, the
allocation of sufficient resources and ensuring the
timely disbursement of allocated funds. To accelerate
progress, the Government’s efforts in those areas need
to be stepped up.
The United Nations system has an important
supportive role to play. The PBC fully supports
the efforts of UNMIL in all aspects. The creative
approaches used by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and UNMIL to fill specialized police posts
are useful examples of how different United Nations

13-469815/9

S/PV.702910/09/2013
The situation in Liberia

tools can be used to strengthen the Organization’s work
on the ground.
The United Nations system needs to perform
effectively the tasks that it takes upon itself, including
“Delivering as one”, providing programme support and
managing funding mechanisms. The independent review
of the justice and security joint programme, including
the trust fund, should offer a basis for strengthening
such mechanisms. UNDP has proposed measures
aimed at improving its contribution, in particular in
the programming support and management of the trust
fund. The security sector reform retreat next week will
offer an opportunity for the United Nations system and
bilateral partners to consult with the Government on
rapid implementation.
The PBC is prepared to do what we can to support
the Government’s efforts in the marshalling of
resources for justice and security. But such efforts will
be difficult if the Government’s budget commitment
for the sector is perceived as insufficient, if funds are
not being released, if the funding mechanisms are not
working effectively and if the justice and security hubs
are not providing services as expected. Support from
partners is more likely to increase when concrete goals
and benchmarks are in place and clearly communicated,
when funding mechanisms are effectively managed,
when there is an efficiently operating joint programme
for implementation and the setting of priorities and
when progress is accelerating.
The holistic context of a coordinated programme
will also be necessary to facilitate the provision of
justice- and security-related services around the country.
The first hub, in Gbarnga, is providing services and has
an impact in a number of key areas, but it is still not
functioning at the expected level of full operationality.
As I now understand it, the court will be inaugurated
only towards the end of the year. The repeated delays
are troubling and, for the coming hubs, lessons must be
learned and applied. For the second and third hubs, the
intention is still to inaugurate and celebrate the delivery
of services in the second quarter of 2014. For that to
be possible, UNDP and the United Nations Office for
Project Services, as implementing partners, must do
their part, together with the Government, and thus show
how the hub concept can be effectively implemented.
That will also make partners more willing to give the
support needed for the full implementation of the five
planned justice and security hubs throughout Liberia.

6/9

Let me now move on to some other peacebuilding
challenges. On gender-related issues, Liberian grass
roots groups and civil society have played a strong and
constructive role, and continue to do so. That role is
even more important in view of the widespread sexual
and gender-based violence, including against children,
and the shortcomings in taking legal action against
perpetrators. In line with resolution 2106 (2013), efforts
need to be stepped up, in terms of both specific genderfocused activities and actions to reform and strengthen
the criminal justice system..
I am pleased to note that the proposal for PBF
funding in Liberia for the coming years includes an
increased allocation for gender-focused activities,
which would appropriately leave us with a funding
level considerably above the 15 per cent target set by
the Secretary-General. In upcoming PBC visits and in
close cooperation with UNMIL and UN-Women, I will
continue the dialogue with the Minister of Gender on
those issues, as well as with civil society organizations.
Women’s organizations and civil society actively
participated in the high-level meeting initiated by the
United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) held
in Dakar at the end of June, on a subregional strategy
for the Mano River Union. I salute UNOWA and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Djinnit on that
initiative. Strengthening the Mano River Union and the
strategy, taking into account security and development,
is an important contribution to conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. We should all consider ways to lend our
support.
As mentioned in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, there are concerns about a lack of oversight,
revenue issues and corruption related to land and
natural resources. During the most recent PBC visit
to Liberia, in May, I had an opportunity to participate
in a conference on the topic, which was arranged by
civil society, with active Government and business
participation. This is an issue where civil society
plays an important role, and the conference offered a
constructive opportunity for a frank and open dialogue.
The Government of Liberia has expressed its
intention to fight corruption. Some actions have been
taken, but progress remains slow. Further actions should
be encouraged, measures should be implemented,
oversight strengthened, perpetrators taken to court and
those guilty held responsible.

13-46981

10/09/2013S/PV.7029
The situation in Liberia

The international community needs to strengthen
its coordinated support to Liberia in this area. I am
pleased to note that the Peacebuilding Support Office
(PBSO) is currently considering a PBF contribution
aimed at promoting concerted action by the World
Bank, the African Development Bank, bilateral
partners and the United Nations in support of Liberia
in conflict-sensitive and sustainable land and natural
resources management. Indeed, the PBF could be more
proactively employed to promote such cooperation
among the international financial institutions and the
United Nations system in other areas as well. I will
continue to make that point in my discussions with the
PBSO and with the relevant actors in Liberia.
The PBC welcomes the inclusion of the concepts of
fragility and peacebuilding in the strategies for Liberia
recently adopted by the World Bank and the African
Development Bank. It will be essential to maintain
that fragility perspective in the implementation of the
strategies. During the PBC visit to Liberia next week,
I intend to continue the dialogue with the international
financial institutions on how we can best work together
to ensure synergies and mutual support.
The PBC visit next week will focus on security
sector reform and national reconciliation. I will also
consult with the Government and partners on how
we can best support Government efforts on resource
mobilization. In preparing for the visit, I welcome
input, and I am, as always, available for consultations.
The visit should provide a basis for accelerated progress
on key peacebuilding challenges and guide the support
of the PBC on justice, security, reconciliation, gender
issues, land issues and natural resources.
The President: I thank Mr. Tillander for his
briefing
I now give the floor to the representative of Liberia.
Mr. Samukai (Liberia): Allow me, at the outset,
to express my Government’s deep appreciation to
the Security Council for its consistent support to the
maintenance of peace in Liberia. It is a privilege for
me to bring my Government’s perspective to today’s
important discussion on the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL), which has been convened under the
presidency of Australia. The Government of Liberia
is also grateful to its many bilateral partners, some of
which are represented in the Council, for their continued
valuable support to Liberia’s development.

The twenty-sixth progress report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2013/479) on UNMIL presents a succinct
overview of the prevailing political, socioeconomic and
security situation in Liberia at this critical juncture in
the transition process. I wish to commend the SecretaryGeneral for his report, which, in our view, brings out in
a cogent manner the progress that has been achieved
and the challenges that still lie ahead. In the same
vein, I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Karin Landgren and
Ambassador Staffan Tillander for their statements and
the useful observations they put forward. I join them
in emphasizing that, while Liberia has the primary
responsibility for shaping its future, the continued
support and partnership of the donor community are
indispensable to success.
Last month, on 18 August, Liberia celebrated
10 years of uninterrupted peace and stability under
the theme “Never again to war”. Indeed, the past
10 years have seen determined efforts to consolidate
peace by promoting reconciliation, building democratic
institutions, initiating reforms across all sectors and
pursuing development. The commemoration of that
national milestone provided an opportunity for all
Liberians to reaffirm their commitment to peace,
security and development.
The Secretary-General’s report correctly describes
the security situation in Liberia as stable but fragile.
That means that Liberia and its partners must focus
concerted efforts on reducing the level of fragility.
It is in consideration of that imperative that the
Liberian Government and UNMIL conducted an
extensive transition planning process, which resulted
in a responsible road map for the reconfiguration
of UNMIL, which the Council endorsed in 2012 in
resolution 2066 (2012). The resolution provides for a
phased reconfiguration of the UNMIL presence in
Liberia over a three-year period.
It is the assessment of the Liberian Government
that the first year of the implementation of UNMIL’s
transition road map has proceeded according to plan.
The process also brought into focus the realistic
challenges of post-conflict development and the
resource and capacity gaps to be bridged in achieving
our agenda for transformation.
The Liberia National Police (LNP) serves as the
lead agency in the implementation of the tasks assigned
by the road map. Over the past months, the LNP has

13-469817/9

S/PV.702910/09/2013
The situation in Liberia

taken over the duties and areas of responsibility
transferred to the Government by UNMIL. However,
personnel and logistics constraints remain huge
challenges for the LNP. Training is a vital component
of the transition and an important means of building
capacity. Acute financial shortfalls linked to unmet
revenue projections have hampered the optimal use of
facilities at the National Training Academy, making
it difficult to meet the timeline for the deployment of
police and immigration personnel.
Notwithstanding those initial setbacks, the
Government of Liberia remains firmly committed
to the road map as agreed. In that regard, I hasten to
mention that the LNP and the Bureau of Immigration
and Naturalization concluded plans to expand their
capacity and have undertaken vetting exercises to
increase their forces in the next three years.
In furtherance of the transition plan, the Government
of Liberia is appropriating in its 2013/2014 budget an
amount of about $10 million for the security and justice
sectors. The Government will continue to seek avenues
for additional support through the budgetary process
and from its partners.
The Government of Liberia remains committed to
the implementation of the 2011 Security Reform and
Intelligence Act, which calls for the rationalization of
security agencies, including the National Bureau of
Investigation and the Ministry of National Security.
The Act is being implemented in stages. Here again
separate allocations have been incorporated into the
2013/14 budget to provide severance pay for employees
who will be laid off; retirement benefits and pensions,
through the Civil Service Agency, for employees
that have reached the age of retirement; and for the
redeployment of some employees to other agencies.
Access to justice is a fundamental human right.
It underpins the initiative to reform the judicial and
criminal justice systems so that they become more
accessible and affordable. That is why the Government
values highly its engagement with the Peacebuilding
Commission and its critical support for the establishment
of five justice and security hubs in the various counties,
only one of which has been constructed thus far. Those
hubs, when completed, will facilitate access to justice
by Liberians in the rural areas; the decentralization of
justice and security institutions; and the reinforcement
of civil administration in the various counties. The

8/9

Government has recommitted itself to adequately
supporting and sustaining hub operations.
The Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL) have been
undergoing robust tactical and technical training to
protect the territorial integrity of the country. The AFL
is positioning itself to assist the civil administration in
specific support missions when required and preparing
to participate in regional and international peace
initiatives when so ordered. The Government of Liberia
recognizes the full support provided by the United
States Government to date in assisting the AFL in its
efforts to prepare itself.
Currently, an enhanced platoon from the AFL
is serving in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. We are seeing
the positive effect of collaboration between the military
and security forces of Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia in
monitoring activities along their common border.
The Government intends to increase the personnel
capacity and capability of the Liberian Coast Guard
to address transnational crimes and illicit activities in
our territorial waters. Again, the Liberian Government
wishes to thank the United States Government for its
generosity in building the capacity of the Liberian
Coast Guard.
The Government is aware of the potential risk
of conflict resulting from any improper handling
of land rights and the management of our natural
resources. The Government will continue to fully
engage all stakeholders of various communities in the
decision-making process where there is potential for
investment in the development of our natural resources.
Finally, Liberia remains grateful to the United
Nations, especially UNMIL, and to the wider
international community for the crucial role that they
continue to play in preserving peace and stability in
Liberia. My Government is committed to continuing
its collaboration with UNMIL and other stakeholders
in ensuring the timely and full implementation of the
transition plan. We believe that the transition plan
has been carefully calibrated to take into account the
resources and capabilities of the Liberian Government
as well as the challenges of reconciliation and healing.
Any initiative aimed at accelerating or fast-tracking
the transition process could have a destabilizing effect
and undermine the gains already made. We support
the recommendation of the Secretary-General for the

13-46981

10/09/2013S/PV.7029
The situation in Liberia

extension of the mandate of UNMIL for a further year
and urge the Council fully to endorse it.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite members to informal

consultations to continue our discussion on the
subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

13-469819/9
