S/2003/301

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 March 2003
English
Original: French

Letter dated 11 March 2003 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
transmit to you herewith the report on the international security presence in Kosovo
covering the period from 1 to 31 January 2003 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would arrange to bring this report to the attention of
the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

03-27700 (E)

130303

*0327700*

130303

S/2003/301

Annex
[Original: English]

Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
Kosovo Force
1.
Over the reporting period (1-31 January 2003) there were just over 27,200
troops of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in theatre.
Security
2.
Although the overall security situation in Kosovo during the month of January
was generally stable, several violent incidents were reported. The possible political
motivation of some of those incidents is of particular concern.
3.
In the final week of January, United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) police and members of the Kosovo Police Service (KPS) were
subjected to acts of intimidation on several occasions by Kosovo Serbs in northern
Mitrovica. On 4 January, a former colonel in the “Armed Forces of the Republic of
Kosovo” (FARK), Tahir Zemaj, his son and another family member were shot and
killed in an ambush near Pec. Zemaj had been the target of several assassination
attempts in the past. Recently he had been a witness in a trial against the brother of
Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK) leader Ramush Haradinaj and other former
members of the FARK rival organization, the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), who
were tried and sentenced in December 2002 for the ambush, abduction and murder
of four Kosovo Albanians. The investigation into the killing of Zemaj continues.
4.
On 2 January, a breakout at the Dubrava prison was foiled. That incident had
been preceded by a breakout on 31 December when seven people escaped and were
later caught by KFOR military police and turned over to UNMIK police.
5.
On 22 January, an anti-tank rocket was fired at close range at the UNMIK
police station in Pec. Although the building was slightly damaged, no one was
injured. On 31 January, UNMIK police arrested six people on suspicion of carrying
out the attack; three were subsequently detained for weapons offences and further
investigation.
6.
KFOR continued to carry out Kosovo-wide search operations in its campaign
against weapons smuggling and terrorist activities.
7.
Weapons and ammunition were seized daily. Items confiscated during the
month included 117 assorted weapons; 101 grenades and mines; and 11,007 rounds
of ammunition.
8.
On 10 January, KFOR and Yugoslav Army authorities signed an agreement on
temporary operating procedures following a further relaxation of the air safety zone
from 10 to 5 kilometres.
9.
On 28 January, a KFOR team of specialists concluded that the storage site at
the Trepca factory in Leposavic was dangerous, when containers of cyanide were
found to be emitting gases. Although there was no immediate risk to KFOR
personnel and local employees, protective measures were taken and KFOR
specialists repackaged the cyanide containers.

2

S/2003/301

Border/boundary security
10. KFOR continued to monitor border and boundary security during the reporting
period. KFOR intercepted 113 persons attempting to cross borders illegally. Most
were ethnic Albanians attempting to enter Kosovo from Albania and from the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. a
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
11. Security forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia b continued to remain in
compliance with the terms and conditions of the Military Technical Agreement.
12. On 31 January, KFOR conducted an unannounced Kosovo Protection Corps
(KPC) roll-call simultaneously at all sites across the province. KPC cooperated fully
during the operation. Eighty-two KPC members c were absent without justification,
out of a total of 3,048 on the active list. Those absent will be investigated by KFOR
for non-compliance.
13. Twelve cases of non-compliance were reported during the month. They related
to breaches of the KPC disciplinary code and included absenteeism, insubordination,
assault and illegal possession of weapons.
14. As a result of promotion ceremonies held without the authorization of KFOR
and UNMIK, the Commander of KPC has been told that any rank changes and
appointments made during these unauthorized ceremonies are to be considered
provisional until formal approval is given by UNMIK. In addition, following a
campaign of posters and calendars depicting KPC as being involved in military
activities, the Commander of KPC has been officially warned by UNMIK and
KFOR that any publicity issued should depict KPC as a civilian organization.
15.

Fifty cases of non-compliance remained open at the end of January.

Cooperation with international organizations
16. KFOR continues to provide assistance, on request, to international
organizations and non-governmental organizations working throughout Kosovo, and
to provide security assistance in support of UNMIK police operations.
Outlook
17. The overall security situation in Kosovo remains stable, despite continued
localized acts of vandalism, intimidation and violence.

__________________
a

Turkey recognizes the Republic of Macedonia with its constitutional name.
As of 4 February 2003, the name of the State of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was
changed to “Serbia and Montenegro”.
c
This number included the only three Kosovo Serb members of KPC.

b

3
