United Nations

S/PV.6575

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6575th meeting
Thursday, 7 July 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wittig . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Vukašinović
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Assaf
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Vaz Patto
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Parham
Mr. Grant

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central African
Republic and on the activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in that country (S/2011/311)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-40363 (E)

*1140363*

S/PV.6575

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Central African Republic and
on the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in that country
(S/2011/311)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Central African Republic to
participate in this meeting.
It is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Margaret
Vogt, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic,
to participate in this meeting.
It is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Jan Grauls, Chairman of the country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission on the
Central
African
Republic
and
Permanent
Representative of Belgium, to participate in this
meeting.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/311, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic and on the activities of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in that
country.
I now give the floor to Ms. Vogt.
Ms. Vogt: It is an honour for me to address the
Council in my new capacity as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in the Central
African Republic and to present the fifth report of the

2

Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central
African Republic (BINUCA) (S/2011/311). The report
before the Council provides an account of the main
developments during the first half of this year and the
peacebuilding challenges that lie ahead for the people
of the Central African Republic and its Government. It
also describes the main activities of BINUCA in
support of the Government’s peace consolidation
efforts in accordance with the mandate entrusted to it
by the Security Council.
Much has been accomplished over the last two
years, since the establishment of BINUCA as an
integrated peacebuilding office in January 2010. A
number of governance institutions have been
established, and some key legislation has been
instituted. Freedom of the press has been expanded,
despite recent setbacks, when two journalists were
arrested for articles they had published. The overall
security situation remains calm but is unstable,
especially outside of Bangui.
Despite these advances, the Central African
Republic still faces serious challenges. It is afflicted
with extreme poverty, weak national institutions,
corruption, a high rate of violent crime perpetrated by
armed movements and brigands, human rights
violations and impunity.
As noted in the report, BINUCA and the United
Nations system have spared no effort in providing
timely and integrated support to the Government and
the people of the Central African Republic in
addressing those challenges.
In the current context, and as the SecretaryGeneral’s report highlights, the two most immediate
challenges are the political dispensation following the
legislative and presidential elections and the
implementation of peace agreements with rebel groups,
and the sustainable disarmament and reintegration of
former combatants, as part of the overall security
sector reform.
The reporting period was dominated by the
presidential and legislative elections. International and
national observers characterized the elections as
inclusive and peaceful while noting a number of
irregularities. The Constitutional Court has addressed
some of these irregularities by overturning results in
nine electoral districts and ordering a rerun in
13 others. On 29 June, the Minister for Territorial

11-40363

S/PV.6575

Administration announced that the 13 by-elections
would be held in approximately two months.
The composition of a new Government, headed
by incumbent Prime Minister Touadera, is a positive
step, in our view, towards the establishment of an
inclusive cabinet. It comprises representatives of civil
society and the opposition parties, including six
women.
The Government has pledged to address
immediate challenges. In this regard, it announced the
establishment of a new, professional and independent
body to manage future elections and the revision of the
electoral code. This commitment was again publicly
stated at the recent partners’ roundtable in Brussels. I
believe that we should hold them to this promise.
As a result of the boycott of the electoral process
by the opposition, the Parliament and other institutions
are dominated by the ruling party. This situation
constitutes a considerable challenge to ongoing efforts
towards stability and national reconciliation. As
mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report, a major
challenge would be for the Government to provide
political space and engage the opposition outside the
Parliament on issues related to the development of the
country. The Government has committed itself to
undertaking political reforms, including of the electoral
process, to address some of the difficulties that plagued
the last elections. BINUCA will work closely with
regional and international partners to support the
Government in addressing these issues.
In May, we witnessed positive developments on
the implementation of the peace agreements with
armed movements and rebel groups. The Government
announced its intention to disarm, demobilize and
reintegrate all combatants by the end of the year.
Concrete steps have been taken in this regard. On
12 June, in another positive step, the Convention des
patriotes pour la justice et la paix (CPJP) joined the
Libreville peace process and signed a ceasefire
agreement with the Government. On 13 June, Baba
Laddé, the Chadian rebel leader of the Front populaire
pour le redressement (FPR), signed a communiqué
with the Chadian Government to start negotiations with
a view to signing a peace agreement within a month to
lay down its arms and for the safe passage of his group
back to Chad.
The implementation of such an agreement, if
followed through, could lead to the repatriation to

11-40363

Chad of about 400-500 elements of the FPR, which is
one of the issues raised by the Armée populaire pour la
restauration de la démocratie (APRD) as a precondition
to disarm. We have to remember that the FPR is really
a Chadian group operating in the Central African
Republic; it is not a national rebel group of that
country. This agreement was facilitated by the National
Mediator of the Central African Republic. Here, we see
the Central African Republic playing a positive role in
trying to get some of these rebel groups back to their
countries.
There were subsequently clashes between
elements of the FPR and the APRD politico-military
movement, in the course of which APRD hostages
were taken by the FPR. Eighteen hostages were
subsequently released on 29 June in Kagabandoro
following the intervention of the National Mediator.
The successful implementation of this agreement will
partially depend on the compliance of the disparate
groups that belong to the FPR. We shall see whether
they will follow what their leaders sign.
Bringing the FPR into a peace process is an
important element in unblocking the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process in the
north-west of the country. President Bozizé and the
leaders of the politico-military groups announced the
launch of a national DDR process on 25 June in
Bocaranga, and over 340 APRD combatants were
disarmed on that occasion. The Government indicated
its intention to proceed with similar disarmament
exercises in other locations in the hope of completing
the process by the end of the year. The launch at
Bocaranga was conducted without the support of the
international community, and especially without
international military observers, as the mandate of the
observers had expired just days before the event.
President Bozizé, expressing great frustration with the
slow pace of support by the international community,
has appealed for assistance for the entire DDR/security
sector reform (SSR) processes, but argues that both the
Government and the politico-military groups were
ready to secure their country and to enable the people
to resume their normal lives.
Support to DDR and overall security sector
reform remains a core priority for the Central African
Republic and BINUCA. I met with President Bozizé
and Prime Minister Touadera in the margins of the
partners’ roundtable meeting held in Brussels. They
both emphasized the political importance of SSR and

3

S/PV.6575

DDR, and restated their commitment to implementing
the terms of the agreements signed with all politicomilitary groups. It is imperative that the international
community do everything possible to support the DDR
and SSR processes and to provide the necessary
resources for their timely completion. BINUCA, the
United Nations country team and partners, along with
the Government, will undertake a review of the overall
DDR and SSR processes in the near future.
The Central African Republic is at the crossroads
of critical conflict zones, impacted by insecurity from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan,
with the possibility of an upsurge of insecurity across
the Sudanese border as that country grapples with
security challenges that will necessarily attend the
creation of the new State of Southern Sudan. The
Central African Republic also suffers from crossborder criminal elements roaming the Sahel and
exploiting the weak ability of the national security
forces to secure the Republic’s territory and people. An
implosion in the Central African Republic would have
cataclysmic impact throughout the region, negating
investments made in securing the neighbouring
countries. I intend to work closely with my colleagues
in the region to provide a holistic response to these
challenges.
In the meantime, the Government has taken an
important step to secure the north-eastern Vakaga
province by signing an agreement for joint border
patrols with Chadian and Sudanese security forces. It is
important that this agreement be implemented and that
the joint patrols receive adequate support from the
international community. This joint force will partially
address the security vacuum in areas occupied by
rebels, heavily armed poachers and the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA).
In the south-east, the LRA continues to kill, take
hostages and impede normal daily life. Security needs
to be improved in the north-eastern part of the country
to help address the deteriorating humanitarian
situation. Humanitarian workers are coming under
increasing attacks from armed criminals. We must not
allow the criminality in certain parts of neighbouring
Darfur to become a model for the Central African
Republic.
Efforts to provide security for Central Africans
and consolidate peace must be complemented by the
promotion of good governance and the rule of law. The

4

Government must extend its authority into each of the
regions and provide health and education services to all
of its citizens as it works to create economic
opportunities.
Another subject of great concern to the SecretaryGeneral is the protection of women and children. More
needs to be done to prevent sexual exploitation and to
promote children’s and women’s rights. We must also
ensure that we put an end to the recruitment and use of
child soldiers, and more broadly work to see that
children’s rights are respected and enforced. I intend to
establish a protection unit within my office to help
coordinate these issues, as befits the importance
attached to them in our mandate.
I would like to highlight the need for the
promotion of a culture in which human rights are
respected throughout the country. Concrete steps must
be taken to tackle corruption and the pervasive
impunity affecting law enforcement institutions. The
Government must be supported in strengthening the
judicial system to end mob justice. On a positive note,
the Government recently granted BINUCA access to
prisons and detention centres. Also, an independent
national human rights commission is expected to be
established shortly.
The Government of the Central African Republic
presented its second Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
(PRSP) for the period leading up to December 2015 at
the partners’ round table that was held in Brussels.
That conference was held largely due to the efforts of
Ambassador Grauls, and I wish to put on record that
his personal engagement in seeing that meeting
through was instrumental to the success of that effort.
The document outlines the Government’s strategy and
programme towards peace consolidation, including
good governance, rule of law, social services and
economic development. I encourage traditional and
new partners to financially support the programmes
contained in the second PRSP.
Looking ahead, the main challenge would be to
ensure continued support to peace consolidation efforts
in the Central African Republic, in particular to efforts
towards political dialogue, DDR and SSR. I would like
to thank the members of the Council and of the
Peacebuilding Commission, the United Nations family
and especially my predecessor, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Zewde and all other partners

11-40363

S/PV.6575

who have been so steadfast in their support of the
Central African Republic.
The President: I thank Ms. Vogt for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Grauls.
Mr. Grauls (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
for permitting me to address the Security Council in
my capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
country-specific configuration for the Central African
Republic. First, I would like to pay tribute to
Ms. Sahle-Work
Zewde,
the
former
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic, for her efforts to support the
peacebuilding process in the country. I would like also
to take this opportunity to wish Ms. Vogt every success
as the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
(BINUCA) in Bangui. I already feel that it will be a
privilege to work with her.
At the outset, I wish to inform the Council in
detail of the main activities of the Peacebuilding
Commission over the past six months, and then of the
priority actions to be undertaken by the countryspecific configuration in the coming months.
Let me turn first to the activities of the past six
months. Without losing sight of other sectors, our
configuration focused mainly on the electoral process
and preparations for the partners’ round table that was
held in Brussels three weeks ago. With respect to the
elections, the Peacebuilding Commission played an
important role from the outset in mobilizing donors. As
a result of those efforts, it has been possible to
overcome the $7.5 million shortfall in the electoral
budget.
Moreover, the Commission provided advice
through BINUCA to some of the actors involved in
preparing the elections, including the Independent
Electoral Commission, the Government and the
opposition. The recommendations also covered
measures to be taken with respect to irregularities
noted in large part during the first round of
parliamentary elections. In the light of that, the boycott
of the second round of the parliamentary elections by a
coalition of opposition parties was a particularly
regrettable incident.
I wish to draw the Council’s attention to the
policy statement presented by the Government of the

11-40363

Central African Republic to the National Assembly in
Bangui on 18 May. This communication should be
studied by the Council because it contains extremely
important political engagements that should be recalled
here. The Government has committed itself, notably, to
complete the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of rebels before the end of 2011; to
combat corruption; to bolster governance and the rule
of law; and to revise the 2009 electoral code and to
establish a permanent and independent secretariat
responsible for future elections. The Commission trusts
that the Central African authorities will not tarry in
implementing these political commitments.
After the conclusion of the election process, the
Government of the Central African Republic and the
Peacebuilding Commission organized in Brussels on
16 and 17 June a round table of partners, with the
support of the United Nations Development
Programme, the World Bank and the African
Development Bank. The Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Mr. Jean Ping, decided to travel
expressly to Brussels to attend the round table.
Approximately 160 participants represented some
30 Governments and 35 international, regional and
subregional organizations; observers represented
Central
African
civil
society,
international
non-governmental organizations and the private sector.
For a forgotten country such as the Central African
Republic, this was truly an unprecedented number of
participants.
The main purpose of the round table was to make
partners aware of the priorities of the secondgeneration Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP).
This excellent document was drawn up by the Central
African authorities with the technical assistance of the
World Bank.
Development needs obviously remain vast in the
Central African Republic. The message of the
participants at the round table was very clear. They all
encouraged the national authorities to define priority
areas for action in the second PRSP and to focus on
measures to restore stability in the country and to
target vulnerable populations in particular. It was clear
to all that this event was but a first step on a long road
intended to strengthen links with existing partners and
to develop new ones from a broad spectrum of
potential new partners. Naturally, the Commission,
cooperating with the Central African authorities, will

5

S/PV.6575

ensure a targeted follow-up to the work of the round
table.
I also welcome a number of decisive
developments in the weeks and days prior to the round
table to which the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has already referred. These include
the signing of a ceasefire agreement with the
Convention des patriotes pour la justice et la paix, the
only remaining rebel group that did not sign the 2008
Libreville peace accords; the signing of a tripartite
agreement among the Central African Republic, Chad
and the Sudan that should contribute to stabilizing the
situation in the north-east of the country; and further
progress towards national reconciliation.
I would now like to turn towards the future. One
of the main priorities for the road ahead will be
security sector reform, as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General has also noted. Here I welcome
the fact that the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has made support for the
Government in creating a strategy for national security
sector reform (SSR) a priority for BINUCA. The list of
existing SSR projects, as presented at the round table
in Brussels, still needs to be prioritized and guided by a
strategy, such as was sketched out during the national
seminar on security sector reform in April 2008. In the
coming months, the Commission will focus on getting
effective SSR under way.
The areas of good governance, the rule of law and
judicial reform will also be part of our peacebuilding
priorities for the coming year. The United Nations
Development
Programme
has
already
begun
implementing a multi-year programme that must be
completed and refined. Transparent management of
natural resources is an issue that requires urgent
attention in order to generate increased State revenue
and encourage private investment. For its part, the
Commission will pursue its efforts to mobilize the
support of existing and potential partners for
peacebuilding projects.
Before concluding, I would also like to
emphasize an issue that is important both to me
personally and to the German presidency of the
Council — the situation of women and children in
areas of conflict in the Central African Republic. That
situation is still very serious in some areas. During my
last visit to Bangui in April, I had the opportunity to
stress the urgency of setting up a reporting and

6

monitoring mechanism for children and armed conflict.
On my return to New York, I briefed the Security
Council’s Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, which you chair, Mr. President. I encouraged
the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and on Sexual
Violence in Conflict to again visit the Central African
Republic this year in order to assess the situation on
the ground, which, I reiterate, remains very worrying
and deserves the full attention not only of the
Commission but also of the Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Grauls for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Central African Republic.
Mr. Doubane (Central African Republic) (spoke
in French): On behalf of the Government of the Central
African Republic, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council this month. We are encouraged by
your country’s commitment to supporting States
weakened by violence of every kind in their quest for
peace, stability and development. I also commend you
for your commitment to the issue of women and
children in conflict.
On behalf of the Central African Republic, I
again congratulate the Secretary-General on his
successful re-election as head of our shared
Organization, enabling him to continue, consolidate
and complete the many projects begun during his first
term. We also take note of his report of 16 May
(S/2011/311), which has just been introduced, on the
political, security and social and economic situation in
the Central African Republic, as well as the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
there. That virtually exhaustive report comes at the
right moment, considering what is currently at stake
both nationally and internationally.
Here I would like to thank and express our deep
respect for Ms. Margaret Vogt, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for the clarity,
depth and above all the concision of her briefing. I
cannot fail to include in our thanks her predecessor,
Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde, who in difficult and unusual
circumstances skilfully led her mission before, during
and after the elections last January.

11-40363

S/PV.6575

We have witnessed a series of encouraging events
since those elections, as has already been mentioned
and which is worth repeating. These range from the
Constitutional Court’s partial cancellation of a quarter
of the National Assembly seats, to the round table for
Central African Republic donors held in Brussels three
weeks ago. They also include the formation of the
Government and its general policy statement, affirmed
by the Parliament; the tripartite Sudan-Chad-Central
African Republic summit; the signing of a ceasefire
agreement with the Convention des patriotes pour la
justice et la paix, the last rebel group remaining outside
the Libreville peace accords; the imminent return to its
own country of a foreign politico-military movement;
and the start of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) process.
We in the Central African Republic are certain
that these events, with the agreement, efforts and
cooperation of all stakeholders, offer hope of a return
to peace. They are visible signs of that return to peace
and essential factors in a lasting recovery. The
President of the Republic and his Government will do
their utmost to maintain dialogue with the political
players and civil society, as was recommended in the
inclusive political dialogue. They are determined to
pursue the DDR process, which from now on should be
coupled with the security sector reform programme
with the aim of restructuring the defence and security
forces effectively. In my fragile nation, peace is
priceless, and any consolidation of democratic gains
requires it.
If these measures are to be achieved, they must of
course continue in coordination with our bilateral and
multilateral partners, particularly the United Nations
through the Peacebuilding Commission in its Central
African Republic country-specific configuration,
chaired in masterly fashion by Ambassador Grauls,
whom we hold in great esteem and whom I would like
to commend here.
While they are committed, to the extent possible,
to carrying out the report’s recommendations, the
highest Central African authorities recall nevertheless
that, in an accurate assessment of the situation in the
Central African Republic — which lies at the very
heart of the African continent — requires internal and

11-40363

external factors alike to be taken into account, as,
thankfully, has been done here. The situation with
regard to the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), a cruel,
barbarous rebel group from a non-bordering country, is
a perfect example. The LRA’s atrocities, destruction,
pillaging, forced conscription and deportation of men,
women and children have made it deserving of
eradication once and for all through the comprehensive
mobilization of efforts and shared resources.
That is why, while recognizing the full value of
the United Nations and African Union initiatives on
this issue, the Central African Republic vests great
hope in the creation, within the next 48 hours, of a new
bordering State that will drastically overturn certain
principles and alter the geography of the area, albeit
with foreseeable consequences. We remain convinced
that that State will join us in our tireless struggle
against a cross-border enemy with nebulous ambitions
that disturb the tranquillity essential to the
development of the subregion.
In conclusion, as it has done in the past, my
country will continue to cooperate with all States
without exception. At times, discerning friends and
observers, justifiably weary of the issue of the Central
African Republic, question its will and its ability to
recover or merely to move forward.
The Central African Republic is definitely not a
hopeless case; its failure is even less a foregone
conclusion. With its limited means and working
tirelessly, it is fighting to remain on its feet. It is
fighting to build the rule of law. My State is fighting
daily to remain a good father to its population, which
aspires only to live and prosper in peace.
The Central African Republic expresses its
undying gratitude to the international community of
which it is fortunate to be a part, whose unwavering
and many forms of support have never failed it, and on
which it hopes to be able to rely throughout this
painstaking process.
The President: There are no further speakers on
my list. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations in order to continue our discussion on
this subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

7
