United Nations

A/S-20/PV.8

General Assembly

Official Records

Twentieth Special Session

8th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 10 June 1998, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Udovenko . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ukraine)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.

Minister of Science and Technology of Croatia, to whom
I give the floor.

Agenda item 3 (continued)
Credentials of representatives to the twentieth special
session of the General Assembly
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee (A/S-20/10)
The President: We shall first proceed to consider the
draft resolution recommended by the Credentials Committee
in paragraph 14 of its report.
The Assembly will now take action on the
recommendation of the Credentials Committee set forth in
paragraph 14 of its report.
The Credentials Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution S-20/1).
The President: We have thus concluded our
consideration of agenda item 3.
Agenda item 8 (continued)

Mr. Kostović (Croatia): This important special
session gives all of us a historic opportunity to agree on
a comprehensive strategy to fight the drug problem and to
truly commit ourselves to carrying out this strategy in a
highly responsible and effective manner.
The drug problem is a major global security issue
which requires a joint global effort in order to stand a
chance of success. It hurts big States and small ones,
developed and undeveloped, as well as those in transition.
Addressing it at the local level must be complemented by
effective regional and global action. Specific national
programmes, including ours, will resemble Sisyphus
rolling his stone up a hill if we do not support the
eradication of narcotic drugs wherever they are grown or
find mechanisms to control and stop the illicit production
of synthetic drugs in many countries.
We cannot overstate the importance of the global
United Nations approach in fighting the drug problem.
The global effort takes into account all the diversities and
specificities of particular countries and allows them to
build their own strategies, but within the framework of
the global concept of cooperation and with transparent
and clear objectives.

General debate
The President: The first speaker on my list is His
Excellency Mr. Ivica Kostović, Deputy Prime Minister and

98-85454 (E)

I should now like to present briefly the recent
Croatian experience in addressing the drug problem. The
war of aggression recently waged against us has seriously

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned, within one month of the date of the meeting, to the Chief of the Verbatim
Reporting Service, Room C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a
consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
aggravated the drug abuse problem in Croatia. Given these
circumstances, the reaction of the Government has been
rather quick. The problem was recognized and a national
strategy on the prevention of drug abuse was proposed by
a governmental committee and accepted by Parliament in
January 1996. Beginning the implementation of the national
strategy has brought up many difficult questions,
underlining the complexity of prevailing drug problems.
We would like to express our particular appreciation
to the United Nations International Drug Control
Programme (UNDCP) for its assistance, which has resulted
in a joint project with Croatia on drug-abuse control. The
two-year project includes activities to modernize drug
control and related legislation, strengthening drug-law
enforcement and improving demand reduction structures.
Croatia considers the UNDCP strategic approach to
regional and subregional cooperation programmes to be
important and very helpful. As a country at the crossroads
of illicit drug-trafficking routes, Croatia is interested in
being an active member of UNDCP subregional drugcontrol programmes for Central Europe as well as for
South-Eastern Europe. Our priorities are both to strongly
control the so-called Balkan route and to participate in
coordinated activities with the Central European countries.
Croatia also cooperates well with fellow States
members of the Central European Initiative, of which my
country holds the presidency this year. Its expert working
group on organized crime has decided to meet in October
this year at the level of ministers of the interior, because
the fight against transnational organized crime is one of the
major issues of common interest to the members of the
Initiative. At that meeting, the fight against illicit drugtrafficking will be at the top of the agenda. All these
regional and subregional efforts could be important steps in
implementing global strategic goals and in facilitating the
realization of the vision of a drug-free world.
I would also like to mention that in May this year
Croatia hosted the twenty-seventh European regional
conference of the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL). At that session, INTERPOL declared the
fight against drugs to be its strategic priority in the context
of other forms of organized crime, such as moneylaundering, the illicit trade in weapons and terrorism.
As concerns the current situation in Croatia, our
assessment is that the expansion of the drug-abuse epidemic
as a post-war syndrome has been halted. However, the
increasing trend still continues, owing to reasons unrelated

2

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
to the war but related instead to the same factors that
have made drug abuse a global problem.
The new crime law, the law against moneylaundering and the law on drug control, which is in the
process of being adopted, will modernize Croatia’s
legislation and provide our society with the legal
provisions necessary to fight the illicit supply of drugs
and to mitigate its consequences.
However, the experience of many countries that have
been facing serious drug problems for a much longer time
warns that measures to control illicit trafficking alone are
not enough. That is the reason why the new strategy to
fight drugs gives a special role to demand reduction. My
Government strongly supports that concept and urges the
strengthening of cooperation in the field of prevention.
Undoubtedly, the twentieth special session of the
General Assembly reflects the international community’s
awareness that the consequences of drug abuse are
devastating and destructive for the human spirit, for
families, for communities and for countries. We believe
that young people first and foremost, as the most affected
part of the population, and who are the future of the
world, demand that we all act very quickly. The new
strategy gives us hope, but also requires that we devote
ourselves truly and strongly to implementing the concept
and vision of a drug-free world. My Government
expresses its readiness to do its part to the fullest.
The President: I thank the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister of Science and Technology of Croatia for
his statement.
I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Janusz
Tomaszewski, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Internal Affairs and Administration of Poland.
Mr. Tomaszewski (Poland) (spoke in Polish;
English text furnished by the delegation): At the outset, I
wish to note that the Polish delegation associates itself
with the statement delivered by His Excellency The
Honourable John Prescott, Deputy Prime Minister of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
on behalf of the European Union.
When the United Nations adopted the United Nations
Convention against the Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances 10 years ago, one could
have surmised that it dealt with a problem that would
affect my country soon and to a considerable extent.

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
Today, drug addiction is a dangerous social problem in
Poland. The danger concerns all social groups and circles,
regardless of their locality, age, level of education or
material status. Drug-related crime is growing drastically.
According to estimates, some 40,000 people habitually
consume drugs in Poland today, and this number is rising.
The drugs most frequently consumed are marijuana and
hashish brought in from Western Europe, as well as
amphetamines and other synthetic drugs, which are also
produced in Poland. A Polish marijuana, made from Polish
plantings of Indian hemp, has also recently appeared on the
market.
Unfortunately, the chief consumers of drugs are people
aged 15 to 25. We note a steady decrease in the age of
people who consume drugs. One specific phenomenon is
the group of drug addicts who consume so-called Polish
heroine, whose number is growing. A large majority of
them produce and consume the drugs themselves, and also
sell them to others in order to earn a living and finance
their habit.
Our information indicates that organized criminal
groups are today taking control of local drug markets. They
are gradually seeking to monopolize and totally dominate
these markets by extorting money or, more directly, by
organizing drug deliveries. The distribution of drugs is
handled by groups with broad contacts at home and abroad
and with considerable funds and adequate technology at
their disposal.
The illegal production of synthetic drugs in Poland,
out of raw materials supplied from abroad, is becoming an
increasingly serious problem. Criminal laboratories
operating on Polish territory, with professional equipment
and qualified personnel, are producing amphetamines both
for the domestic market and for transfer abroad. The
destruction of 10 such illegal production facilities in 1997
was an undeniable victory for the Polish police. The
criminal groups engaged in the illegal manufacture of
amphetamines are very adaptable in their activities. Apart
from the drug business, they are also engaged in other areas
of crime: car theft and trading in stolen cars, robbery,
forging money and documents, and smuggling alcohol,
cigarettes and weapons.
Poland is a country whose borders are open to an
influx of people and goods. The fact that Poland is
exploited as a transit country for the shipment of drugs is
connected with its central location in Europe: many land,
maritime and air routes converge there. The Balkan trail, by

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
which heroine is shipped from the so-called Golden
Triangle and Golden Crescent regions, leads through
Poland. Cocaine from South America and cannabis from
southern Asia and South America are also shipped via
this route.
Increasingly, we observe closer links between Polish
criminal groups and criminal groups in other countries,
especially in the production of synthetic drugs and in the
transfer and smuggling of drugs. Polish citizens are used
by international criminal organizations, as well as by
Polish organizations, as drug runners on the most
important smuggling routes.
Between 1994 and 1997, the number of the most
serious drug-related offences, such as the production,
distribution and smuggling of drugs, rose by almost 100
per cent, from 4,000 to 7,915. The Polish Government has
undertaken a series of actions to change this situation. A
new law on combatting drug addiction came into force a
few months ago. One of the main goals of adopting it
was to adapt Polish legislation to international standards
and, in particular, to criminalize the possession of drugs.
The new law has also introduced the duty to control trade
in chemical substances used in the production of narcotics
and other intoxicants. The new regulations prohibit the
production, acquisition, possession or storage of
precursors by unauthorized elements.
In order to improve the work of the police in
combatting drug-related crime, a special narcotics bureau
was set up in February 1997. Its work is already yielding
tangible results. Polish law allows the police to send mail
that is secretly monitored; this is particularly useful in
combatting drug smuggling. Laws are being prepared
which will enable us to combat money-laundering. We are
convinced that these are an essential part of the effective
struggle against criminals who derive profit from drugs.
Poland’s experience over the past few years indicates
that without international cooperation it is impossible to
create an effective system of internal security or halt the
threat of organized crime.
The 1988 United Nations Convention against Illicit
Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, a
document that served as a kind of model, provided the
inspiration for the Polish idea of a convention against
transnational organized crime. We are convinced that the
work on this convention, sometimes called the Warsaw
convention, will be successfully concluded and will serve

3

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
to support to a considerable extent actions aimed at illegal
drug-trafficking.
At the same time, mindful of the constant changes in
the situation and in the nature of the phenomenon against
which the United Nations conventions concerning drug
addiction and drug-trafficking are aimed, it seems advisable
to consider the possibility of reviewing some of the
provisions of these conventions so that they may suit the
requirements of today.
Poland wishes to participate actively in the efforts of
the United Nations in the battle against drugs. We welcome
with satisfaction the idea of establishing in Vienna a centre
for combating organized and drug-related crime. The
achievements to date of the Vienna offices for drug control
and crime prevention augur well for this idea. Poland could
be the site of a regional bureau for combating the drug
threat.
Despite the fact that the anti-drug units of the Polish
police have only recently become operational, Poland’s
police forces are cooperating effectively in this sphere with
their counterparts in other countries. We have concluded
with a number of countries bilateral agreements concerning,
among other things, the combating of drug-related crime.
Nearly two weeks ago an agreement between the European
Union and the associated countries on the subject of
security vis-à-vis organized crime, including drug-related
crime, was reached in Brussels. Poland, was a signatory
country and also took active part in the preparation of the
agreement.
The diversity of the situation in various countries
requires the use of diverse resources. To combat drug
addiction and drug-related crime effectively, efficient police
forces are not enough. It is essential to have programmes of
social and economic action to curb the demand for drugs,
reduce deliveries and create possibilities of alternative
development in those areas where drug production has
become part of the economy of individual regions.
We should be concerned by the fact that modern
communications resources, such as the Internet, are
increasingly being used to promote the consumption and
manufacture of drugs. I think that in this sphere, too, it is
essential for us to cooperate in order to reduce these
negative phenomena.
The Polish Government will not give up in its efforts
to combat drug addiction and drug-related crime. The
Declaration that is the focus of the present special session

4

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
is a major incentive to combine our activities on an
international scale. For this action to be effective, it has
to be coordinated by the appropriate organs and agencies
of the United Nations. Along with the Declaration,
programmes of long-term activities are emerging. I wish
to assure the Assembly that Poland will actively
participate in the efforts to fulfil these programmes’
important objectives.
The President: I thank the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Internal Affairs and Administration of
Poland for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Valeriy
A. Smoliy, the Deputy Prime Minister of Ukraine.
Mr. Smoliy (Ukraine) (spoke in Ukrainian; English
text furnished by the delegation): Among the many global
challenges facing mankind at the end of this millennium,
the drug problem remains one of the most serious.
The convening of this special session of the General
Assembly at such a high political level is an indication of
a deep understanding by all countries of the world of the
fact that today international drug crime has already
become a strong destabilizing force capable of ruining not
only the political and economic foundations of States, but
also peace and security on earth.
Drug dealers are well equipped with modern
technologies and means of transportation. Their profits
exceed by many times the amount of money allotted by
the world community for development purposes. It is a
fact that no nation can stand against these forces by itself.
If previously cooperation in the struggle against drug
crime was viewed as a manifestation of solidarity by
countries, today the coordination of national efforts has
become a vitally necessary prerequisite for the secure and
stable development of nations.
This forum is taking place in conditions of
considerable geopolitical changes that have occurred since
the adoption, at the seventeenth special session of the
General Assembly, of the Political Declaration and the
Global Programme of Action. The elimination of
remnants of totalitarianism and the transition of new and
restored democracies from planned to market economies
have, unfortunately, turned out to be a more difficult
process than initially expected. One of the negative
phenomena that has increased during this process is the
growth of criminal activity connected with illegal drugtrafficking.

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
Ukraine faces a number of problems in countering this
criminal activity. During the previous period, the number of
drug addicts, according to official data, has increased
threefold, to about 70,000 individuals. But can we estimate
the real number of victims of this terrible phenomenon?
According to some estimates, this figure might exceed half
a million. Each year our law-enforcement bodies confiscate
more than 40 tons of narcotics from illegal drug traffickers.

The situation becomes more complicated since
Ukraine, due to its geopolitical situation, is of great interest
to drugs dealers. New routes of the international drug
business have gone through the territory of our country to
the States of Europe with which we have common borders.
During only the last half year, 874 kilograms of cocaine,
more than six tons of hashish and other narcotic substances
on their way to the countries of Western Europe have been
seized in Ukraine.
This situation has led to the need to establish an
effective State mechanism to counteract drug crimes and
drug addiction. The President and the Cabinet of Ministers
of Ukraine have made control over trafficking in drugs,
psychotropic substances and precursors a national-policy
priority. Within the framework of these measures, the
concept of monitoring the trafficking in drugs, psychotropic
substances and precursors was adopted, the National
Coordinating Council on Combating Drug Abuse was
established and the National Programme to Counter Illegal
Drug-trafficking and Abuse was approved.
Our country attaches great importance to international
cooperation in combating drug-trafficking. One of the main
focuses of such cooperation was the conclusion of 57
bilateral and multilateral agreements on legal assistance,
including issues regarding combating illicit drug-trafficking.
Today, Ukraine is a party to the three basic United Nations
conventions on monitoring trafficking in drugs and
psychotropic substances. It takes an active part in the work
of the United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs and
the International Criminal Police Organization (Interpol). It
enjoys fruitful cooperation with the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme, the International
Labour Organization, the United Nations Children’s Fund
and other international organizations. Ukraine’s activity in
the field of combating drug-trafficking within the
framework of regional organizations, specifically the
Council of Europe and the Black Sea Economic
Cooperation, is becoming more and more dynamic.

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
I would like also to take this opportunity to
underline the effectiveness of a new regional initiative,
the international operational preventive operation “Kanal”
that has been developed jointly by Ukraine, the Russian
Federation, Belarus and Moldova. The distinguishing
feature of this operation, which envisages interaction
between competent institutions on the borders of those
countries, is the high level of dynamism, the mobilization
of the efforts and means of the law-enforcement bodies of
the participating countries. Taking into account that the
criminal groupings of the drug business are transferring
the centre of their activities to Central and Eastern
Europe, we invite other countries of the region to take
part in the implementation of the this initiative.
At this session, the General Assembly will, for the
first time, adopt a number of important documents drafted
through the joint efforts of Member States and the active
role of the various bodies of the United Nations system.
These documents contain a new world strategy for
combating illicit drug-trafficking and lay secure grounds
for the further strengthening of international cooperation
in this field. Ukraine’s delegation expresses the hope that
all States of the world will demonstrate sufficient political
will for the practical realization of these provisions.
The achievement of our common aspiration to put an
end to the problem of drugs and to enter the third
millennium with the hope of freeing human civilization
from this horrible phenomenon depends precisely on the
unity of all members of the world community.
The President: I thank the Deputy Prime Minister
of Ukraine for his statement. I also urge other delegations
to follow the Ukrainian example and to take even less
time than expected. His statement was less than seven
minutes long.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr.
H.A.F.M.O. van Mierlo, Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Mierlo (Netherlands): This General
Assembly’s special session on drugs provides us with a
unique opportunity to examine successes and
shortcomings in tackling the world drug problem. In the
10 years that have passed since the adoption of the United
Nations Convention against the Illicit Traffic in Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988, much has
been accomplished; but we still have a long way to go.

5

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
The international drug control treaties have been
created with the explicit purpose of protecting life and
health. What these treaties have failed to do is to provide
a proper framework for the vital element of demand
reduction. We are therefore deeply satisfied that the General
Assembly at this special session will put demand reduction
high on the international drug control agenda by adopting
a Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Demand
Reduction. These principles are a welcome and necessary
addition to the treaties. The Declaration recognizes the very
broad range of issues that are covered by the term “demand
reduction”, stretching from the prevention of first-time use
all the way to reducing the negative consequences of drug
abuse.
The Declaration is an important step in the right
direction; but we should not stop there. The next step
should be to evaluate the results of our past efforts in order
to find out what works and what does not. In discussing
new strategies, let us not get trapped in the ideological
disputes of the past. Let us instead base our discussions on
facts and on the practical experiences we have gained over
the years.
We strongly believe that the only way to tackle the
drug problem effectively is by means of an integrated and
balanced approach that includes both demand reduction and
supply reduction; for production and consumption are two
sides of the same coin.
In combating drug cultivation and production, we have
several instruments at our disposal. These include
alternative development and law enforcement measures,
which should be applied on a case-by-case basis. We
therefore welcome the Action Plan on International
Cooperation on the Eradication of Illicit Drug Crops and on
Alternative Development. In this Plan, the basic principles
for effective alternative development programmes are
established. We urge all countries and organizations to
apply these principles to the best of their ability.
Drug-trafficking, by its nature, does not respect
national boundaries. It calls for concerted action at all
levels. As far as action within and by the European Union
is concerned, I would like to refer to the speech of the
European Union presidency. A region of particular interest
to us is the Caribbean, a major transit area in which parts
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands — namely, the
Netherlands Antilles and Aruba — are situated. We will
continue to support the implementation of the Barbados
Plan of Action. This presents an excellent framework for
coordinated regional action and is as yet the only one of its

6

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
kind. In addition, the Kingdom of the Netherlands has
recently taken the initiative to explore the possibilities for
a formal agreement between the countries of the region to
strengthen maritime cooperation.
Related to both drug production and trafficking is
the fast-growing problem of money-laundering. This
special session will approve a resolution setting out the
basic principles for efforts to counter it. As a next step,
we should agree on a global set of measures to implement
them. The Kingdom of the Netherlands, which plays an
active role in the Financial Action Task Force and in its
Caribbean branch, the Caribbean Financial Action Task
Force, will be happy to contribute to the establishment of
such measures.
Allow me to share some of the experiences of the
Netherlands’ demand reduction policy. Our primary aim
is to protect health and social well-being and to reduce
the harm and risks associated with drug abuse. Within
this context, we believe that drug users should not be
criminalized for their habits, but, on the contrary, should
be provided the help they need. This policy has shown
some positive results.
First, our policy prevents drug users from going
underground, where we cannot reach them. We have
identified the various user groups and we know their
habits. This has enabled us to develop targeted policy
measures, which are more effective. By being brought out
into the open, drug use has become less glamorous. The
clearest example of this is the use of opiates. For young
people in the Netherlands now, heroin is for losers; very
few of them would think of trying it.
Secondly, thanks to a high standard of treatment,
care and risk reduction, including methadone and needle
exchange programmes, morbidity and mortality rates
among drug users are relatively low. Such measures are
also important to society in general, since they reduce the
spread of infectious diseases such as tuberculosis, AIDS
and hepatitis.
Now, one may ask whether our programmes do not
lead to an increase in drug abuse. Our experience is that
they do not. On the contrary, needle-exchange
programmes, for instance, have not led to more
intravenous drug use, but they have led to fewer people
sharing needles. Consequently, few addicts in the
Netherlands suffer from AIDS.

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
Each country must bear in mind that it should not
impose its system on other countries as the only right and
proper one. This would deny the specific circumstances of
the drug problem, which vary from country to country. In
regional and international discussions we must find out
what is the best approach for our peoples, based on
arguments and experiences. We in the Netherlands believe
that we are on the right track, encouraged as we are by
results and figures. We have a wealth of experience in
demand-reduction programmes and are willing to contribute
to the further development of the guiding principles on
demand reduction and their implementation.
Whether the world will ever be completely free of
drugs remains an open question. Control of drugs and drugrelated problems seems a more attainable goal. As we all
know, even to reach this objective takes all the resources,
both political and financial, that we can bring to bear. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands stands ready to play its part,
and we look forward to working together with all other
Members.

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
Globally, we are all conscious of the magnitude of
drug abuse, which has spread to every corner of the
world. Terrorist groups and organized criminals have
seized upon human weaknesses to carry out their
activities, to the detriment of the vast majority of the
human race.
Papua New Guinea welcomes its responsibilities in
the context of these challenges and hence reaffirms the
importance of the political declaration and the declaration
on the guiding principles of demand reduction as valuable
tools in our Government’s attempt to counter drug abuse.
Mr. Campbell (Ireland), Vice-President, took the
Chair.

I give the floor to The Honourable Michael Nali, MP,
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Trade and Industry
of Papua New Guinea.

Papua New Guinea’s geographical position gives the
perception that the illicit drug trade could not possibly be
found among its 4 million people, but in fact drugs, both
foreign and domestic, are taking their toll on the country
at an alarming rate. As the largest island nation-State in
the South Pacific, we have great potential in terms not
only of natural resources but also, more importantly, in
the richest of all resources: people, and especially our
youth. This is precisely where illegal drugs are making
their greatest impact. We not only have illegal drug users
in our country, but also increasing numbers of illegal
exporters and importers of drugs, especially of marijuana
and cannabis. We see havoc and destruction in the lives
of so many, especially our young people.

Mr. Nali (Papua New Guinea): On behalf of the
Government and the people of Papua New Guinea, I want
to extend my appreciation to you, Sir, as President of this
twentieth special session of the General Assembly, for this
opportunity to add Papua New Guinea’s voice on the issue
of narcotics and drug abuse.

We are keenly aware of the impact of drugs on the
economic life of our country. Our battle against drugs
means that monies that are vitally needed for the
development of our country are being spent on fighting
this problem. But we are determined to counter these
losses and to eliminate drug abuse from our society.

This event is truly historic. Not only are we
commemorating the tenth anniversary of the drafting of the
1988 Convention, in which Papua New Guinea actively
participated, but for the first time all the Member States
have gathered in this Hall to consolidate our efforts in a
political declaration to counter drug abuse.

Our Government has already established a special
Narcotics Bureau to address and coordinate all aspects of
the fight against drug abuse. My Government is
introducing in Parliament new, up-to-date legislation,
drafted with the assistance of the United Nations experts,
to place these substances under both national and
international control. Papua New Guinea is a signatory to
the Convention of 1961, and its consequent amendment
in the 1971 Convention. Upon passage of the new
Controlled Substance bill, we expect to join those nations
in ratifying the 1988 Convention.

The President: I thank the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands for his
statement.

The twentieth century has seen the international
community grapple with this serious problem. Now, at the
conclusion of this century and on the eve of a new
millennium, we are committing ourselves to the one
element that has often been lacking: the political will
needed for us to unite and solve the problem of this
scourge of modern humankind.

My delegation welcomes the fact that this special
session will consider as a priority our concerns related to
money- laundering, which is a threat to the South Pacific

7

General Assembly
Twentieth special session

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998

region. Our new legislation contains provisions to address
this aspect, as well as measures to promote judicial
cooperation.

The President: I thank the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister of Trade and Industry of Papua New Guinea
for his statement.

Many traditional methods of reducing the supply of
drugs have to a certain extent failed in many countries, as
they have in ours. This does not mean that supply reduction
needs to be abandoned. On the contrary, the proposed bill
will strengthen law-enforcement bodies in this work by
introducing such measures as controlled delivery. But we
are grateful that the promotion of alternative development
projects is being discussed and recognized as a method of
supply reduction.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Peter
Boyadjiev, Minister of Health of Bulgaria.

The drug menace is spreading rapidly not only because
of human weaknesses but also because it is promoted by
terrorists and organized crime. That being the case, Papua
New Guinea recognizes that we are dealing with forces so
powerful that no one country alone can hope to contain the
problem by itself.
Therefore, we need greater international assistance.
We strongly support the call for financial institutions to
commit themselves to an active partnership with Member
States, and in particular to those countries under severe
financial constraints, thus enabling us to have the necessary
resources to combat drug abuse. It makes good sense for
those who wish to invest in developing countries to help
those Governments curtail the greatest obstacle to economic
investment: illicit narcotic drugs and their abuse.
Papua New Guinea is committed to a leadership role
in the Oceania region. We have embarked upon a massive
awareness programme in our country that is aimed in
particular at preventing young people from being lured into
the problems related to drug abuse.
We have established a vibrant training centre and
developed courses on basic training in drug abuse, a
counselling, treatment, rehabilitation and community-based
drug awareness. This programme will be extended as a way
of strengthening regional cooperation.
The target dates and strategies set at this special
session are not easily attainable. But at the same time,
Papua New Guinea pledges its complete commitment to
working together with the international community. Let me
assure the Assembly that my Government will translate the
words of the Political Declaration into action for today and
tomorrow.

8

Mr. Boyadjiev (Bulgaria) (interpretation from
French): The Government of the Republic of Bulgaria
supports and welcomes the drafting of the documents
which this productive twentieth special session of the
General Assembly will adopt today, covering a broad
range of problems in the struggle being waged by the
entire international community against drug abuse. We are
convinced that the essential goals of the war against this
threat and challenge to humanity will be met, because
countries respect decisions and rules which they establish
for themselves.
Bulgaria’s national strategy in this field is one with
the policy of the world community. It is based on the
implementation of a systematic approach to this complex
and complicated phenomenon and attacks the problem
domestically at every link in the chain, from production
and trafficking to use and money-laundering. Bulgaria’s
specific conditions require us to take repressive measures
against the dominant threat: the illicit international traffic
in drugs and the diversion of part of this traffic to the
domestic market.
This priority reflects the country’s geopolitical
position on an important transit route and our
determination to be as effective as possible in the antidrug campaign. It is no coincidence that, year after year,
Bulgarians customs have seized substantial quantities of
drugs and precursors. The energetic action and vigilance
of law enforcement officials in recent months have led to
the elimination of small laboratories and an illegal
amphetamine factory in Bulgaria at the initial stages of
their criminal activities.
Efforts are being made at the national level to reduce
demand through a widespread public relations campaign
and an unyielding attitude towards drugs and the illegal
activities associated with them. At the same time, a
network of professional medical treatment and addict
rehabilitation has been established in the country. For
humanitarian reasons, we are trying to expand
programmes that allow us to confine the risks, reduce the
damage and control access to drugs when their use cannot
be prevented.

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
In the anti-drug struggle, this year has been
particularly fruitful for the world Organization and for
Bulgaria.
A national law on narcotics, encompassing several
aspects, has been drafted in conformity with international
norms and standards. This law will be adopted in its
definitive form when this forum issues its latest decisions.
A new law has been drafted in the struggle against moneylaundering and the institutional potential for its complex
implementation have been expanded. Preparations have
begun for the establishment of up-to-date anti-corruption
legislation.
The new national strategy in the fight against drug
abuse and illicit trafficking is categorically designed to
strengthen national institutions and their material bases and
to promote wide and regulated international cooperation in
this field. Bulgaria is participating as actively as possible in
the creation of subregional cooperation machinery in the
struggle against drug transit along the Balkan route.
We are aware that the objectives of the Bulgarian
national strategy can be achieved only if there is broad
action and effective cooperation and collaboration between
the State, the private sector, civil organizations,
communities, universities, schools, families and individuals.
That is why 17 institutions are represented before the
Council of Ministers on the National Council against drug
abuse and illicit drug-trafficking.
The time that has elapsed since the seventeenth special
session on drugs has convinced the international community
that it can win the fight and prevent drug-related problems
from deteriorating. Organized crime knows no State borders
or moral standards. Let us show that we can be equally
organized, decisive and determined in our fight against it.
We dare to hope that this session of the General
Assembly will mark the turning point at which the
international community abandons its strategy of fighting to
win isolated battles for one of fighting to win the entire
war.
The President: I thank the Minister of Health of
Bulgaria for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Wong Kan
Seng, Minister for Home Affairs of the Republic of
Singapore.

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
Mr. Wong (Singapore): As we stand on the
threshold of a new millennium, we face an old adversary.
More than 30 years ago, the United Nations called
attention to the drug menace and its frightening
consequences if left unchecked. In three decades, three
separate Conventions have been adopted. However, with
the advent of cashless transactions and modern
communications, the illegal use of and traffic in narcotic
drugs and psychotropic substances have increased
manifold. The drug menace remains one of the most
pressing global concerns of our time.
No country, whether developed or developing, has
escaped this scourge. The fight against the global drug
problem is a common and shared responsibility which
requires the commitment of all States. Our task will not
be easy. However, it is a battle we can ill afford to lose.
At this special session of the General Assembly, we must
commit ourselves to the international efforts to combat
the world drug problem. We must have the collective
political will to take tough measures and rid ourselves of
this menace.
Through the United Nations system, we should
develop action-oriented international strategies to control
chemical precursors used for the illicit manufacture of
drugs. Measures must be taken to eliminate or
significantly reduce illicit crops and to promote alternative
development programmes. However, eradicating the
supply of drugs is not enough to tackle the world drug
problem. We must reduce the demand for drugs. This can
be done only through the implementation of measures
which emphasize deterrence and rehabilitation and
through preventive education programmes.
Governments alone cannot effectively tackle the drug
problem. The role of the community is an integral part of
the war against drugs. The drug problem directly impacts
on families and communities. It undermines the political,
social, economic and cultural foundations of every
society. Therefore, the devastating effects of and social
problems arising from drug abuse must not be neglected.
Here, the United Nations International Drug Control
Programme (UNDCP) can play a strong advisory role.
The UNDCP has the capacity to adapt to local
circumstances and has a wide variety of methodologies
and best practices developed under pilot projects
throughout the world.
The United Nations has also established a
Commission on Narcotics Drugs and an International
Narcotics Control Board. It is time to strengthen their

9

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
roles by improving cooperation among our judicial and law
enforcement agencies. Through closer contacts, we can
facilitate the exchange of information leading to the
identification, freezing, seizure and confiscation of the
proceeds of crime. The UNDCP can also play a role in
encouraging greater subregional and regional cooperation.
Criminal organizations take full advantage of borders
demarcating different legal and judicial systems and socioeconomic realities. Through greater international and
regional cooperation, we can prevent these groups from
exploiting our legal and judicial systems. In this regard,
Singapore supports the joint declaration of the signatory
countries of the 1993 memorandum of understanding on
drug control.
Money-laundering is another consequence of the drug
problem. The development of sophisticated communications
and financial infrastructures worldwide has provided drug
traffickers with effective avenues for legitimizing their
earnings from the drug trade. As a member of the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF), Singapore has worked with
other countries to combat international money-laundering.
We have also put in place legislation to counter this
problem and provided for judicial cooperation on drug
matters. We are committed to working closely with other
Member States and the FATF to prevent drug traffickers
from profiting from their illegal activities.
Singapore is strongly committed to the fight against
drugs. We take the drug problem seriously because our
geographical location puts us at constant risk of being used
as a trans-shipment point for drug-trafficking. We have
successfully contained the drug problem through strict antidrug legislation and effective enforcement against drug
abuse. Our stringent deterrent laws are well known. Drug
offenders are treated with the same gravity whether they are
Singaporean or foreign nationals. At the same time, we
have undertaken rigorous enforcement efforts to maintain
checks and curbs on the supply of drugs into Singapore.
We have extended our assistance and cooperation to other
drug enforcement agencies and will continue to do so as
part of our contribution to the international drug control
effort.
Singapore has also developed an effective preventive
drug education programme. In this respect, the strong
partnership between the Singapore Government, our
community and non-governmental organizations and selfhelp groups have helped to create a national consensus
towards zero-tolerance for drug abuse. By learning from
one another, the various organizations have developed more
structured preventive programmes and organized more

10

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
drug-prevention activities. Though the results are longdrawn, there have already been encouraging results to
these efforts.
For example, despite vigorous enforcement, our
police and drug enforcement agencies are making fewer
arrests. In 1994, about 6,160 individuals were arrested. In
1997, we saw a 22 per cent drop, to 4,750 individuals.
Fewer relapses are also being reported: 66 per cent in
1997, compared to 81 per cent in 1994. Fewer new
addicts were arrested in 1997: 1,130, compared to 1,420
in 1996. The drug situation in Singapore is very much
under control.
The world community’s success in combating the
drug problem depends on our sustained collective
commitment. Individual Governments must stay the
course if international action is to achieve positive and
lasting results. The drug control situation continues to
change relentlessly. There will always be new challenges
to this problem, be it in the changing patterns of
manufacture, trafficking or abuse of drugs.
The United Nations and its agencies therefore have
a pivotal role to play in global efforts to combat the drug
problem. The international treaty system and the
international standards and norms embodied in the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the work of the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs provide an irreplaceable
foundation and point of reference in the efforts to
overcome the world drug problem.
We have a unique opportunity here in New York to
take stock of our individual and collective efforts to
combat the world drug problem. Let us not waste it on
mere rhetoric. Let us instead make a firm commitment as
to what we, the international community, can and will do
to resolve this shared problem.
The Acting President: I thank the Minister for
Home Affairs of Singapore for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Nicolae
Tabacaru, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Moldova.
Mr. Tabacaru (Republic of Moldova): There is no
doubt that the production, sale and consumption of drugs
have a disastrous impact on both society as a whole and
on individuals. It is equally clear that they have become
a serious problem for most of the countries of the world.
This transnational dimension of the problem has led to the

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
acknowledgement that the fight against drugs can be
efficacious only through the close cooperation of all States.
For many years, the United Nations has played the
role of the main coordinator of international efforts to fight
this dangerous phenomenon on the global level and though
we are far from the complete elimination of the drug issue
from the United Nations agenda, we should admit that the
United Nations has contributed significantly to the
achievement of certain successes in some countries and
regions.
At the same time, we believe that the suggestions that
will be made and the decisions that will be adopted by the
member States at this special session of the General
Assembly will contribute decisively to the realization of the
objectives of the United Nations Decade against Drug
Abuse.
The Republic of Moldova fully supports the draft
Political Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug
Demand Reduction, which we regard as one of the most
important initiatives in the fight against narcotic drug abuse.

In this context, I would like to express our gratitude
to the United Nations International Drug Control
Programme (UNDCP) and the Centre for International Drug
Control for their efforts in the preparatory activities of this
special session. The Republic of Moldova highly
appreciates the activities of these bodies, which have
generated and promoted the implementation of a number of
decisions with respect to the fight against the production,
traffic and illegal sale of drugs.
Like other newly independent countries confronted
with the drug problem, we are extremely interested in
developing additional cooperation with the UNDCP. The
lack of proper specialized institutional structures, as well as
insufficient financial resources, create serious difficulties for
the newly independent States in implementing programmes
in the fields of education, treatment and rehabilitation. This
situation requires the launching of a number of assistance
projects in the areas concerned by the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme, in cooperation with
the World Health Organization, the United Nations Children
Fund, the United Nations Development Programme and
other United Nations bodies. We therefore hope that the
relevant international structures will consider the specific
problems of this group of countries when planning their
future activities in this region.

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
Although the drug problems of my country are not
as great as those of other countries of our region, they are
basically generated by Moldova’s geographical position
on the “Balkan route”, the illicit thoroughfare of narcoticdrug transit.
It is well known that this negative phenomenon
flourishes because of certain conditions, among them the
conflict zones generated by separatist movements.
Unfortunately, the Republic of Moldova is no exception
in this respect. I would like to refer here to the eastern
region of my country, which is beyond the control of the
constitutional authorities of the Republic of Moldova, and
which creates favourable conditions for carrying out
illegal activities. These activities not only jeopardize the
sovereignty and integrity of the country, but also create
conditions for drug- and armament-trafficking and moneylaundering.
The destabilization potential of this particular
situation, which imperils regional security, also generates
problems for other countries. That is why we consider
that only joint actions by the countries of the region, in
cooperation with the relevant structures of the United
Nations, can prevent the transformation of this region into
a centre of drug- and armament-trafficking. Consequently,
we believe that the legal settlement of the situation in the
eastern part of the country will have a positive effect on
the existing situation in the region.
My country is making considerable efforts to fight
against the production, trafficking and sale of narcotic
drugs. In the last few years we have adopted a series of
laws to control narcotic drugs. My country’s adherence to
the United Nations conventions on this problem has given
an impetus to improving the legal framework in this field.

In addition to measures taken at the national level,
the Republic of Moldova has developed a bilateral
cooperation framework. We have signed a number of
intergovernmental agreements with the countries of our
region. On the basis of the decisions adopted at this
session, the Republic of Moldova will act with firmness
in order to fight against the drug phenomenon in all its
manifestations.
In conclusion, I would like to express our hope that
close cooperation between nations will constitute an
important step in the consolidation of the fight against the
illicit production, traffic and sale of narcotic drugs.

11

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
The Acting President: I thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Moldova for his
statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Luc
Frieden, Minister of Justice of Luxembourg.
Mr. Frieden (Luxembourg) (interpretation from
French): The Grand Duchy of Luxembourg attaches great
importance to the fight against drugs. Many men and
women in our societies have fallen victim to this scourge,
which has developed at an unprecedented pace in the past
few decades. The Government of Luxembourg believes that
it is necessary to coordinate drug-control policies as much
as possible at the international level with regard to both
supply and demand.
The draft resolutions that we will be called upon to
adopt here represent a qualitative leap forward. Indeed, this
is the first time that commitments of this scope, dealing
with the reduction of both supply and demand in the
struggle against narcotic drugs, will be taken on a global
scale.
Luxembourg supports such commitments without
reservation. In this context, I should like to refer to the
statement made on Monday by Mr. John Prescott, Deputy
Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, who spoke on
behalf of the European Union. That statement clearly has
the support of my country.
We welcome in particular the well-balanced and
integrated approach that has been chosen, which takes into
account the many different aspects of the drug problem, as
well as their interdependence. Such an approach is of
necessity based on the principle of shared responsibility.
The eradication of illicit crops, while being an essential
aspect of any global strategy to combat drugs, must include
the creation of alternative development programmes in
countries that produce narcotic drugs.
However, Luxembourg would like to stress that the
creation and the implementation of such programmes must
take place in cooperation with the populations concerned
and must respect fundamental principles of human rights.
These development programmes must offer to the
populations concerned real and sustainable alternatives and
not simply force them to eradicate all their narcotic drug
cultivation.
This action must be balanced by systematic prevention
efforts on the part of our Governments. We hope in

12

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
particular that education about the dangers of drugs will
become obligatory for States in formulating their school
programmes. Furthermore, the victims of drugs must
receive appropriate treatment.
The effectiveness of the struggle against drugs will
depend largely on the nature of international cooperation.
The harmonization of anti-drug legislation is required at
the global level as well as in every region. Both the
United Nations and the European Union must contribute.
Our laws and our legal authorities must continue to
prosecute illicit traffic in all types of narcotic drugs,
irrespective of their category or geographical origin.
Only international action that takes all of these
considerations into account will be effective. That is why
the Government of Luxembourg takes an active part in
the efforts of the United Nations and the European Union
in this area.
With regard to the United Nations, I should like to
stress that Luxembourg is one of the few countries that
has followed up article 5, paragraph 5, of the United
Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, which recommends
financing intergovernmental bodies specialized in the fight
against illicit traffic in narcotic drugs by using the
proceeds confiscated from drug activities. The fund to
combat the traffic in narcotic drugs, which Luxembourg
set up to receive the proceeds confiscated from drug and
money-laundering activities, has already, on many
occasions, supported various United Nations International
Drug Control Programme (UNDCP) projects. This fund
has also enabled Luxembourg to share such proceeds on
several occasions with other countries involved in
international legal cases.
Luxembourg appreciates the various efforts made by
the United Nations system to develop activities to combat
the illicit cultivation of narcotic drugs worldwide. In this
context, we welcome in particular the activities outlined
in the UNDCP action plan and those of the Executive
Director, Mr. Pino Arlacchi.
In conclusion, Luxembourg attaches great importance
to the question of combating money-laundering. In 1989,
Luxembourg adopted the necessary legislative measures
to prevent the financial sector from being abused for the
laundering of drug-traffic money. Shortly thereafter, we
supplemented these measures by ratifying the Vienna
Convention and requiring professionals in the financial

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
sector to report any suspicious operations to the legal
authorities.
In addition to national efforts, Luxembourg has taken
an active part in the work of various international bodies,
in particular the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), of
which my country is a founding member. In the most recent
assessment, the FATF confirmed that Luxembourg was
complying with 40 of its recommendations with regard to
money-laundering.
The results of Luxembourg’s efforts in this area show
that an effective fight against the scourge of moneylaundering is not incompatible with professional
confidentiality, specifically in banking. In the fight against
money-laundering, investigatory powers prevail over
confidentiality, both in the course of domestic investigations
and when fulfilling requests from abroad for judicial
cooperation.
The Government of Luxembourg will continue its full
cooperation with the United Nations and with other States
to wage an effective battle against drugs and to help their
victims.
The Acting President: I thank the Minister of Justice
of Luxembourg for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr.
Abdourahmane Sow, Minister of Town Planning and
Habitat of Senegal.
Mr. Sow (Senegal) (interpretation from French): As
we approach the end of the millennium, the question of
drugs and psychotropic substances has become a central
international concern, first and foremost because of the
major role of drugs in today’s international commerce. This
is also because drugs are a social time-bomb that threatens
the survival of societies and of families, including their
most vulnerable members: the young. Drugs are a threat
because modern communications, including electronic
means, are used by international traffickers to carry out
their activities.
No country is spared; no society is safe from the
destructive effects of drugs; the trade in drugs is increasing
exponentially, keeping pace with globalization. Indeed,
apart from their well known harmful effects on physical,
mental and moral health, we must emphasize the many
pernicious connections that drugs create, consolidate and
expand: connections with international organized crime,
small-arms smuggling, terrorist groups and the financial and

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
industrial entities that are used for money-laundering.
Illicit drug production is gravely harming the development
of crops and the achievement of food security in poor
countries, and threatens and even compromises the
national unity and security of States.
Africa occupies a central place in the illicit world
drugs trade. Indeed, the 1997 report of the International
Narcotics Control Board indicated that many African
seaports and airports have become important transit sites
for cocaine and heroin. Moreover, Africa continues to be
a major supplier of cannabis and cannabis resin sold on
illicit African, European and North American markets,
despite the large seizures carried out and the vigorous
action taken to eradicate the problem in recent years.
In the light of the dangerous development of the
situation, we must carry out without delay an exhaustive,
in-depth study of the drug situation in Africa. Such a
study is all the more necessary as Africa still lacks
adequate logistic, technological and financial means to
combat drugs, and as it faces objective constraints linked,
inter alia, to the permeable borders among its States, and
to the deterioration of the political, economic, social and
security situation in a number of its countries.
This state of affairs led the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) held at Yaoundé, Cameroon, in July 1996
to adopt a political declaration and a plan of action on
combating the abuse and illicit trade in drugs in Africa.
The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) too has included the drug issue among its
activities; in 1993 and 1994, on a proposal by Senegal, it
adopted resolutions on the subject. An anti-drug
coordination unit was established in June 1996 within the
ECOWAS secretariat, a summit meeting of which was
held at Abuja, Nigeria, in July 1997, at which a political
declaration, a subregional plan of action to combat drugs
and two conventions on judicial cooperation were
adopted.
There is a need to strengthen internal and external
consistency among the various anti-drug strategies and
measures at the national, regional, subregional and
international levels, and to integrate demand reduction
programmes into the health and social policies of our
States. Moreover, international and national action against
drugs cannot be the sole responsibility of Governments.
It requires the constant mobilization of public opinion,
communities, non-governmental organizations, civil

13

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
society, political actors, the media, the private sector, trade
unions, and women’s and youth organizations.
Senegal solemnly reaffirms its firm determination to
help at all levels in the world struggle against the scourge
of drugs, something it has done since its independence in
1960, clearly aware that its geostrategic position as a
country open to the world thanks to modern seaport and
airport infrastructure makes it a likely port of entry and
transit site for traffickers. That is why in 1963 we adopted
a law against the use and illicit trade in cannabis. In 1965
we created a National Narcotics Commission, which has
now become the Inter-ministerial Committee to Combat
Drugs, which has a permanent secretariat and which is
responsible for the Government’s anti-drug policy.
My country has ratified the Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs of 1961, the 1971 Convention on
Psychotropic Substances and the 1988 United Nations
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances. In 1997 it adopted a drug code on
the basis of multidisciplinary study; this is an important
step in the process of harmonizing and adapting our
national anti-drug legislation.
With the assistance of the United Nations International
Drug Control Programme (UNDCP), Senegal has drawn up
and adopted an agreed national plan of action to combat the
consumption and illicit trade in drugs for the period 19972000, with an overall cost estimated at $4.4 million. This
plan, which will be funded in part with internal resources,
aims, inter alia, at strengthening national capacities and the
overall institutional anti-drug framework, at intensifying
preventive action, at caring for addicts, and at reorganizing
and strengthening suppression services.
Moreover, caring for addicts and ensuring that young
people are educated and made aware of this problem have
an important place in our national policy thanks to the
effective endeavours of the Jacques Chirac Centre for
awareness and information on the dangers of drugs, at
Thiaroye in the Dakar suburbs, which was financed through
French cooperation programmes, and of many other nongovernmental organizations, with the support of the
authorities and international cooperation.
The Government of Senegal is grateful to all friendly
countries and international institutions whose assistance has
enabled us to attain notable success in fighting drugs.
Today more than ever, the international community must
act together for the total eradication of the illicit cultivation
of the plants that go to make the drugs that so sorely afflict

14

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
our continent, and of the illicit traffic in drugs and
psychotropic substances. It must also act quickly to
ensure the effective implementation of international
conventions on money-laundering and to strengthen
procedures for information exchanges, cooperation and,
specifically, judicial cooperation.
That is Senegal’s message: a message of hope that
the decisions adopted at this special session will help us
make progress in our common worldwide struggle against
drugs.
The Acting President: I thank the Minister of Town
Planning and Habitat of Senegal for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency The
Honourable Tuariki John Delamere, Minister of Customs
and Associate Minister of Health of New Zealand.
Mr. Delamere (New Zealand): First, let me say that
New Zealand recognizes that drug use is an international
problem, and we are well aware of our responsibility to
work with other countries to address this problem.
We have been striving to develop a comprehensive
and balanced approach to the issue of illicit drug use. We
seek to minimize drug-related harm by preventing drug
use in the first place and reducing drug-related harm that
is already occurring. Our National Drug Policy thus
emphasizes the need for strong law enforcement, credible
messages about drug-related harm and effective health
services.
Our efforts to strike a balance between supply
control, demand reduction and the management of drug
problems have helped us reduce significantly the harm
associated with illicit drugs in New Zealand. For example,
we have significantly increased the number of people
receiving methadone treatment. Many of these people
have not only reduced their illicit drug use and needlesharing, but have stabilized their family and working
lives, reduced their involvement in criminal activity and
generally improved their health status. Another success
story has been the introduction of a needle-exchange
programme a decade ago, which has helped to prevent the
spread of HIV/AIDS. In fact, our HIV infection rate of
less than 1 per cent among injecting drug users is one of
the lowest in the world. We are only now beginning to
understand just how important this relatively simple and
inexpensive programme has been in terms of helping
protect the public health of all New Zealanders. I note
that there are those who vehemently oppose methadone or

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
needle-exchange programmes. For me, the answer, “Well,
it works”, seems to be the best response to these critics,
who I suspect would have us blindly march down the road
towards a “war on drugs”, a philosophy that many would
consider has not worked.
A few words now about two groups in New Zealand’s
population that I feel we have not focused on enough. One
of the strong messages that I will be taking back from the
special session is the need to do better at communicating to
our young people, in credible and effective ways, the
dangers of using any type of drug — including alcohol and
cigarettes.
Some people may argue that, as the leaders of our
nations, we cannot be seen to do anything that condones
drug use, that by even talking openly about the relative
risks of drug use, we might be taking away some of the
social sanction against using drugs. But I do not think that
we can afford the luxury of taking the moral high ground.
Nor can we continue to keep our heads in the sand. Young
people are using illicit drugs, whether we as parents or
politicians like it or not. Providing honest and accurate
information about the issues surrounding drug use is one of
the keys to reducing drug-related harm, particularly for
young people who might be tempted to experiment with
drugs because of stories they have heard that downplay the
risks, or things they may have seen in the media that
glamorize drug use.
If we are going to stand a chance in convincing our
young people about the risks of drug use, we need to
address the hypocrisy that young people see when adults,
including some politicians and other civic leaders, openly
and legally abuse alcohol, then turn around and condemn
youth for using marijuana. This sort of hypocrisy makes
young people switch off, and you cannot really blame them.

In many countries the indigenous people are overrepresented in national statistics on drug-use problems.
This, unfortunately, is also true for Maori, New Zealand’s
indigenous people, to whom I belong. I think we need to do
much better at empowering indigenous people to understand
how they can control the factors that influence their health,
such as drug use. They also need to be encouraged to
participate much more fully in all levels of the health
sector, and health services must be made more responsive
to the needs of indigenous people. At the Healing Our
Spirits Conference on indigenous people and substance
misuse, sponsored by the World Health Organization and
held in New Zealand earlier this year, it was heartening to

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
hear so many indigenous people saying it was time to
take responsibility for prevention work among their own
people, rather than waiting for others to step in and
provide treatment services once a member of their
community had developed a drug problem. This issue of
how to engage indigenous people in efforts to counter the
world drug problem is something that I will be taking
back to New Zealand, and, I will be saying that we
clearly need to be doing better in this area.
Speaking now as my country’s Minister of Customs,
I think everyone recognizes the need for enhanced
cooperation and coordination. I regret to say that New
Zealand law-enforcement authorities are finding that, all
too often, a number of other administrations are not
committed to putting these sentiments into practice. It is
ironic that, at a time when the need for international
liaison and coordination has never been greater, we
increasingly see barriers being put up to frustrate these
types of objectives. It is vital that all law-enforcement
agencies become much more comfortable at working in
the international environment. It is equally important that
they be encouraged to do so by individual Governments.
Finally, I want to say that the decision to create a
Declaration on demand reduction is highly significant. It
articulates the international importance of striking a
balanced approach to drug policy, where supply reduction
and demand reduction are seen as two equal and
complementary strategies. New Zealand looks forward to
being able to contribute to the preparation of actionoriented strategies for demand reduction in collaboration
with the United Nations International Drug Control
Programme and other interested delegations.
When this special session closes and we all return to
our respective countries, I do not think we can pat
ourselves on the back, thinking that somehow we have
solved the world drug problem. The challenge we all face
now is to turn our commitment into action, both
individually and in concert with one another.
And I agree that, together, “We can do it”.
Let me assure the Assembly that New Zealand will
be shouldering its burden to meet this challenge.
The Acting President: I thank the Minister of
Customs and Associate Minister of Health of New
Zealand for his statement.

15

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
I now give the floor to His Excellency The
Honourable Nii Okaija Adamafio, Minister of the Interior
of Ghana.
Mr. Adamafio (Ghana): In February 1990, this
Organization, conscious of the growing menace of drugs,
held a special session of the General Assembly to confront
that threat. At that meeting the then Secretary-General made
a momentous pronouncement that underscored the drug
problem in all its devastating dimensions. Let me refresh
our memories of what he said:
“We are assembled here today in response to the
threat posed by drug abuse. Let us not underestimate
this threat. We are talking about personal tragedy,
severe damage to health, the disruption of society,
economic breakdown, the undermining of democratic
institutions, corruption, intimidation, violence and
death.
“Let us resolve that at this special session of the
General Assembly words lead to action and that this
action leads to success. Drug abuse is a time-bomb
ticking away in the heart of our civilization. We must
find measures to deal with it before it explodes and
destroy us.” (A/S-17/PV.1, p. 9 and p. 16)
Since then a lot has been done and achieved at the
national, regional and global levels. In 1990, in response to
the threatening drug problem at home, and in pursuance of
our determination to address the international aspects of that
problem, the Government of Ghana enacted the Narcotics
Control and Enforcement Law. This is our most
comprehensive legislation on drugs. It incorporates in its
provisions the principles of the multi-disciplinary outline
recommended by the United Nations Conference on Drug
Abuse and Illicit Trafficking, held in Vienna in June 1987.
It established the Narcotics Control Board as the central
coordinating government agency in all matters relating to
drugs and has criminalized money-laundering and all
proceeds from drugs.
Since then, our efforts at enforcement, as well as those
concerning education and prevention, have had a positive
impact on our society. However, our treatment and
rehabilitation programme has not been as successful as we
would have wished, largely because of the lack of
infrastructural and financial resources.
Ghana has sought to pursue its international
obligations by forging a close working relationship at both
the bilateral and multilateral levels.

16

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
We have also been very active and relentless in
efforts at subregional cooperation within the context of
the Protocols of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) on mutual assistance on crime
and other, related matters.
A study of all reports available from the group of
experts shows very clearly that drug barons and
traffickers are now at their destructive worst, that the drug
market continues to expand, that large quantities of drugs
are being moved around and that drug monies continue to
be laundered even in sensitive areas of the global
economy.
This trend can become a nightmare if it is not
ruthlessly confronted. This, however, requires not only the
necessary political will, but also sustained financial
resources, logistics and expertise in all the multidisciplinary aspects of the drug war.
We must also pay urgent attention to the disturbing
economic dimensions of the drug menace, which are
seriously undermining our efforts. A growing number of
young people are being enticed into the illicit drug
industry as a matter of economic survival.
Ghana, like many other developing countries, has
undertaken economic reforms to revitalize its economy.
Structural adjustment, though necessary, can have painful
short-term consequences for the more vulnerable sectors
of society, particularly the rural and urban poor. The
benefits of economic growth take time to be reflected in
the incomes of many of these people, and they are
therefore easily tempted to become involved in growing
and trafficking in drugs and acting as couriers.
I would like to assure the Assembly that Ghana
remains committed to the fight against drugs. It is
imperative, however, that the developed nations in whose
hands control of the world economy lies recognize that
the most effective way to contain the flow of drugs from
poorer countries is to support our efforts towards
sustainable economies.
Only then can our united efforts to deal with the
global drug menace yield meaningful results.
I wish to avail myself of this opportunity to place on
record Ghana’s profound gratitude to the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme and other donors,
especially the Governments of the United States, the

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
United Kingdom and Germany, for their encouragement of
and support for our drug control programme at home.
The Acting President: I thank the Minister of the
Interior of Ghana for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Natheer
Rashid, Minister of the Interior of Jordan.
Mr. Rashid (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic):
Permit me, first, to congratulate the President on his
conduct of the business of the twentieth special session of
the General Assembly.
I would also like to thank all States, representatives
and observers for the universal awareness they have shown
in their participation in this session. Our common goal is to
endeavour constantly to combat the greatest of all evils in
order to save our societies from its endless dangers.
We in the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, recognizing
the danger of this evil, have taken a keen interest in
combating it. We have given top priority to this matter.
Jordan, as the Assembly knows, is neither a producer nor
a consumer of these substances, but its geographical
location, between the producing regions to the north and
east and the consuming regions to the south and west, gives
it increased responsibility as a safety valve and a line of
defence in combating the growing trafficking operations.
An additional factor is the nature of these smuggling
operations, which take place over vast regions of Jordan,
often over rough terrain.
We are doing our best, sparing no effort, to control the
danger of this scourge to protect our citizens, help our
neighbours and help protect the international community
from its dangers, whether in the area of prevention or of
pursuing smuggling operations. Our actions in this regard
are essentially in line with the report of the Executive
Director of the United Nations International Drug Control
Programme.
In the area of protection and prevention, which is one
of the most important aspects of civilized societies, a public
awareness campaign has been launched across all sectors of
society. The Government of Jordan recognizes and
appreciates the roles played by public and private
organizations in raising the awareness of members of
society in order to reduce this problem. The Ministry of
Education has included in its curricula appropriate materials
for students on the danger of narcotic drugs. Efforts are
also being made by the Ministries of Higher Education,

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
Culture, Youth and Information. They are supported in
this endeavour by local newspapers and magazines. All
these organizations have joined hands to guide and
educate youth towards a brighter future free from the
dangers of narcotic drugs.
There is another dimension to the concept of
protection, which is the treatment of addicts and the
comprehensive rehabilitation of former offenders
convicted of dealing in drugs. The Ministries of Social
Development, the Interior and Health have their own
programmes for the rehabilitation and treatment of such
people to give them a better chance to return to normal
life and to be reintegrated into their communities as
people who have become fully aware of the magnitude of
their crimes and the damage that they inflicted upon
themselves and those around them.
Religious and spiritual values play an important role
here. Islam, like all divine religions, is one of the main
pillars of the protective work in our country. Therefore,
the Ministry of Awqaf and Islamic Affairs trained and
dispatched preachers to centres in various parts of the
country to make people aware of the dangers of narcotic
substances and the damage that results from dealing with
drugs. The aim is to guide them to a healthy future.
In the area of legislation, one of the first legal
instruments to be adopted after the inception of the
Emirate of Transjordan, a law enacted in 1926, contained
provisions relating to narcotics. This law evolved and was
amended several times until it was replaced by the Law
on Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988,
which gave drug addicts the right to treatment and saved
them from punishment as a means of encouraging them
to admit to society their guilt. On the other hand, it
stiffened punishment for other aspects of dealing with
drugs and psychotropic substances, such as illegal
trafficking and involvement with international gangs.
Punishment for such crimes has been made more severe
in certain instances, commensurate with the increased
incidence of such crimes in Jordan.
The law also provides for the seizure of illegal drug
money. A bill dealing with money-laundering is currently
under consideration.
All government agencies are engaged in the combat
against drugs and are equipped with the personnel and
equipment necessary for their operations in the desert
regions of Jordan. We have ascertained, including through
aerial surveys, that Jordan is free from any illicit crops,

17

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
and therefore our data base reveals no manufacturing
facilities.
In the international arena, the Government of Jordan
stands by every friendly and sisterly State in accordance
with its capacity and potentialities, especially regarding the
sharing of information with other countries. Here I should
like to emphasize the relations that my country enjoys with
neighbouring countries and the bilateral agreements signed
with them. We have even gone beyond the limits of these
agreements for practical purposes, strengthening cooperation
with neighbouring countries in terms of procedures
concerning seizure and the exchange of comments and
information.
We have always supported accession to international
treaties in order to contain the drug problem. We have
signed and acceded to many agreements in this regard. We
also support the United Nations International Drug Control
Programme and are ready to cooperate in order to achieve
the goals which all of us aspire to.
We would like to emphasize that the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan annually spends a significant amount of
its budget on combating drugs in order to achieve
continuous progress in eradicating this problem. Our
agencies have succeeded in reducing this dangerous activity
by more than 20 per cent. We appeal to the international
community and to the United Nations Fund to take these
achievements into consideration and to enable us to
energize and modernize our potentialities and equipment in
order to tighten our grip on drug smugglers and dealers,
who possess modern communication systems and
sometimes have more effective means than we do.
The Acting President: I thank the Minister of the
Interior of Jordan for his statement.
I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Poseci
Waqalevu Bune, Chairman of the delegation of Fiji.
Mr. Bune (Fiji): In any war, battle or fight, having
engaged the enemy, we must regularly assess our strategy,
tactics and options to determine if we are marching to
victory or losing the fight. My delegation therefore believes
that this special session is most timely and provides a
unique opportunity for such an assessment by the
community of nations, and we are consequently pleased to
participate in it.
The fight against the production and distribution of
narcotic drugs was internationally enjoined through the

18

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
adoption, some 10 years ago, of the United Nations
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances and its precursors, which include
the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs and the
1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances.
Fiji is a party to these Conventions and is fully
committed and dedicated to international, regional and
national efforts to create a drug-free world.
My delegation was saddened recently to learn that
the illicit production of the opium poppy has more than
tripled since 1985; that the illicit production of coca has
doubled over the 1985-1994 period; and that
psychotropic-substance abuse continues to climb. The
data, while alarming, should motivate us to press on with
greater intent and purpose to reverse the trend.
At the international and regional levels, we must
facilitate and assist Governments to fully apply the
provisions of drug- control treaties and intensify
international and regional cooperation to prosecute the
fight, and we must revisit our strategies, tactics and
actions to effectively respond to the challenge.
In individual countries, the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme should work
closely with individual Governments, upon the
Programme’s own initiative or at the request of the
Government, to develop and implement in-country
strategies, plans and programmes to create a drug-free
country. When we make all countries drug-free, we will
have a drug-free world. Such collaboration could take
many forms, including legislative action, more education
and mass communication programmes, and more training
to provide each country with the tools and skills to win
the fight.
There is a major problem confronting many small
developing States in their battle against illegal drugs, and
that has to do with financing the battle. The scarce
financial resources of States such as Fiji have to be
applied to promoting economic and social development
and eradicating poverty from our midst. We need
maximum official development assistance at the required
international level of 0.7 per cent of gross national
product to aid us in our war against illegal drugs. The
drug trade has developed into illegal business ventures,
creating illicit employment. Small developing States can
attack that problem through increased investment to
facilitate economic development by widening the business
and industrial sector.

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
The bottom line is that people get involved in drugs as
an illegal business because it is lucrative compared with the
monetary value of export crops as recommended by the
Government. In response, therefore, to reverse the situation,
the Government will have to create an environment in
which national economic development, including business
and industrial expansion, is sufficiently large to offset and
eradicate the existence of the drug trade. We must provide
the people with legitimate business alternatives and
productive employment.
Cannabis, or marijuana, is the crux of our illicit drug
problem in Fiji and has become a major cause of social
problems in the last decade. Our tropical climate allows for
cannabis to be grown all over the country. While its use
was initially localized, markets in urban areas have become
lucrative for the illicit drug trade. There is little indication
of the existence of hard drugs in Fiji.
In the drive to eliminate the illicit cultivation of
marijuana, the Fiji police force has been actively involved
in its eradication and seizure and in the arrest of offenders.
Available information indicates a high level of trafficking
in marijuana from rural to urban areas by drug traffickers,
who use commercial vessels, fishing boats or public
transport to take the drugs to the market.
It is a source of concern for us that since 1990, more
than 50 per cent of Fiji’s drug offenders have been in the
age group of 17 to 25 years.
Members of our police force have so far taken part in
educational programmes jointly conducted with the Ministry
of Education in schools, villages, church groups and other
civic groups, in order to raise public awareness of the
dangers of drug use. We have targeted preventative and
educational programmes at you people since, as alluded to
earlier, they accounted for more than half of our drug
offenders in 1997.
Our Government has recognized that a holistic
approach is necessary to combat the evils of drugs.
Towards that end, it has presented to Parliament a
Substance Abuse Advisory Council Bill which is aimed at
developing a comprehensive and substantive abuseprevention, education and research programme in Fiji. The
Council is mandated to encourage, promote, sponsor and
coordinate research into the use of liquor and substance
abuse, which is defined as including liquor; psychoactive,
pharmaceutical or illicit drugs; volatile substances such as
petrol and some fluorocarbons; and anabolic steroids, as
well as problems associated therewith in Fiji. This is not to

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
mention the educational, dissemination, collation and
monitoring role of the Council.
My Government is equally aware that to succeed in
the global fight against illicit drugs, it is necessary to
have legislation which would facilitate the extradition of
fugitives, mutual legal assistance and transfer of
proceedings. I am pleased to announce that Fiji has
enacted the Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters Act
and Proceeds of Crimes Act, respectively, to complement
our Extradition Act.
In conclusion, my delegation will fully support the
adoption of the three draft resolutions — the Political
Declaration, the Declaration on the Guiding Principles of
Drug Demand Reduction, and “Measures to enhance
international cooperation to counter the world drug
problem”.
The Acting President: I thank the Chairman of the
delegation of Fiji for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Jacques
Louis Boisson, Chairman of the delegation of Monaco.
Mr. Boisson (Monaco) (interpretation from French):
The authorities of Monaco largely share the sense that
only increased international cooperation, based on
steadfast political determination, can curb the threat posed
by the international drug trade and all the criminal
activities associated with it.
Nowadays, States have at their disposal the legal
instruments and institutions necessary to fight this
scourge. We must now combine our efforts and pool our
experience in order to offer, especially to the young
generations, a drug-free society.
The Principality of Monaco has ratified all the
international texts on drugs. On several occasions, it has
altered its drug laws to correlate them with these
instruments. The laundering of drug money has been
criminalized since 1985 and the scope of this crime has
been extended and diversified in accordance with the
1988 United Nations Convention. In 1993, a broad
criminal statute on the laundering of property and capital
from illicit sources was also added to our penal code.
These provisions target the fruit of serious offences
committed in the context of organized crime and, in
particular, extortion, kidnapping and illegal confinement,
procurement and arms trafficking.

19

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
The legislative work on money-laundering was
completed in implementation of the 40 recommendations of
the Financial Action Task Force created in 1989 by the
seven most industrialized countries. Financial institutions
are obliged to participate in the battle against laundering
money from drug-trafficking or the activities of organized
crime. An information and control service for financial
flows was established, in the framework of bilateral
agreements with France, to oversee the implementation of
these provisions. The small size of Monaco’s territory
clearly facilitates the application of these recommendations
and effective control over their implementation.
As a founding member of the International Criminal
Police Organization (Interpol), the Principality of Monaco
contributes to the force’s work in the fight against drugtrafficking and addiction.
The Government of the Principality will continue to
support unreservedly the anti-drug efforts of the United
Nations and expresses every confidence in the activities of
the United Nations International Drug Control Programme.
The provisions of the three draft resolutions prepared
for adoption at this special session of the General Assembly
should give renewed impetus to the relentless battle to
eliminate the devastating consequences of the production,
sale, demand, traffic and illicit distribution of narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances — criminal activities of vast
scope and international dimensions.
The reaffirmed political will in the battle against this
worldwide scourge will be successful only through
enhanced and effective international cooperation. This
cooperation must be legal, of course, but also undertaken in
the field of precursor and synthetic drug control, demand
reduction and alternative development programmes and
activities. It is through responsibility shared by
Governments and civil society that the common struggle
against the global drug problem should be waged,
objectively and with an approach balanced between
education and prevention, on the one hand, and suppression
and rehabilitation on the other.
The consumption of drugs has grown inexorably in the
past 10 years. All are agreed on that. If we can better
understand, in order better to attack, the causes of this
alarming and insidious phenomenon, which finds all too
fertile soil in the malaise of contemporary society, we
should be able to intervene more effectively. Poverty,
economic uncertainty and the loss of traditional values
acquired through the ages probably contribute to the despair

20

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
of a growing number of young people fleeing the artificial
paradises and pain of a world in upheaval.
It is therefore our duty to restore hope to these
somewhat disoriented young people; to be tuned into
them, as is the Monegasque association “Jeunes
j’Ecoute”; and to guarantee care and rehabilitation to the
most desperate drug addicts, as do many nongovernmental organizations that deserve our tribute. For
many of these people, hope can shed light on a future that
once seemed bleak.
The Acting President: I thank the Chairman of the
delegation of Monaco for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. John de
Saram, Chairman of the delegation of Sri Lanka.
Mr. De Saram (Sri Lanka): The views that have
been expressed by the many distinguished speakers who
have preceded me are views with which the delegation of
Sri Lanka, on whose behalf I have the great honour to
address this special session of the General Assembly,
would in large measure wholeheartedly concur.
Much has been done - and much has in fact been
done under United Nations auspices in the last 50 years to address the subject of drug abuse and the questions of
supply, demand and the links in between; yet there is still
so much more that always seems to still lie ahead.
This special session of the General Assembly will
very shortly, in its global approach to the vast and
complex field of drug-abuse control, urge the adoption
and implementation, at the international and national
levels, of a further range of specific programmes,
pursuant to the Global Strategy and the Global
Programme of Action adopted at earlier sessions of the
General Assembly and, in particular, at the seventeenth
special session in 1990.
There is much that will be required by way of
international cooperation — global and interregional,
regional and subregional, bilateral, formal and informal
arrangements. More importantly, there is much that will
be called for in national, local and family endeavour. As
the representative of Saint Lucia so eloquently reminded
us last evening, let us hope that deeds match words.
As regards the international cooperation in South
Asia, I would like to inform the General Assembly that
Sri Lanka will next month assume the chairmanship of

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
the Association of the seven countries of South Asia —
Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and
Sri Lanka — the South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation, popularly known as SAARC. The subject of
drug-abuse control in the region will be carefully
considered, pursuant to the Convention on Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances adopted by SAARC in 1990,
and also in the light of the results of this special session of
the General Assembly.
As to Sri Lanka itself and our own national
endeavours, the National Dangerous Drugs Control Board
has requested me to inform the Assembly that the
Comprehensive Multidisciplinary Outline of Future
Activities in Drug Abuse Control adopted by the General
Assembly in 1987 and the Global Programme of Action
adopted by the General Assembly in 1990 have been
enormously helpful in guiding us in the formulation of a
statement of overall national policy on drugs, in the
creation and expansion of institutions, in the consolidation
and updating of the drug-abuse laws of Sri Lanka through
statutory enactments, and also in the development of
specific programmes. These programmes include the
treatment of drug dependency in public and private
facilities, rehabilitation, preventive education and, where
appropriate, the entrustment of drug-addicted offenders to
non-penal facilities.
I have also been requested to say to the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme that we are
very grateful for the advice and assistance provided to Sri
Lanka in the formulation of its Statement of National
Policy on Drugs and its Master Plan for Drug Control. We
look forward to the International Drug Control
Programme’s continuing advice and assistance in their
implementation.
This special session of the General Assembly includes
on its agenda a number of items pertaining to the restriction
and reduction of the supply of drugs, the restriction and
reduction of the demand for drugs and, additionally, the
measures that ought to be taken against the laundering of
the colossal amounts of money reaped by those engaged in
what we now call the illicit drug industry. These are
matters of the greatest importance.
The President returned to the Chair.
Yet we, the delegation of Sri Lanka, would also ask
this special session of the General Assembly to give careful
attention as well to a phenomenon that has crept upon the
world within perhaps the last three decades — namely, the

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
close relationships that we are told often obtain among
those who engage in the illicit trade in narcotics, in the
illicit trade in arms, in the illicit processes of moneylaundering and in the funding of other criminal activities,
including the funding of the cold, calculating inhumanity
of terrorism.
I would, in this connection, like to read to the
Assembly the following two sentences from the report of
the Secretary-General of July 1997 on proposals for
United Nations reform.
“Government authority and civil society are
increasingly threatened by transnational networks of
crime, narcotics, money-laundering and terrorism.
Access by underworld groups to sophisticated
information technologies and weaponry as well as to
the various instrumentalities through which the
global market economy functions are vastly
increasing the potential power and influence of these
groups, posing a threat to law and order and to
legitimate economic and political
institutions.“[A/51/950, para. 143]
I congratulate the Secretary-General for those words
of warning; I congratulate the Secretariat for the close
relationship that now obtains between the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme and the United
Nations Centre for International Crime Prevention, under
the excellent, dynamic leadership of Mr. Pino Arlacchi.
The President: I thank the Chairman of the
delegation of Sri Lanka for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Robert
E. Millette, Chairman of the delegation of Grenada.
Mr. Millette (Grenada): My delegation congratulates
you, Mr. President, for the effective and efficient manner
in which you have conducted this special session. My
Government has made and will continue to make every
effort locally, regionally and internationally to eradicate
poverty and to rid the country of the scourge of drugs.
Research data show that there is a direct correlation
between unemployment and substance abuse. Recent
statistical data collected by Grenada’s National Drug
Avoidance Committee show that the majority of people
who were arrested for drug related crimes were
unemployed or underemployed. Therefore, we ask the
developed countries to assist Grenada in its quest to
eradicate poverty by providing meaningful sources of

21

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
employment and training for everyone, especially for males
between the ages of 20 and 35.
My Government feels that sustainable eradication
programmes must be accompanied by the provision of
regular income incentives. One of the sources of income in
Grenada is the Micro Enterprise Programme, which is
aimed at encouraging private sector entrepreneurship
throughout the country. We want to stress that successful
eradication programmes must be accompanied by the
provision of regular income incentives. The Micro
Enterprise project has gone a long way to improve the
living standards of Grenadians, especially in the rural areas.

There are many socio-economic factors that have
contributed to the drug problem. Some of our young people
perceive the drug dealers and drug traffickers as positive
role models. The Grenada Government is actively and
aggressively seeking to make farming, manufacturing,
fishing and other business ventures more available and
more attractive to our young people. We ask our friends to
assist us in these endeavours.
The international narcotics control report compiled by
the United States Embassy in Barbados for 1997-1998
praised the Grenada National Drug Avoidance Committee
for having a strong and viable organization and for
involving agencies such as the police and customs services.
However, Grenada will continue to make every effort to
reduce demand and to educate our people, young and old
alike, about the effects of illicit drugs.
Grenada is an active member of the Regional Security
System, an eastern Caribbean initiative to enhance military
cooperation. Grenada is also a member of the Maritime
Movement Information System, a project funded by the
United States. This system allows regional coast guards to
track vessels as they move through the eastern Caribbean.
My Government supports the view that a new global
approach is needed in our fight against illicit drugs. We,
large and small countries alike, must seek to find solutions
to supply, demand, money-laundering, corruption and the
many social ills that result from the use of illicit drugs.
In 1971 and 1988 respectively, my Government
acceded to two of the four United Nations conventions: the
1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances and the 1988
Convention against the Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances.
In July 1987, an Agreement for the Prevention, Control and
Suppression of the Consumption of, and Trafficking in,

22

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
Narcotic and Psychotropic Substances was signed between
the Governments of Grenada and the Republic of
Venezuela. Additional treaties and letters of agreement
have been signed between Grenada, the United States, the
United Kingdom and other developed countries. Grenada
also became a member of the Inter-American Drug Abuse
Control Commission during the twenty-sixth regular
session of the Organization of American States.
My Government sees the drug trade as
multidimensional, since it cuts across political, economic,
geographical, social, legal, health and cultural spheres.
Therefore, it is imperative that the developed and
developing countries join hands in finding solutions that
are holistic and practical. The solutions and strategies that
we develop at this special session must tackle the drug
problem on two fronts: the users and the producers.
My Government’s Integrated Drug Reduction
Strategy concentrates on the following areas: institutional
strengthening through measures such as the Drug
Avoidance Secretariat in the Ministry of Education;
demand reduction, through programmes in collaboration
with the police, customs, the Ministry of Education and
the Ministry of Legal Affairs; supply reduction, through
cargo and passenger examination and sea and land
surveillance; treatment and rehabilitation through the
Carlton House and Grand Bacolet rehabilitation centres
and other facilities; legislative and judicial apparatus;
international and inter-agency cooperation; and economic
and cultural development.
In 1986, the Government appointed the Drug
Avoidance Committee to formulate and implement
policies to reduce the demand for narcotics. The Royal
Grenada Police Force and the Ministry of Education
conduct drug-abuse-resistance programmes in primary
schools throughout the country.
The fight against the production, use and trafficking
of drugs is no easy task. However, the Government and
people of Grenada, Carriacou and Petit Martinique are
totally and absolutely committed to this fight. It is our
hope that this special session will result in a closer
working relationship among Governments, international
agencies, community groups and non-governmental
organizations. We are convinced that it is only by
working together that we can create a drug-free world.
The President: I thank the Chairman of the
delegation of Grenada for his statement.

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. George Saliba,
Chairman of the delegation of Malta.
Mr. Saliba (Malta): Malta welcomes the convening of
this special session of the General Assembly devoted to the
fight against drugs. Today, as a result of revolutionary
changes in technology, as well as of new and advanced
means of communications and transport, organized crime
has found what it considers to be fertile ground to
consolidate its established illegal activities. Without any
shadow of doubt, the drug problem has become
transnational and of interest to all States. We cannot but
underline the importance of a concerted effort to tackle this
issue, which has become a scourge, at the national and
global levels. We all know that no one can claim immunity
from the ripple effect of the drug phenomenon — a
phenomenon that represents a threat not only to individuals
and communities, but also to security and stability within
States and regions. This was emphasized by Mr. Pino
Arlacchi, Executive Director of the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme (UNCDP), in his
address to the forty-first session of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs, when he stated that
“No country is too small. No region is unimportant.
Everyone, both as individual people and as societies,
are adversely affected by illegal drugs”.
My delegation commends the Executive Director of
UNDCP for the enthusiasm, vigour and foresight he
demonstrated in taking up his new duties and in addressing
the drug problem.
With regard to the question of required funding for
UNDCP programmes, the provisions of article 5, paragraph
5(b)(1) of the 1988 Vienna Convention may be utilized
further as a source of funding drug control and prevention
programmes and for UNDCP programmes, which are in
need of such funding more than ever.
Malta welcomes the consolidation by the SecretaryGeneral of several relevant functions into one single Office
for Drug Control and Crime Prevention; under the
leadership of Mr. Arlacchi. We also welcome the
appointment by the Secretary-General of a group of highlevel experts to undertake a comprehensive review of how
the efforts to combat illicit drugs have evolved within the
United Nations system since the General Assembly
established UNDCP in 1991.

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
mechanisms whereby regions and subregions may be able
to share their experiences and conclusions resulting from
the implementation of national strategies. In this respect,
the Government of Malta is fully in support of the
initiatives taken within the Euro-Med process, in both
Barcelona and Valletta, to pursue actively a dialogue and
cooperation on combating organized crime and all aspects
of the illicit drug trade.
In Malta, as in most countries, the drug problem is
a very real one. The Government of Malta has recognized
the seriousness of the situation and, in its determined
fight against drug traffickers, has taken appropriate
remedial measures by developing an intensive and
comprehensive strategy consisting of making enforcement
more effective, improving control at ports of entry,
updating the laws within the context of international
conventions, developing preventive measures, improving
treatment, rehabilitation and social support structures, and
cooperating through bilateral or multilateral agreements or
arrangements, especially with States bordering the
Mediterranean, to strengthen the infrastructure needed for
effective control and prevention of illicit trafficking
through Malta.
The Government of Malta is committed to fighting
illicit drug-trafficking with ever-increasing vigour. The
Dangerous Drugs Ordinance, the main legislation, has
been amended to provide for, inter alia, life sentencing
for very serious trafficking; 10-year sentences for other
cases of trafficking; compulsory prison sentencing in the
case of trafficking, cultivation and importation;
confiscation of the property of convicted traffickers; pretrial financial investigations; the criminalization of the
offence of money-laundering; and increased international
cooperation in this field.
The laws governing the monitoring of drug
traffickers, the confiscation of their assets and other
measures to strengthen police operations against
trafficking are being brought into line with those of
modern European countries. At the same time, preventive
programmes have been implemented to raise anti-drug
awareness among parents, young people and children. In
addition, the Government is also supporting and seeking
the closest possible collaboration and cooperation with all
voluntary organizations in running rehabilitation
programmes. No effort is being spared to ensure that
voluntary organizations are considered as equal partners
with Government ones.

The draft Political Declaration calls for the
establishment or strengthening of regional or subregional

23

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
New measures were announced last February which
will permit the introduction of strategic and administrative
structures to obtain the coordination needed in the
management of a national policy on drug and alcohol
abuse. To that end, a new coordinating commission has
been set up to supervise the operation of government
agencies and voluntary bodies, to monitor the
implementation of the national policy on substance abuse
and to advise the Government on changes in social policy.
Malta’s geographical location may offer strategic
attractions to those involved in drug-trafficking. For our
part, we have been able to remain in control of the
situation. However, in order to maintain this momentum,
Malta needs more technical assistance, particularly in the
fields of surveillance, information sharing and advisory
services in order to strengthen its capability to combat illicit
drug-trafficking.
Today more than ever, the drug problem needs to be
tackled in a more direct and coordinated manner. The
prevention and reduction of demand, control of supply,
suppression of illicit trafficking, and treatment and
rehabilitation of victims are four areas none of which can
be considered in isolation. It is to be recalled that the draft
political declaration to be adopted at this special session
specifically reaffirms our unwavering determination and
commitment to overcome the world drug problem through
domestic and international strategies to reduce both the
illicit supply of drugs and the demand for them.
Malta renews its full support for the concerted efforts
being made by the international community to control the
world drug problem. We pledge our unreserved
commitment to achieving a society free of drugs.
Undoubtedly, our primary duty is to ensure that the efforts
we undertake are continuous, balanced and concerted, both
nationally and internationally. We could be on the threshold
of achieving notable successes in controlling one of the
worst scourges to afflict the human race for a good number
of years. It would be unforgivable if we were to leave the
twentieth century with a legacy of unfulfilled promises.
The tasks ahead are not easy, but the plight of millions
of young people worldwide whose lives are threatened by
drugs should be enough to consolidate our resolve. Our
commitment is a debt we owe to our children, to our young
people, and to future generations, so that they may be able
to live healthy lives in a safe environment.
The President: I thank the chairman of the delegation
of Malta for his statement.

24

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Rex Stephen
Horoi, chairman of the delegation of the Solomon Islands.
Mr. Horoi (Solomon Islands): The rapid growth of
international crime is having an impact on all countries.
Small island developing states such as Solomon Islands,
however, are especially vulnerable because of our
geographical location and characteristics and our limited
interdiction and enforcement capabilities. This applies
particularly to drug-trafficking and the violence and
financial crimes associated with it. Moreover, the drug
problem and its related ills pose a serious threat to our
security and to the social and economic fabric of our
society.
The drug problem is of serious concern to Solomon
Islands. It is now evident that illicit drugs are locally
grown and widely used. The detection and confiscation of
illegal drugs since the late 1980s, including the discovery
of 2.6 tons of compressed cannabis in 1989 on one of our
remote islands, confirms that major drug-trafficking
through the Solomon Islands is a reality. In the absence
of an effective intelligence network, it is difficult to detect
and identify Solomon Islands nationals engaged in the
illicit drug business, let alone the international traffickers
crossing our borders. Although we assume that the drugs
are brought into the Solomon Islands by a variety of
means, customs and police reports show they enter mainly
by post or through the international air terminal serving
the capital. Furthermore, the detection of coca leaf
cultivation last February as well as three recent heroin
cases indicate that more serious and dangerous drugs now
threaten our nation.
Confronting the rapid growth of illicit drug activities
in my country and contributing to an effective global drug
control strategy are daunting tasks. There is much to be
done in terms of reviewing and strengthening current
national legislation and policies on drugs, providing
adequate professional training, increasing access to
effective and appropriate equipment, developing an
efficient intelligence system, and promoting demand
reduction strategies that will ultimately erode the market
for drugs. The use of modern technology and
communications in drug-trafficking and money-laundering
must be countered by professionally trained personnel
using reliable intelligence links and effective detection
equipment.
Difficulties notwithstanding, we have undertaken
several drug control initiatives. The Royal Solomon
Islands Police, for example, is embarking on a campaign

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
to combat illicit drugs by upgrading its drug unit and
strengthening its intelligence system. Moreover, a campaign
was launched in February of this year to foster community
support in the fight against illicit drugs. Public talks and
school visits to foster basic drug awareness and education
are under way, but on a small scale. There is a need to
expand and extend such activities, especially in the rural
communities.
In addition, an anti-drug campaign committee to
devise strategies for the effective control of drugs in the
Solomon Islands has been proposed. This body will involve
the various sectors of civil society. It must be noted that the
active involvement of all sectors of civil society is
fundamental, and is a prerequisite for any practical and
workable drug control strategy, especially where one of the
key objectives is to reduce the demand for drugs among
youth.
My delegation fully concurs that the drug problem is
a complex global challenge demanding a comprehensive
global solution on both the supply and the demand sides.
Our efforts at the national level, therefore, must be
complemented and supplemented at the regional and
international levels. Various regions and subregions have
initiated and adopted certain drug control measures, apart
from organizing workshops and seminars. In our own
subregion, for instance, the Honiara Declaration of 1992
focuses on legislative drafting assistance, improvements in
the drug enforcement capabilities of regional police and
customs officials, and help in training and information
exchange. Additional resources must be mobilized to give
better effect to such regional initiatives and to encourage
and facilitate inter-regional and inter-State cooperation in all
aspects of drug control. In particular, my delegation
supports the recommendation to intensify international
cooperation in prevention, law enforcement and prosecution.
Many States have also begun to address the drug
problem through adherence to relevant international
conventions such as the United Nations Convention against
the Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances. However, ratifying conventions without the
resources and capacity to implement them means very little,
especially in view of the urgency of responding effectively
to the challenges at hand. To counter the demand for and
the sale of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and
related activities such as money-laundering, developing and
least developed countries, including my own, need the
assistance of the international community, particularly with
respect to intelligence gathering and analysis, detection and
prosecution.

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
In our judgement, however, the international
community’s first priority in aiding smaller nations, like
my own, is to help us develop appropriate information
networks and secure assistance for training to maximize
our own national efforts. It is in this context that my
delegation firmly supports the call for an action-oriented
outcome of this session.
Finally, in countries where the drug problem is
relatively new, apart from using strong law enforcement
methods, we must invest in creating alternative economic
opportunities. In this regard, my delegation recognizes the
efforts made by the United Nations International Drug
Control Programme (UNDCP) and other organizations. I
believe, however, that proactive engagement will go a
long way towards diminishing the drug problem. It is far
more costly, especially for the least developed countries,
to deal with the needs of a drug-addicted population than
to initiate preventive strategies early.
My delegation joins previous speakers in reiterating
the need for a long-term and holistic approach to the
problem of illicit drugs. Solomon Islands is small and
vulnerable. We are no longer the place that time or the
international drug traffickers have forgotten. Threatened
is the extended family — the foundation of Solomon
Islands society. Committed as my Government is to the
efforts against illicit drugs, we know the necessity of
international cooperation.
A concrete outcome of this special session will
therefore be a global commitment that will help to ensure
the sustainability of the cultural and moral structure of
our societies as we begin the new millennium.
The President: I thank the Chairman of the
delegation of the Solomon Islands.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Roland
Y. Kpotsra, Chairman of the delegation of Togo.
Mr. Kpotsra (Togo) (interpretation from French):
First of all, may I extend to you, Sir, the most sincere
appreciation of the Togo delegation for the skill with
which you have been leading our work, which no doubt
will ensure the desired success of our deliberations.
I also take this opportunity to extend my most
earnest thanks to the Commission on Narcotic Drugs for
the outstanding work it has done to prepare for this
twentieth special session of the General Assembly.

25

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
With a population of 4.5 million inhabitants, of which
50 per cent are young people under 15 and 51.3 per cent
are women, Togo has set itself guidelines based on respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms and is working
tirelessly to promote its harmonious and sustainable
development in peace and security. In this context, it has
deliberately made the campaign against organized crime,
juvenile delinquency and the abuse and illicit trafficking of
drugs and psychotropic substances one of its priorities.
A veritable plague at the end of this century, the drug
phenomenon today is worldwide and its harmful effects
spare no State, whatever its size or its level of development
throughout the world, to varying degrees, the cultivation
and production of many types of drugs, used by a large
sector of the world population, are on the increase.
In Togo, the recent discovery of cannabis plantations
over relatively large areas of land and the clandestine
introduction into the country of enormous quantities of
cocaine, heroin and psychotropic substances from certain
countries of Latin America and Asia are sufficient to
highlight the seriousness of the phenomenon, which was
particularly exacerbated by the socio-political troubles of
1990 to 1993. Cannabis cultivation, undertaken both by
nationals and by foreigners who have settled in our country,
not only feeds local demand, which is constantly increasing,
but also produces a surplus, which is exported; in particular
to Europe.
Heroin and cocaine, on the other hand, are brought
into our country in transit towards other destinations. By
way of illustration, in 1997 we confiscated 81 kilograms of
heroin, 13 kilograms of cocaine, 1,107 kilograms of
cannabis and 11,000 psychotropic tablets. The harmful
effects of the abusive consumption of these products on the
health of our people are becoming alarming and might very
well become catastrophic, especially in economic terms.
In the face of this situation, which is a deplorable one,
to say the least, it is absolutely necessary that our States,
individually and collectively, intensify their efforts and take
energetic steps required by the seriousness of this
phenomenon in order effectively to combat the illicit
movement of drugs.
For its part, the Togolese Government, under the
dynamic leadership of the President of our Republic, has
with determination committed itself in recent years to
waging a merciless struggle against this scourge. As a party
to the three international drug conventions, it has not
hesitated to adhere to important related subregional

26

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
instruments, such as the Convention on Mutual Assistance
in Criminal Matters of the Economic Community of West
African States and a convention on judicial cooperation
and mutual assistance among member States of the
Council of the Entente.
Furthermore, on 18 March 1998, Togo adopted a
new law on drug control. This law conforms to the 1988
Convention, which takes into account the areas of
prevention, suppression, and treatment and social
rehabilitation of the drug addict, as well as the area of
money-laundering.
Along with this legal arsenal, a decree by the
President of the Republic created the National Anti-Drug
Committee, an interministerial body for coordinating the
anti-drug struggle in Togo. This Committee has rapidly
begun to define a national policy replete with strategies.
The approach adopted is multi-sectoral, global and wellbalanced.
Above and beyond activities against drugs
undertaken by the Gendarmerie, the police and customs
officials through their anti-drug brigades, preventive
action has been undertaken with non-governmental
organizations, linked together in an anti-drug network that
has been waging a vigorous education campaign
throughout the country.
It is obvious that, despite the efforts it has made, our
Government will not be able to deploy the resources it
needs for its anti-drug policy. Indeed, the effective
implementation of this policy requires, inter alia,
strengthening the capacity for the laboratory analysis of
narcotic drugs, creating anti-drug units, setting up
establishments to treat drug addicts, organizing training
programmes on techniques for identifying moneylaundering, and appropriate training of judges. As will be
seen, the task is enormous and can be carried out only if
the Government’s efforts are supported by significant
bilateral or multilateral assistance.
There is now a consensus that responsibility for
combating the world drug problem is a common one and
must be shared. In a word, the struggle against the
production, illicit sale, trafficking and distribution of
drugs is a worldwide campaign which no State can avoid
and in which the international community must play its
full role, especially in regard to international control.
Here, we pay tribute to the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme for its work in

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
western Africa, and particularly in Togo, and welcome the
convening of this special session.
The Togolese delegation expects documents to emerge
that will strengthen international, regional and subregional
solidarity and cooperation and to initiate an ongoing regular
dialogue with the United Nations, its various bodies and
Member States so as to more easily eliminate the scourge
of drugs. The adoption in this regard of a true universal
social contract would therefore be indispensable as a basis
for this cooperation and to pave the way for stricter and
more effective international control.
At one time, former Secretary-General Javier Pérez de
Cuéllar quite rightly pointed out:
“The growing problem of narcotic drugs has
become a major international anxiety, not least
because of its effect on the future of children and
young people. It has become more and more evident
that international and multinational efforts provide the
best hope for arresting and reducing the traffic in and
use of drugs, which have such an appalling effect on
both individuals and the societies in which they live.”
(ST/DPI/906, p. i)
Togo endorses this point of view and, at this historic
meeting, urges the international community to go beyond
the limits of simple analysis to explore the best ways and
means and consider the best measures that could help to
encourage the struggle and eliminate this scourge at the
dawn of the next millennium.
Our fight against the scourge of drugs is a major
endeavour, a long-term task that is difficult to carry out and
can be accomplished only if we unite our efforts to that
purpose and if we truly invest our determination and the
appropriate resources.
The President: I thank the Chairman of the delegation
of Togo for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Moses M.
Dlamini, Chairman of the delegation of Swaziland.
Mr. Dlamini (Swaziland): Allow me, on behalf of my
delegation, to extend the warm greetings and good wishes
of His Majesty King Mswati III, Her Majesty the Queen
Mother, the Swazi Government and the entire Swazi
nation.

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
We meet at this special session of the General
Assembly, eight years after the seventeenth special
session, to draft a more comprehensive and integrated
approach to international drug control, in view of the
challenges we continue to face as a result of the alarming
increase in the abuse, illicit production and trafficking of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.
Nevertheless, the continued efforts which express the
undying quest and determination of the United Nations,
Member States and civil society to eradicate this problem,
which undermines development and socio-economic and
political stability, both within and among nations, are
indeed commendable.
While the poor economic performance of some
countries, coupled with political instability and turmoil,
makes them fertile ground for illicit drug-trafficking and
organized crime, it is equally true that, where positive
political and economic elements necessary for
development exist, it is simpler for criminals to transport
and distribute illicit drugs across borders. This is a tragic
reality that poses a serious challenge to the world
community.
It is extremely disturbing and most unfortunate that
illegal drugs find their way to innocent children and
young people. It is also unfortunate that women have of
late joined men in the criminal activities of illicit drugtrafficking and use and are increasingly engaged in these
activities.
The effects of illicit drugs on the individual and the
family should not be underestimated. Illicit drugs are a
major health problem; they bring about disruption and
disharmony within the family. They adversely affect
economic and development initiatives, and they contribute
to the disintegration of societies.
We should not ignore the fact that the consequences
of poverty have a linkage to the widespread involvement
of our young people in drug use and trafficking. While
the United Nations is charged with the important task of
eradicating poverty, Member States must not despair in
their quest to ensure the availability of social services for
their citizens. The absence of employment opportunities
may lead to such problems as drug use and trafficking.
The immense danger and threat posed to societies by
drug-trafficking and its links to terrorism, transnational
crime, money-laundering and illegal trafficking in arms
makes it necessary for Governments to cooperate in

27

General Assembly
Twentieth special session
dealing with this threat, thus preventing the channelling of
funds to and between those engaged in such activities. The
extent to which this problem has expanded beyond national
and regional boundaries demands that the international
community continue to address the drug problem
collectively.
The necessity for Governments to intensify efforts in
enacting pertinent laws as well as strengthening national
judicial systems in this context cannot be overemphasized.
My delegation therefore fully supports the draft Declaration
which is about to be adopted today. This is particularly so
since it sets target dates for the establishment and
strengthening of national legislation, legal structures and
other pertinent programmes. Without the promulgation of
firm laws and regulations, efforts to curb the drug problem
will continue to be frustrated.
Furthermore, it is also important to carry out effective
drug control measures with other States in accordance with
international instruments, and to promote judicial
cooperation in such measures as extradition and mutual
legal assistance. Anti-drug legislation must be harmonized
throughout the world, and this requires the commitment of
all United Nations Member States and their cooperation at
all levels.

8th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
question of corruption, which is an integral part of drugtrafficking and other forms of organized crime. In this
regard, in March 1998, an independent anti-corruption
unit was officially set up and launched.
I should like to further stress the point that national
efforts aimed at eradicating the illegal cultivation of and
trafficking in cannabis require financial support. Effective
control of cannabis cultivation requires destruction of the
crops and seeds. Accessibility to isolated, mountainous
cannabis-growing areas could be greatly enhanced by the
services of helicopters.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Swaziland pledges its
full support for continued efforts by the United Nations
system at stopping the illicit trafficking and abuse of
drugs and thereby ensuring the safety of our societies and
the entire world. We particularly appreciate the efforts
made by the United Nations International Drug Control
Programme, the effects of which have been felt within the
Southern African Development Community, of which
Swaziland is a member.
The President: I thank the Chairman of the
delegation of Swaziland for his statement.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

At the national level, the Government of the Kingdom
of Swaziland, in collaboration with non-governmental
organizations, is vigorously engaged in drug-awareness
programmes targeting the most vulnerable groups,
particularly young people. The main objective of such
campaigns is to educate the nation and communities about
the dangers and risks of drug use and abuse. If the nation,
particularly children and young people, knows the truth
about the consequences of harmful drugs and their
illegality, they are then empowered to make informed
decisions.
Efforts aimed at curbing the scourge of drugs and its
manifestations in the form of corruption, money-laundering
and trafficking in illicit arms are enhanced with the
enacting and updating of relevant legislation, which seeks
to strengthen the role of law enforcement agencies. The
new proposed legislation, which is at various stages of
promulgation, include the following: the drugs of abuse bill;
the medicines and related substances control bill; the
foreign evidence bill; the proceeds of crime bill; and the
money-laundering bill.
It is also worth pointing out that the Kingdom of
Swaziland is fully engaged in efforts to address the

28
