S/PV.8628

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8628th meeting

Monday, 30 September 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Vershinin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Ugarelli
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Roscoe
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-29626 (E)
*1929626*

S/PV.8628

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

to try to agree, under the auspices of the United Nations,
on new constitutional arrangements for Syria — a new
social contract to help repair a broken country. This can
be a door-opener to a wider political process that meets
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Egypt, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Gholamhossein Dehghani, Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs for Legal and International Affairs
of the Islamic Republic of Iran, and His Excellency
Mr. Sedat Önal, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Turkey.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: 1. In one month, on 30 October, I
intend to convene 150 Syrian men and women for the
launch of a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned, credible, balanced
and inclusive Constitutional Committee facilitated by
the United Nations in Geneva. I believe that this should
be a sign of hope for the long-suffering Syrian people.
It comes after the agreement of the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic and the Syrian Negotiation
Commission to a package deal of the nominees to the
Committee and a Terms of Reference and Core Rules of
Procedure to guide its work.
We should stop for a minute and take stock of the
significance of this agreement. This is indeed the first
concrete political agreement between the Government
and the opposition to begin to implement a key aspect of
resolution 2254 (2015) and to set a schedule and process
for a new constitution. It implies a clear acceptance of
the other as an interlocutor. It commits their nominees
to sit together in face-to-face dialogue and negotiation,
while at the same time opening space for civil society at
the table. It is also a shared promise to the Syrian people
2/26

30/09/2019

Seizing this opportunity will not be easy. Syria
remains in the gravest crisis, with violence and terrorism
continuing, five international armies operating on
its territory, appalling suffering and abuses, a deeply
divided society and a sense of despair among its people
inside and outside the country. Trust and confidence
are almost non-existent. The Constitutional Committee
will really matter if it becomes a step along the difficult
path out of this conflict and to a new Syria, and if its
launch and work are accompanied by other steps to
build trust and confidence among Syrians and between
Syria and the international community.
The Secretary-General formally announced the
agreement on 23 September. Allow me to join the
Secretary-General in welcoming the progress made by
the Government and the opposition. I particularly thank
Syrian Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister
Al-Moualem, and Syrian Negotiation Commission
leader Al-Hariri for their engagement with me in a
sustained dialogue to help bring this about.
Like the Secretary-General, I am grateful to the
wide range of Syrian women and men — including
the Women’s Advisory Board, participants in the Civil
Society Support Room and Syrians from all parts of
the country — who have offered their counsel and
insight. I join the Secretary-General in expressing my
particular appreciation to the Governments of Russia,
Turkey and Iran for their support in the conclusion of
the agreement. I also join the Secretary-General in
expressing my thanks for the support of the members of
the Council, including all five permanent members, and
my appreciation to the Small Group for their support.
The Secretary-General transmitted the agreed
Terms of Reference and Core Rules of Procedure of
the Constitutional Committee via you, Mr. President,
to the Security Council; all members now have it in
document S/2019/775. The agreement is framed by
key principles that must underpin any process and
any settlement. These include respect for the Charter
of the United Nations; Security Council resolutions;
Syria’s sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial
integrity; and the Syrian-led and owned nature of
the process. The principles also include the objective
19-29626

30/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

of United Nations-supervised elections envisaged in
resolution 2254 (2015), based on a new constitution.
They also recognize the need for a broader political
process to implement resolution 2254 (2015).
The Constitutional Committee has a clear mandate.
It shall, within the context of the United Nationsfacilitated Geneva process, prepare and draft for popular
approval a constitutional reform as a contribution to the
political settlement in Syria and the implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015). The constitutional reform shall,
inter alia, embody in the constitution and constitutional
practices of the country the letter and spirit of the 12
living intra-Syrian essential principles that emerged
in the Geneva process and were affirmed in Sochi.
The Committee may review the 2012 Constitution,
including in the context of other Syrian constitutional
experiences and amend the current constitution or draft
a new one.
The constitutional reform adopted by the
Constitutional Committee must be popularly approved
and transposed into the national legal order by a
means that will need to be agreed. There is a clear,
balanced and, I believe, workable structure. There will
be two equal co-chairs from the Government and the
opposition who will proceed in consensus and exert
the prerogatives necessary to ensure the Committee’s
smooth functioning. There is small body of 45 — 15
Government nominees, 15 opposition nominees and 15
from civil society — to prepare and draft proposals.
And there is a large body of 150 — 50 Government
nominees, 50 opposition nominees and 50 from civil
society — to discuss and adopt proposals.
The agreement promotes consensus within the
Committee where possible, but also specifies a
decision-making threshold of 75 per cent. All main
components need to be on board for proposals to move
forward. No one bloc can dictate the outcomes, and
the incentives exist to reach out to the middle ground
and across the divide. The parties have agreed and
committed to working expeditiously and continuously
to produce results and continued progress, without
foreign interference or external deadlines, and also
without preconditions or insisting on agreement on one
point before discussions can begin on another.
The parties have welcomed and embodied in the
agreement the facilitation role of the United Nations,
including using good offices and reporting to the
Council on progress. Both parties have told me that they

S/PV. 8628

have confidence in the United Nations and want to work
with us in a sustained and constructive manner. We will
do everything we can to meet their expectations.
The names of the 150 members will be released by
the United Nations once all nominees have formally
confirmed their participation, but let me say a few words
about them. Beyond the Government and opposition
nominees, the middle third comprises 50 civil society
actors. They hail from different religious, ethnic and
geographical backgrounds, hold a range of political
leanings, and include respected experts. Some live in
Syria; others are based outside the country. Facilitating
agreement on this list has been the most complex part
of the deal. Ensuring sufficient credibility, balance and
inclusiveness in a manner that keeps all on board has
been a key priority for us. The result is, of course, a
negotiated compromise, and like all compromises, no
one is completely satisfied.
We are proud that nearly half the civil society
list are women, and that we have around 30 per cent
women in the overall 150. Any viable, sustainable
peace process needs to have women of all political
persuasions at the table, since they represent over half
its population and since, throughout the course of the
conflict, they have taken on an ever more prominent
role in their communities.
We have worked hard to secure guarantees — and
here I quote from the agreement — that
“members of the Constitutional Committee and their
relatives or political and civil society organizations
and entities of which they are part are not subject
to threat or harassment or actions against person
or property directly related to their work in the
Constitutional Committee and to addressing and
resolving any incidents and concerns should they
arise” (S/2019/775, annex, para. 19).
These guarantees have been solemnly given and must
be respected.
Hundreds, if not thousands, of Syrian experts and
activists, men and women, on all sides, have done
outstanding work throughout the years of this conflict,
developing ideas and proposals as a basis for lasting
peace. In so doing, they helped create a public space
for democratic and civic debates. We have actively
supported and facilitated this process. Not all of them
could be on the Committee, but I am confident that
they will continue to make their voices heard and I am

19-296263/26

S/PV.8628

The situation in the Middle East

30/09/2019

equally confident that Committee members understand
their responsibilities towards all Syrians and their
obligation to listen to and take on board the ideas of
others. I will continue to consult widely and closely
among Syrian civil society, including through the Civil
Society Support Room and with the Syrian Women’s
Advisory Board, and with all components of Syrian
society, including in the north-east of the country.

civilians and upholds international law — is vital in its
own right and would help animate the political process.

Let me, above all, stress the following: the future
Constitution of Syria belongs to the Syrian people
and to them alone. This effort is about meeting the
aspirations of the Syrian people. The United Nations
will jealously guard the Syrian-owned and Syrian-led
nature of the process. Syrians, not outsiders, will draft
the Constitution, and the Syrian people must popularly
approve it. We will be there to facilitate the process in a
manner that ensures its continuing credibility, balance
and inclusiveness, and to help when needed.

Millions remain displaced, inside and outside Syria,
many mired in hopelessness and fear. Meaningful steps
will be required to create an environment for refugees
and internally displaced persons to return in a safe,
voluntary and dignified manner. Millions continue to
live in poverty, facing widespread commodity shortages
and an economy that lies in tatters. Lawlessness and
fragmentation abound, weakening the social fabric
and prospects to build the rule of law and a culture of
respect for human rights. This too must be our concern.

Let me assure the Security Council and all the Syrian
people that I am fully aware that the Constitutional
Committee obviously cannot resolve the conflict alone.
We must look squarely at the facts and address the
conflict and the crisis more comprehensively, in line, of
course, with resolution 2254 (2015) .

That is why, as we look towards the first meeting
of the Committee, I urge all stakeholders — the Syrian
parties and their backers — to think more broadly, more
inclusively and with the ultimate objective of a country
at peace. I appeal for them to seize upon the momentum
that the Committee offers and take concrete actions to
build trust and confidence.

A humanitarian crisis continues, in Idlib in
particular, and in many other parts of Syria. Idlib is
calmer today than it was last month, but violence
continues, and there is an ever-present threat of
Idlib or other parts of Syria being engulfed in allout conflict. Meanwhile, terrorist groups, listed
by the Security Council, continue to metastasize,
touching all Syrian communities. A solution that
does not endanger civilians is essential — a solution
to Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and other extremist groups
in Idlib, and to a resurgent Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant elsewhere. Violent confrontations between
international players remain frequent, within Syria
and across its international borders. The spectre of a
broader regional conflagration still looms over the
country. The country’s sovereignty, territorial integrity
and independence are not being respected.
De-escalation steps towards a nationwide ceasefire
are absolutely essential because the violence and
killing must stop, because there is no military solution
and because resolution 2254 (2015) tells us so. A
ceasefire — with a shared international understanding
of how to combat terrorism in a manner that protects
4/26

Tens of thousands remain detained, abducted
or missing, their families suffering from untold pain
and daily challenges. I appeal for action on detainees,
abductees and the missing, particularly the release of
women and children. This action would be a vital step.
Now is the time. Now is the time for action on this issue.

Language matters too. I hope that the Syrian parties
and the international community can find the right
words to clearly signal their good intentions — to each
other and to the Syrian people — to open a new chapter
and create new and better realities on the ground.
Ultimately, I hope that we can begin to build a
positive dynamic step by step by the Syrian parties, as
well as by the international parties. We need to build
the kind of safe, calm and neutral environment that
could make Syrians feel that the political process can
restore their country and respond to their aspirations.
That requires genuine international dialogue and
cooperation in support of the Geneva process. Any
concrete steps should be reciprocal, building trust among
Syrians as well as between Syria and the international
community. I know that it will not be easy but I sense
among my key partners an honest understanding that it
is necessary. I will keep working to that end.
Ultimately, the Syrian people must be able to
participate in free and fair elections under United
Nations supervision, in line with resolution 2254 (2015),
in which all Syrians, including those in the diaspora,
19-29626

30/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

are eligible to participate. Elections, held to the highest
international standards, take a long time to prepare.
That is why I have already begun to think about how
the United Nations could plan for that task, of course in
dialogue with the Syrian parties.
Let me conclude with a simple request to the
Council. I have greatly appreciated the excellent
dialogue that I have had with members of the Council,
and I will need their support in the difficult work ahead.
I appeal to the Council to unite behind a revitalized
effort by the United Nations with the parties so as to
move the Geneva political process forward.
I believe that this moment is an opportunity for the
Council to publicly support the process that it mandated
in resolution 2254 (2015). The road ahead will be long
and difficult but if the Council can unite, and remain
united, behind the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
process that the United Nations will seek to facilitate,
I believe that we can begin to make a real difference to
the people of Syria, the region and international peace
and security.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): We welcome
the Secretary-General’s announcement that the Syrian
Negotiations Commission and the Syrian regime have
reached agreement on the committee that will draft
a credible, balanced and inclusive constitution. That
constitution must reflect the aspirations of all Syrians,
both inside and outside the country.
Lasting peace is not easily or quickly won. It requires
commitment, meaningful action and a consistent effort
over a sustained period of time. With that in mind, I
therefore say to Special Envoy Pedersen that the United
States would like to extend its thanks for his personal
commitment and effort over the past 21 months in
helping to form the Constitutional Committee.
I also want to thank our partners in the small
group — Egypt, France, Germany, Jordan, Saudi
Arabia and the United Kingdom — as well as Turkey
and Russia for helping us take that encouraging step.
A special word of gratitude also goes to the leadership
and members of the Syrian Negotiations Commission
for their cooperation, even as their supporters faced
brutal attacks.

S/PV. 8628

Last Thursday, the small group on Syria reaffirmed
its broad support for the Special Envoy’s efforts to
implement all the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015).
We encourage the United Nations to convene the
Committee, and we reiterate our belief that there can be
no military solution to the conflict — may I repeat, no
military solution to the conflict.
The formation of the Committee is a historic,
tangible first step in the political process to resolve the
Syrian crisis. But if we are honest, we know that there
is hard work ahead for the parties to the conflict and
civil society leaders, who will be tasked with drafting a
new Syrian constitution, in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015). It is essential that the Council vigorously
support their efforts, as well as those of the Special
Envoy to convene the Committee’s first meeting on
30 October. When they gather, the members of the
Committee must be able to work in safety, free from
intimidation to alter the outcome of their work.
Furthermore, it is critical that all parties, including
the opposition, the regime and civil society leaders,
engage in good faith in the days ahead with the aim of
ensuring that the legitimate aspirations of all Syrians
are represented.
If there is one party that consistently fails to act
in good faith, it is Iran. It is therefore ironic that the
State responsible for much of the carnage in Syria and
for most of the current conflicts in the Middle East sits
before this very Council today presumably to lecture us
on the path to peace in Syria. If Iran genuinely wished
to contribute to the political process under resolution
2254 (2015), it would leave Syria and remove its militias
and their affiliates without delay.
I also wish to be very clear on the following point.
The Al-Assad regime and its allies must not use the
launch of the Constitutional Committee as a pretext to
stall the political process and pursue a military solution
to the conflict. The violence in Idlib must cease
immediately and unconditionally. That will protect the
lives of innocent civilians and improve the prospects
for a political solution on the ground.
At the outset of my remarks, I noted that lasting
peace requires commitment and meaningful action. But
it also requires that we tell the truth about what has
happened, and what is still happening, in Syria. It is
that aspect of peace with which, I regret to note, the
regime does not appear comfortable.

19-296265/26

S/PV.8628

The situation in the Middle East

Bombings continue to terrorize innocent women,
men and children in Idlib. The regime’s campaign
has displaced more than half of the Syrian population
and thousands of Syrian mothers and fathers have had
to bury their own children — a fate that no parent
should suffer.
The agreement to form the Constitutional
Committee is clearly an encouraging step but there
are too many levelled neighbourhoods and too many
shattered lives for anyone here today to act as though
the horrors visited upon the Syrian people can now
be forgotten.
The Council cannot believe the version of events,
preferred by some, that our work is nearly finished. The
United States, for one, will continue to speak the truth
about the atrocities committed by that regime, as well
as what must be done to right the wrongs committed
against the Syrian people.
I want to end my statement today by sharing a
brief story. Last week, I had the privilege of meeting
with Amina Khoulani, the co-founder of Families for
Freedom and a woman of profound courage. I was deeply
disturbed by what she shared with me: nearly 128,000
Syrians — 128,000 — face arbitrary detainment. That
practice is unacceptable. The Al-Assad regime must
release detainees and provide international monitors
access to detention centres.
However, while I was distressed by Amina’s
account, I was even more inspired by her spirit. She is
advocating faithfully, cheerfully and relentlessly for the
dignity of all Syrians. As we seek to build on this first
step towards peace in Syria, I hope that the Council
will adopt the same spirit.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
welcome your participation, Mr. President, in this
meeting and the fact that you are presiding over it.
At the outset, we thank the Special Envoy, Mr. Geir
Pedersen, for his valuable briefing on the Syrian political
process. I also take this opportunity to reaffirm to him
the full support of the State of Kuwait for his efforts
to revitalize the political process in Syria. We call on
all the parties to provide support to and work with the
Special Envoy in order to enable him to fully carry out
the mandate entrusted to him.
We welcome the announcement by the SecretaryGeneral of the agreement reached between the Syrian
Government and the Syrian Negotiations Commission
6/26

30/09/2019

on the formation of the Constitutional Committee,
which is scheduled to start its work in Geneva on
30 October under the supervision of the United Nations
in order to facilitate a balanced Syrian-led and Syrianowned Constitutional Committee (see S/2019/775).
We express our appreciation for the efforts made
by the guarantors of the Astana agreement, which
contributed to reaching this very pivotal stage in the
Syrian political process, as well as our support to the
small group. We also commend the tireless efforts
made by the Special Envoy, Mr. Pedersen, to reach this
agreement. We endorse his call for the Security Council
to be publicly united and to be supportive of his efforts
and of the important steps taken in order to implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions. We hope
that this step will represent the beginning of a longawaited Syrian political process and will be important
in enabling the fraternal Syrian people to realize their
legitimate aspirations through a political settlement that
is agreed by all constituents and that maintains the unity,
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Syria, in keeping with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
We stress that this political process should be
accompanied by confidence-building measures.
Perhaps the most prominent measure, as noted earlier
by Mr. Pedersen in his briefing, is to ensure that real
and tangible progress is achieved as concerns detainees
and missing persons, and that specialized international
organizations are given access to detention centres
and prisons.
We are concerned about the situation in Idlib
province, which since April has witnessed a military
escalation, and about the possibility that developments
in Idlib could be reflected in the political process.
Military operations in the north-western part of Syria
have led to the displacement of more than half a million
people and the deaths of more than 1,000 civilians, not
to mention the significant damage inflicted on healthcare, educational and civilian facilities.
We reiterate our condemnation of the targeting
of innocent civilians by any party, and we condemn
all attacks carried out by terrorist groups included
on the Council’s lists. At the same time, we would
recall once again that counter-terrorism operations
in no way exempt any party to the conflict from its
commitments under international humanitarian law,
including compliance with the principles of distinction,
19-29626

30/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8628

proportionality, precaution and the protection of
civilians and civilian targets.

and inclusive political solution to which all Syrians,
including women, will contribute.

We reiterate that no lasting and comprehensive
peace can be achieved in Syria in the absence of justice
or of guarantees that there will be no impunity. The
perpetrators of the crimes committed during the Syrian
crisis since 2011 must be held accountable. We also fully
support the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism for Syria.

This political process, in order to be credible,
requires that security be ensured throughout Syrian
territory, as noted by the Special Envoy. In that regard,
France expresses its deep concern as regards the
situation in Idlib, where the regime and its allies are
pursuing an indiscriminate military operation whose
primary victims are civilians. More than 1,000 civilians
have already died in bomb attacks, and the population,
with winter coming, will suffer even more from the
consequences of this offensive, which could also lead
to a dispersal of the terrorist elements currently present
in the north-west. This relentless military action has to
stop; we call for an immediate freeze of positions in
Idlib and throughout Syria, which would be a first step
towards a national ceasefire, in line with the provisions
of resolution 2254 (2015). Only a lasting cessation of
hostilities will allow for the creation of conditions
conducive to discussions within the Constitutional
Committee and for the lifting of impediments to
humanitarian access. The combat against Da’esh
and Al-Qaida, which continue to pose a threat to our
security, must be our priority but must not serve as a
pretext for indiscriminate strikes.

In conclusion, we stress once again that a solution
to the conflict will be achieved only through a political
settlement in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015),
which sets out a road map for a multi-stage transitional
political process, including the drafting of a constitution
and the holding of free and fair elections according to
the Constitution, under the supervision of the United
Nations and with the participation of all Syrians,
including those abroad.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for his
specific and very detailed briefing on the progress made
in the political process and on its upcoming stages.
France welcomes the announcement made by
the Secretary-General as regards the Constitutional
Committee, which is a first positive step in the
framework of the political process provided for under
resolution 2254 (2015). The agreement reached under
the auspices of the Special Envoy represents an initial
and decisive move forward that took about two years
to take shape. We fully support the efforts made by
Geir Pedersen aimed at ensuring that the Constitutional
Committee can soon meet in Geneva and at facilitating
its work.
It is vital that the Committee be in a position to
make a useful contribution to restoring a political
horizon in Syria. Determined action and a resolute
commitment by all parties will be vital to ensuring that
credible negotiations begin without delay and enabling
the Constitutional Committee to discharge its mandate
by providing Syria with a new constitution, in line with
the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015). It is vital in
particular to ensure that the security and integrity of
the members of the future Constitutional Committee
are fully respected. For this process to be a useful one, it
is also necessary for the Syrian regime to at last engage
in it in good faith. The work of the Committee must be
a starting point for the elaboration of a comprehensive

It is urgent now to progress in parallel on all of
the elements contained in resolution 2254 (2015) so
as to devise an inclusive political solution and open
up genuine prospects for peace and reconciliation.
The establishment of the Constitutional Committee
is but one stage of the implementation of resolution
2254 (2015), which represents a road map for the
international community in proposing a lasting,
inclusive political solution for the future of all Syrians,
definitely eradicating terrorism and ensuring the safe
and dignified return of refugees under the auspices of
the United Nations.
All of these elements must be implemented,
which means that confidence-building measures must
also be taken in order to ensure a safe and neutral
environment. This includes the freeing of all detained
or abducted persons and exchanges of information on
missing persons. This also includes efforts to create the
conditions necessary for the holding of free and regular
elections, under United Nations supervision, in which
all Syrians would participate, including refugees and
displaced persons, as well as those living outside the
country. Only in this way will Syrians will be able to
take control of their future.

19-296267/26

S/PV.8628

The situation in the Middle East

France will continue working in this regard along
with its partners. That is the message that France and
its partners from the small group conveyed during the
ministerial meeting held on 26 September. We reiterate
our support for the efforts of the Special Envoy to
bring the small group and the Astana guarantors closer
together within a single international forum in order to
support the political process between the Syrian parties,
under the auspices of the United Nations. France would
recall that there can be no peace without justice and
that the perpetrators of the atrocities committed in
Syria each and every day must answer for their crimes.
Lastly, France reiterates its consistent position on
reconstruction, which is the same as that of the European
Union: we will not participate in reconstruction unless
a comprehensive, genuine and inclusive political
transition is implemented — not just initiated — on
the basis of resolution 2254 (2015). Our position on
sanctions and normalization also remains unchanged,
as is our determination to contribute to helping Syria
emerge from the war. There can be no purely military
solution, and that is why it is more urgent than ever to
move forward in a swift, resolute manner towards an
inclusive political solution.

30/09/2019

all — and we must always remember this — it is the
Syrian people who will decide their own future.
We advocate for the participation of women in equal
conditions to be respected, valued and strengthened at
every stage of the constitutional process. The voice of
women must resonate louder than ever in all aspects
of the broad political process, but especially in the
Constitutional Committee as a fundamental piece
of the creation of a new national system based on
the rule of law and respect for the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of all citizens. We urge the
Special Envoy to continue to advocate for at least 30 per
cent female representation throughout the process. The
road to political and national reconciliation is long and
complex and must have at its core the strengthening
and empowerment of all Syrian civil society, for whose
participation clear terms must be fixed. Certainly, an
agreement such as this is an important achievement, but
it is essential, in our view, to strengthen the people’s
trust through urgent measures on the ground.
First, we believe it is crucial to ensure the safety
and protection of the members of the Constitutional
Committee and their families.

Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Pedersen for his
briefing and wish to convey our gratitude to the Syrian
Government, the opposition and the members of the
small group on Syria and the Astana guarantors for
having created a forum for dialogue among the parties
involved, so as to achieve, for the first time in a long
time, tangible progress in the political process.

Secondly, given the humanitarian and, consequently,
impartial nature of the treatment of detained and
missing persons, we reiterate the need to see more
progress in that area. We therefore invite the parties to
work in good faith and to immediately release women,
children, the elderly and persons with disabilities, as
well as to provide information to families about their
missing loved ones.

We welcomed the announcement made by the
Secretary-General a week ago on the composition,
terms of reference and basic rules of procedure of
the Constitutional Committee. We see that as a first
major step towards resolving the conflict in Syria. We
hope that it will translate into a resurgence of hope for
all Syrians.

Finally, we reiterate the need to protect the civilian
population in the north-west of the country and avoid
indiscriminate attacks against areas inhabited by
civilians and against civilian infrastructure. We recall
that even counter-terrorism measures must adhere to
international humanitarian law and avoid the loss of
civilian lives at all costs. All efforts must be aimed
at alleviating the precarious conditions in which a
large portion of the Syrian population lives and at
restoring their dignity and ensuring their protection
and development without any further delay.

We reiterate the support of the Dominican
Republic in this new phase for the efforts aimed at
the advancement of the Committee and the eventual
satisfactory conclusion of its work, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015), facilitated by the United
Nations. We invite the parties to show the highest
possible levels of compromise, flexibility and mutual
respect, but above all to keep the Syrian people at
the centre of each and every decision they take. After
8/26

I would like to take this opportunity, at the last open
meeting in September, to congratulate Ambassador
Nebenzia on the success of the Russian presidency.
As expected, he has demonstrated great diplomatic
capabilities, which should be emulated, and great
19-29626

30/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

efficiency in the conduct of the Council’s work. I thank
him and his entire team.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation extends a warm welcome to you, Mr. Deputy
Foreign Minister, and congratulates Mr. Geir Pedersen,
Special Envoy Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, for his very informative briefing on the latest
developments in the political process in Syria. My
delegation welcomes his mediation efforts and good
offices at having the Syrian parties firmly commit to
dialogue and make the necessary compromises with a
view to creating the conditions for a lasting return to
peace and stability in Syria.
My country believes that it is imperative to make
the Constitutional Committee operational and to
place it at the heart of the political process to end the
crisis, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). We
therefore welcome the announcement by the SecretaryGeneral, on 23 September, of the decision of the Syrian
Government and the Syrian Negotiations Commission
to form a credible, balanced and inclusive Constitutional
Committee, of which the United Nations would be the
facilitator. Accordingly, Côte d’Ivoire calls for strong
support from the international community, and in
particular from the Security Council, to ensure that
the commitment by the Syrian parties is realized in
the near future. In addition, my delegation encourages
Mr. Pedersen to continue his consultations with
stakeholders in order to ensure that the Constitutional
Committee is inclusive, which is a prerequisite for its
credibility and effectiveness. We also very much hope
that the meeting scheduled for 30 October in Geneva,
under the auspices of the United Nations, will enable
the effective establishment of the Constitutional
Committee in order to inject new momentum into the
political process to resolve the crisis in Syria.
As vital as the Constitutional Committee is, it
remains but a link in the chain of requirements that
will determine the return of lasting peace and stability
in Syria. It is essential that current efforts towards a
political solution to the Syrian conflict benefit from a
calm environment, achieved through an immediate and
lasting cessation of hostilities, which will allow for better
management of the situation of refugees and internally
displaced persons. In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes
the unilateral truce decreed by the Russian Federation
and Government forces in Idlib province on 31 August.
We fervently hope that the parties to the conflict will
take more confidence-building measures, including the

S/PV. 8628

release of prisoners. In addition, Côte d’Ivoire urges the
belligerents to respect the ceasefire in order to allow
for, among other things, the delivery of humanitarian
aid to people in distress. My country also calls on
them to respect human rights law and international
humanitarian law, in particular by refraining from any
attacks on health and education infrastructure.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire once again welcomes
the commitment of Syrian actors to form a credible,
balanced and inclusive Constitutional Committee,
which is an encouraging step in the right direction. We
reaffirm our full support for the actions and initiatives
of the Special Envoy taken with a view to achieving a
peaceful and lasting settlement of the Syrian crisis in
keeping with resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Equatorial Guinea welcomes the convening
of this meeting and would like to take this opportunity
to congratulate Ambassador Nebenzia and his entire
team on the success of the Russian presidency of the
Security Council during the month of September. I
would also like to thank Special Envoy Pedersen for
the pertinent information he has provided us and for his
admirable commitment to lasting peace in Syria.
Today’s meeting should be considered historic
following the long-awaited announcement of the
establishment of the Constitutional Committee. After
eight years of conflict and despite numerous obstacles
and several rounds of difficult consultations and
negotiations among all the key actors in the Syrian
political process, the establishment of the Constitutional
Committee is undoubtedly good news that restores hope
to all the Syrian people. The Government of Equatorial
Guinea welcomes the fact that a credible, impartial and
inclusive Constitutional Committee has been set up,
which should finally open up the way for an end to the
Syrian crisis in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015)
and in line with the statement of the small group on
Syria. We must be aware that this positive step requires
serious dedication and a firm commitment to achieving
positive and tangible results. We very much look
forward to the first meeting of the Committee, to be
held in Geneva as soon as possible, so that the parties
can begin to discuss the substance of the Committee’s
mandate as well as all other dimensions of the Syrian
political process.
In this new scenario, brought about with the
diplomatic support of the Astana guarantors, namely,

19-296269/26

S/PV.8628

The situation in the Middle East

Russia, Turkey and Iran, we must be aware that the
Committee’s establishment and action must go hand
in hand with tangible confidence-building measures
that facilitate progress in the political process. We
must also ensure the approval of the Committee’s rules
of procedure so as to guarantee that its members act
independently and are not subject to external pressure.
At the same time, we agree that it is unacceptable
to partition Syria into zones of influences, which
would only heighten tensions, particularly in Idlib. The
presence of five different armies in Syria is cause for
concern to the Government of Equatorial Guinea, since,
as the Special Envoy just underscored, it not only poses
an obvious threat to the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Syria, but also heightens the risk
of the conflict escalating dangerously and spilling over
into the region and beyond.
I wish to reiterate my Government’s full support to
the Special Envoy in pursuing the successful conclusion
of the process, which inevitably requires a concerted
diplomatic solution to the Syrian and not undue use of
force. There is no military solution to the war or alternative
to a political solution. It is therefore imperative that we
continue to make progress towards a political solution in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
I should like to break with protocol for a moment.
In Spanish we say that “gratitude is the sign of noble
souls”. I cannot conclude my statement without
first expressing my gratitude to the interpreters and
translators for their work, as today is International
Translation Day. Without them, I believe that our work
would be much more difficult.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom joins others in welcoming the announcement
by the Secretary-General last week that agreement had
finally been reached on the Constitutional Committee.
As Mr. Pedersen said, it will be convened in Geneva
on 30 October. We are also grateful to him for setting
out the modalities and complexion of the Constitutional
Committee, which we also welcome. That progress is
a true testament to Mr. Pedersen’s hard work over the
past nine months and, of course, that of his predecessor,
Staffan de Mistura.
Last week, the United Kingdom hosted a ministerial
meeting of the Syria small group, at which all members
welcomed the agreement. But we also recognized that
this is only the first step towards the inclusive political
settlement that Syria so desperately needs and which
10/26

30/09/2019

must ultimately include transitional arrangements
and free and fair elections. As the Secretary-General
himself stated,
“this can and must be the beginning of the political
path out of the tragedy towards a solution in
line with resolution 2254 (2015) that meets the
legitimate aspirations of all Syrians”.
To succeed, it will require the serious engagement and
commitment of all participants to succeed. We call
on the regime, in particular, to demonstrate genuine
commitment at the first meeting and beyond.
However, the problems in Syria were not caused
by flaws in the existing Constitution, but by how
that Constitution was implemented and the regime’s
repressive policies. This is a critical first step, but
the deeper roots of this conflict still also need to be
addressed. With that in mind, progress on the political
process cannot be made in isolation. No one here is blind
to this. We agree wholeheartedly with the SecretaryGeneral that the Constitutional Committee’s launch
and work must be accompanied by concrete actions to
build trust and confidence. It is therefore crucial that
all elements of 2254 (2015) be taken forward in tandem.
Mr. Pedersen has our support in advancing these efforts
and we ask that all sides, and in particular the regime,
engage fully with Mr. Pedersen’s confidence-building
measures, especially in terms of greater humanitarian
access, the release of detainees and much-needed
information on the missing.
It is also crucial that the Constitutional Committee
represent the voices and views of the Syrian people,
freely expressed. Mr. Pedersen has done tremendous
work to secure balance, and particularly we welcome
the strong participation of civil society and women, but
it is also critical that Committee members be allowed
to fulfil their duties free of fear and intimidation, for
themselves or their family members, if this process is
to be truly free, legitimate and credible.
Today’s briefing is rightly focused on the political
process, but it would be remiss of us, as Mr. Pedersen
and others have said, not to recall the dire situation
in Idlib, an issue that has quite rightly dominated the
Security Council’s work over the past few months. Over
1,000 civilians, including 500 women and children,
have been killed. Over 676,000 people have been
forced to leave their homes since the beginning of May.
Idlib is the Syrian conflict in microcosm. The Syrian
regime has targeted civilians through indiscriminate
19-29626

30/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

aerial bombardment, arbitrarily detaining and torturing
political opponents and deliberately bombing civilians
seeking shelter in schools and hospitals. We cannot
allow impunity for these crimes or any of the crimes
committed in the Syrian conflict, so it is a matter
of utmost importance that the people of Idlib and
throughout Syria be allowed to live free of fear.
In this respect, we welcome the most recent
ceasefire in Idlib, which has largely held since
31 August. However, we note its fragility, particularly
given the continued reports of regime shelling. To our
great disappointment, Russia and China vetoed draft
resolution S/2019/756 at the most recent humanitarian
meeting (see S/PV.8623). It is now morally incumbent
on them and on Damascus to ensure that the ceasefire
in Idlib continues and that international humanitarian
law is fully respected. Perhaps when the representative
of Syria speaks shortly, he might tell this Chamber what
they are doing to ensure that the ceasefire continues to
hold and to protect civilians on the ground.
Since our Turkish colleague is present today, the
United Kingdom would like to state again that we
welcome Turkey’s ongoing efforts to end the violence
in Idlib and to work to protect the ceasefire.
The United Kingdom has so far given over
$3 billion in response to the crisis in Syria, which is
our largest-ever response to a single humanitarian
crisis. We will continue to do what we can to support
those in need. With more than 400,000 Syrian lives lost
and nearly 12 million people in continued dire need
of humanitarian support, a political settlement cannot
come soon enough. Therefore, the United Kingdom
this morning joins others in welcoming Mr. Pedersen’s
briefing on the plans and prospects for the Constitutional
Committee. We support his efforts and wish him every
success in his continuing work. We call on all members
of the Security Council gathered here, all those in Syria
and all those across the region to support his work.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, we congratulate the Russian Federation
on its successful presidency during the month of
September and express our gratitude for the wonderful
results achieved this month. We commend the Russian
delegation for the great deal of work accomplished.
I wish to thank Mr. Pedersen, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, for his briefing. Since the
beginning of his mandate, Special Envoy Pedersen has
engaged with multiple stakeholders through his good

S/PV. 8628

offices leading to positive results in the tasks at hand.
China expresses its appreciation.
Lately, important progress has been made on the
Syrian issue, with a breakthrough on the political
track. On 23 September, Secretary-General Guterres
announced that the Syrian parties had reached an
agreement on the formation of the Constitutional
Committee. On 26 September, the Secretary-General
sent a letter to the President of the Council, transmitting
the Terms of Reference and Core Rules of Procedure
of the Constitutional Committee (S/2019/775, annex).
We also note that the Special Envoy said that the
Constitutional Committee will meet on 30 October.
Those achievements are of great significance to
the political process in Syria. China welcomes
those developments, appreciates the constructive
participation of the Syrian parties in the preparation
of the Constitutional Committee and commends the
diplomatic efforts of the United Nations and the Astana
guarantors, namely, Russia, Turkey and Iran.
During the high-level segment of the General
Assembly, the Syrian issue was one of the constant
focuses of world leaders and representatives. In his
statement at the general debate, Mr. Walid Al-Moualem,
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Expatriates of the Syrian Arab Republic stressed
that the Constitutional Committee must maintain
independence in its work and be free from foreign
interference (see A/74/PV.11). Syria’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity must
be fully respected. All parties must pay attention to
Syria’s concerns and create favourable conditions for
the political settlement of the Syrian issue.
First, they must build on the results achieved to
continue moving the Syrian political process forward.
A political settlement is the only way out for the Syrian
issue. Parties to the issue should seize the current
favourable opportunity to advance the work of the
Constitutional Committee. Committee members are
expected to set store by the interests of the Syrian
people so as to reach a consensus at an early date.
The Syrian Government is encouraged to strengthen
communication and coordination with the United
Nations. To that end, the international community,
including the Security Council, should provide support
and do more to help the Syrian parties narrow their
differences and build consensus.

19-2962611/26

S/PV.8628

The situation in the Middle East

Secondly, security guarantees must be provided
to ensure a sustainable political process. Rampant
terrorism is a major latent security problem for the
political process. If not properly addressed, it will
adversely affect the political settlement of the Syrian
issue and the future of the country. China is closely
following the relevant trends with regard to the
terrorist forces in Idlib. With respect to the issue of
the settlement of the foreign terrorist fighters and their
families in Syria, the international community should,
under international law and on the basis of relevant
Council resolutions, continue its collective efforts
against terrorism.
Thirdly, an integrated approach must be taken in
dealing with all aspects of the Syrian humanitarian
issue. The international community should provide
humanitarian assistance to the Syrian people and
support the post-war reconstruction of the country. The
humanitarian issue must not be used as a bargaining
chip to exert political pressure. It is necessary to address
the return of Syrian refugees and internally displaced
persons objectively and impartially, while taking into
account the legitimate concerns of Syria’s neighbours,
and actively encourage the return of Syrian refugees.
Lifting the economic sanctions against Syria will be
an important step to improve the overall humanitarian
situation of the Syrian people.
China categorically rejects the groundless
accusations made by the representative of the United
Kingdom against China in his statement. China has
clearly indicated that it makes its decisions on the merits
of an issue. We proceed from interests of the Syrian
people when deciding how to vote on draft resolutions.
No country has a right to make irresponsible remarks
in that regard.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me begin by
congratulating you and your team, Mr. President, for
your remarkable and successful presidency during
the month of September. My delegation would also
like to thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his
comprehensive briefing.
Indonesia welcomes the announcement by the
Secretary-General on 23 September on the agreement
of the Syrian Government and the Syrian Negotiations
Commission for a credible, balanced and inclusive
Constitutional Committee, one that will be facilitated
by the United Nations in Geneva. We are pleased
and delighted with that positive and encouraging
12/26

30/09/2019

development in the political process in Syria. The launch
and the first meeting of the Constitutional Committee
in Geneva next month, inshallah, will indeed serve
as a door opener for a serious political path towards a
sustainable and lasting solution to the current crisis in
Syria, in accordance with the 2012 Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015).
Indonesia commends the hard work of Special
Envoy Pedersen and his team in facilitating the process
and engaging with various relevant parties. As we have
stated many times, my delegation strongly supports and
stands ready to assist the Special Envoy’s mandates.
My delegation would like to emphasize three points on
ways forward.
First, we encourage the immediate launch of
the Committee and the commencement of its first
consultation as scheduled, under the United Nations
in Geneva, so as to keep the positive momentum alive.
To that end, the Security Council should continue to
spare no effort in supporting the work of Special Envoy
Pedersen. A strong and genuine commitment from all
parties in ensuring and assisting the Committee to
succeed is urgently required, a commitment that is based
on respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. Those
principles must be respected and should not be taken
for granted.
Secondly, moving forward, we need to ensure that
we have all agreed to work in a cooperative manner in
addressing future challenges. Indonesia appreciates all
efforts from various parties in trying to find a peaceful
solution to the conflict and, in that regard, invites all
the relevant parties to work together. We will be able
to find solutions and reach middle ground if we talk to
each other instead of talking about each other. Again,
dialogue is key.
Thirdly, my delegation believes that a political
process and a ceasefire should move ahead in parallel
and expeditiously. Upholding the ceasefire agreement
is critical, not only to prevent further humanitarian
catastrophe but also to support the political initiative. In
that context, Indonesia supports a nationwide ceasefire
in Syria and calls for parties to strengthen their efforts
to implement it.
The Council’s support for a Syrian-led and Syrianowned United Nations-facilitated political process is
needed today more than ever. We are entering a crucial
phase, one for which we have been waiting for so long,
19-29626

30/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8628

namely, the launch of the Constitutional Committee. I
have heard much support for that, and the Council needs
to work in harmony to guarantee that we see progress
in that regard. The pressure is on. The road ahead is
not going to be easy. But reaching the destination is
indeed possible.

law, as reiterated by the Council in presidential statement
S/PRST/2019/8, adopted in August on the occasion of
the seventieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions.
Only by ensuring those measures will we be able to
generate the positive atmosphere necessary for the
success of negotiations between the Syrian parties.

Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank the Special Envoy, Mr. Geir Pedersen, for his
comprehensive and insightful briefing. I would like to
assure him once again that he has our full support. We
wish him every success in his work.

In conclusion, I want to recall Poland’s position,
as well as the stand of the European Union, on
reconstruction. We will be ready to assist in the
reconstruction of Syria only once a comprehensive,
genuine and inclusive political transition, within the
framework of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
process, is firmly under way.

Let me start by welcoming the announcement made by
the Secretary-General on 23 September on the agreement
on the formation of the Constitutional Committee.
Poland has underlined on many occasions that any
sustainable solution to the conflict requires a genuine
political transition, as outlined in resolution 2254
(2015) and the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex) negotiated by the Syrian parties within the
United Nations-led Geneva process. We therefore look
forward to the inaugural meeting of the Committee at
the earliest possible opportunity. That is a definite step
forward and one that is certainly full of potential.
Unfortunately, the escalation of the conflict in
Idlib persists. It is therefore of paramount importance
to ensure positive developments on the ground, in
particular a cessation of hostilities, in parallel with the
work of the Constitutional Committee.
All parties to the conflict need to engage in
confidence-building measures. In that context, let me
stress again the importance of detainees, including
abductees and missing persons in Syria. Eight years
into the war have brought unspeakable suffering to the
once peaceful country. Thousands of people remain
in arbitrary detention, where many are subject to
various forms of ill-treatment, including torture and
rape. At the same time, thousands remain missing,
with their relatives deprived of any information on
their fate. We call for their release, particularly for the
release of children, women and the elderly. Progress in
that area would help to raise the level of confidence
between the parties and greatly contribute to the efforts
aimed at reaching a lasting peace in Syria. That is
one of the most important, if not the most important,
confidence-building measure between parties to
the conflict.
We also underscore the need to ensure humanitarian
access and full respect for international humanitarian

We fully support the safe return of Syrian refugees
who fled their homes. We believe that a durable solution
should ensure the security of the sustainable, dignified
and voluntary return of Syrians to their country of
origin, in accordance with international law and the
principle of non-refoulement.
Since it is the last meeting of the Security
Council under your presidency, Mr. President, I would
like to congratulate you and the entire team of the
Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation for your
professionalism and the successful way in which the
work of the Security Council was conducted during the
month of September.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We want to thank you,
Mr. President, for presiding over our meeting today, as
well as the Russian Federation, Mr. Vassily Nebenzia
and his team for the excellent manner in which they
managed the Council programme for this month. Allow
me to thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, for his briefing to the
Council today.
The recent political developments in Syria, as
announced by the Secretary-General on 23 September
(see S/2019/775), are warmly welcomed by my
delegation. South Africa congratulates Mr. Pedersen,
the Syrian Government, the Syrian opposition
and all other stakeholders on the agreement on the
establishment of a credible, balanced and inclusive
Constitutional Committee. We in the Council all know
that the journey to this point has not been easy but the
perseverance and determined efforts of all parties have
borne the fruit of compromise, unity and a commitment
to the people of Syria for sustained peace. We thank all
Governments and parties that made that possible.

19-2962613/26

S/PV.8628

The situation in the Middle East

My delegation looks forward to the convening of
the first meeting of the Constitutional Committee on
30 October. We hope that the commitment for a 30 per
cent representation of women in the larger 150-member
body and the smaller 45-member body will be upheld.
As has been said before by South Africa and many
other delegations, the active participation of women
at all levels of the peace negotiations is essential to a
successful and inclusive political process in Syria.
With the establishment of the Constitutional
Committee, it is also necessary to ensure the safety
and security of all its members. The members of the
Committee must be assured that they will be able to do
their duty to the people of Syria without undue pressure
or influence from any sector.
While we commend the agreement regarding
the Constitutional Committee, we cannot forget the
broader political process. The establishment of the
Constitutional Committee and the finalization of its
Core Rules of Procedure (see S/2019/775, annex) is but
one step towards the full implementation of the political
process, as set out in resolution 2254 (2015).
The work of the Constitutional Committee must
be accompanied by the active engagement of all
parties in the continuing political process facilitated
by the Special Envoy. In that regard and in calling
for the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015),
my delegation calls for the release of civilians from
detention, particularly women, children, the sick
and the elderly. That will serve as a gesture of good
faith and confidence-building among the parties and
bolster the goodwill created by the establishment of the
Constitutional Committee.
The humanitarian situation in parts of Syria remains
of concern. Progress in improving the humanitarian
situation will come about only if progress is made in the
political process, which can be resolved only through
continued negotiations and dialogue among the parties.
At this important juncture in Syria’s history, we call on
all parties to recommit to ensuring the peace, stability
and prosperity of all Syria and its people.
In conclusion, let me again congratulate the parties
on this important step towards long-term peace and
security in Syria. However, we all know that this is not
the end of the journey. Yet the journey has begun, and
the Council should accompany the Syrian people as
they negotiate their way to a peaceful, stable, inclusive
and prosperous Syria.
14/26

30/09/2019

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I can be brief, as much
has already been said. I wish to start by thanking the
presidency of the Russian Federation for this month of
work. Your country, Mr. President, did a very good job
and you are very good diplomats. I will return to Russia
a little later.
I would like to thank Mr. Geir Pedersen for his
work and his tireless efforts. His insistence has paid
off. I thank him very much for his briefing. I just want
to repeat one sentence. He said that the Constitutional
Committee is a promise to the Syrian people for a new
social contract and to achieve that, we must overcome
the deep divisions in the population and build trust and
confidence. I hope the work that is now starting will
achieve this.
As others have said, this is a first step, and the proof
of the pudding is in the eating, so we have to see that the
Constitution actually works. It is very important that all
parties be fully committed to this process, including, in
particular, the Syrian regime. What is very important
is that Committee members be able to exercise their
mandate free from threats and intimidation, including
concerning their families.
I would agree with what Jerry just said to the effect
that the Council should accompany this process. The
representative of Kuwait has proposed that we prepare
a statement; Germany would support a statement by
the Council endorsing the work of the Committee and
giving more weight to what has been achieved. Of
course, this is not the only thing we need. We hope that
the establishment of the Committee will now allow the
door to be opened to a broader political process — and
here I can only echo what others, including Jerry and
the representative of Poland, have said — that in this
political process, a political solution can be achieved in
this conflict only if Syrian women are fully involved in
and participate in all the processes, which have to result
at some stage in free, fair and credible elections.
Again, I would like to echo what many have
said before. As Geir said, it is now time for action. I
think that the release from prison of women, children,
handicapped persons and the elderly would send a very
good signal and contribute to this new social contract.
I would also underline that accountability for all the
crimes that have been committed in the country remains
important; we cannot allow impunity to continue or to
gain ground.
19-29626

30/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Let me end briefly by echoing what my British
colleague said earlier: that we, including Kuwait,
Belgium and Germany, tried very hard to get the
Idlib draft resolution (S/2019/756) adopted here (see
S/PV.8623). It was a very simple draft that asked that
all counter-terrorism measures respect international
humanitarian law; I must say that it was very sad that
China and Russia vetoed it, given that 12 countries stood
firmly behind it and wanted to send this humanitarian
message to the people of Idlib.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I would like at the outset to thank the Special
Envoy, Mr. Geir Pedersen, for his briefing and for his
tireless efforts.
The Council is meeting today, after eight years of
violence, with a glimmer of hope. A fragile glimmer
of hope, to be sure, but hope nonetheless. We cannot
overestimate the importance of the agreement between
the Syrian Government and the Syrian Negotiations
Commission to put together a Constitutional Committee
facilitated by the United Nations in Geneva.
First, this is the first time in the course of the Syrian
conflict that the United Nations has been able to facilitate
a direct agreement between the parties. And, secondly,
this is the first time in a very long time that the Syrian
people have received good news. We have reiterated on
many occasions that there can be no military solution
to the crisis in Syria; the solution is a political one. The
Constitutional Committee has the potential to be a key
that can open doors to other aspects of the political
process, as provided for by resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
We recognize the important role that the Special
Envoy played in its establishment, and we support
his future role in ensuring the functioning of the
Committee. We also appreciate the role played by the
States members of the Council and others, in particular
the Astana process guarantor countries, for their
diplomatic commitment in support of the Special Envoy.
Today we are therefore optimistic, but cautiously
so. Belgium sees the Committee is a means to an end.
The fact that the parties can now undertake structured
discussions on the future of their country represents
significant progress in and of itself. Nonetheless, the
real progress will lie in the outcome of such talks. A
great deal of time has been lost, and it is now important
that the Committee get to work quickly and that tangible

S/PV. 8628

progress be made as a first step towards a political
solution that is in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
This opportunity to work together towards a
Syria that meets the legitimate aspirations of all
Syrians carries with it obligations for all parties.
All parties must continue their engagement in good
faith, and Committee representatives will have to be
encouraged to speak freely and to conduct their work
in a favourable environment that is free of obstacles
or intimidation. The Syrian Government has a special
obligation to create a safe, stable and calm environment
in the country.
The violence in Idlib has to stop. It is difficult
to conceive of talks going on in Geneva even as the
violence continues. We reiterate our appeal for a
nationwide cessation of hostilities nationwide.
Lastly, let us not forget the thousands of Syrians
who continue to be arbitrarily arrested and detained.
We encourage the Special Envoy to redouble his efforts
on this important issue, and we fully support his appeal
to the parties to exchange prisoners on a large scale.
Most particularly, we call on Damascus to take into
account the crucial importance of this issue as a sign of
good faith towards the people of the country. Thousands
of Syrians continue to wait for news of their loved ones
who were arbitrarily detained or who have disappeared.
I cannot conclude without offering my
congratulations to the Russian delegation on
its presidency of the Council during the month
of September.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to welcome the presence of Sergey
Vershinin, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation, and to echo other delegations in
congratulating the presidency on the successful manner
in which it has helmed the important work and agenda
of the Security Council. We are also grateful for the
convening of this briefing and thank Mr. Pedersen for
his comprehensive presentation. We acknowledge his
intensive and always careful work and reaffirm our
commitment to continuing to contribute in a positive
fashion to the discharge of his mandate.
We wish to commend the developments described
by the Special Envoy on the upcoming implementation
of a Constitutional Committee that the Syrian people
and the international community will be able to
acknowledge as legitimate, balanced and inclusive, as

19-2962615/26

S/PV.8628

The situation in the Middle East

set out in the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
We echo those who underscored the role played
in this regard by the Astana guarantors as well as the
constructive participation of the Syrian Government
and opposition groups. We would highlight the fact that
the elaboration of a new Constitution will be necessary
if we are to lay fresh political and institutional
foundations in Syria. However, we must also be careful,
as the reality today points to the fact much remains
to be done to put an end to the suffering of millions
of Syrians.
We therefore wish to emphasize the importance that
the Committee be effective and diligent in fulfilling
its mandate and that it produce tangible results under
deadlines that are in keeping with the sense of urgency
inherent in the seriousness of the humanitarian situation
and the latent threat of terrorism in Syria. That implies
that the parties show genuine signs of disinterestedness,
be flexible in their respective positions and come to
the table with a renewed willingness to engage in a
different yet constructive dialogue. Furthermore, we
note the central role of the Special Envoy as facilitator
of the process and promoter of consensus to that end.
In that connection, we underscore that the international
community should provide him with broad support.
We commend the efforts to make the Committee
representative and inclusive of all segments of Syrian
society. We especially emphasize that the final
percentage of women members of the Committee
is close to the 30 per cent quota initially envisaged.
We encourage the meetings of the Committee and
the various discussions held there to take place in a
context of transparency so as to enable the international
community, and the Council in particular, to monitor
and support the implementation of any agreements and
to inspire greater confidence among all the parties to
the peace process.
As we look towards the Committee’s first meeting,
we urge the parties to continue to work on measures to
promote a better climate of understanding, including
the release of detainees, the identification of missing
persons and the transfer of mortal remains. We welcome
the work being done in that respect under the Astana
framework, but note the need for more substantial
progress. In addition, we underline the importance of
facilitating the voluntary, safe and dignified return of
millions of internally displaced persons and refugees,
16/26

30/09/2019

under internationally recognized parameters, as an
essential element of achieving reconciliation in Syria
and building sustainable peace in that country.
I conclude by reaffirming Peru’s full commitment to
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Syria.
Any détente or other arrangements or the presence of
foreign forces should always be temporary and not lead
to a de facto partition of the country.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation
We thank the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Pedersen, for his briefing and all the
speakers for their views and assessments.
The Security Council has repeatedly considered
the matter of a political settlement in Syria, but today’s
meeting is special. For the first time, we meet at a time
when we can say with satisfaction that real conditions
have been created and are in place to move forward on
the path to a lasting and just settlement of the Syrian
crisis in the interest of all Syrians without exception.
As Special Envoy Pedersen just confirmed to us, the
work on the formation of the Constitutional Committee
has been fully completed. That is undoubtedly a major
accomplishment for the entire international community.
Let me remind members that the idea of establishing
the Constitutional Committee was adopted by the
participants in the Syrian National Dialogue Congress
in Sochi in 2018, who represented all segments of
Syrian society. We agree with Mr. Pedersen that the
establishment of the Committee is not an end, but the
beginning of a long road. And many have stated that
today. Syrians have to agree for themselves on the
parameters of the future development of their country.
I would also like to recall the key principle of their
independent work, as enshrined in resolution 2254
(2015), which is to promote a Syrian-led and Syrianowned political process.
We welcome the intention to hold the first meeting
of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva in late
October. Russia, together with Iran and Turkey, made
a decisive contribution to determining its composition
and agreeing on its rules of procedure. The guarantor
countries worked very closely with the Syrian parties,
namely, the Government and the opposition, and
carefully coordinated their efforts with SecretaryGeneral Guterres and his Special Envoy. Russia
19-29626

30/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8628

will continue to support the successful launch and
sustainable work of the Constitutional Committee in
every way possible. The same assurances have also been
repeatedlygiven by the representatives of Turkey and
Iran. At the same time, all the activities of the Astana
guarantors will be based on the strict observance of
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. The Presidents
of the three countries stated that firmly at the fifth
tripartite summit in Ankara on 16 September. The
practice of holding high-level international meetings
on Syria in the Astana format will continue. The next
such meeting is scheduled to be held in the capital of
Kazakhstan in the near future.

needed impact on the entire region. Peace, security and
stability in the Middle East will benefit. The time has
come to encourage, not discourage, Syria’s return to the
Arab family.

We believe that all of us should take great care
in preserving the inter-Syrian dialogue to begin in
Geneva at the end of October. We have no doubt that
the Syrians themselves, who represent one of the
oldest and most unique countries in the Middle East,
with a centuries-old tradition of peaceful coexistence
among ethnic and religious groups, will be able to find
mutually acceptable solutions themselves. They also
have sufficient expertise to achieve that end. We are
convinced that attempts to interfere in the inter-Syrian
dialogue and impose prescriptions on Syrians that are
incompatible with their cultural, religious and national
traditions are unacceptable. It is also unacceptable to
set artificial time limits or to demand concessions from
only one of the parties. That is the position of the Astana
format, which stands ready to continue providing
constructive assistance to the Syrians in coordination
with the United Nations. We invite all those genuinely
interested in returning peace to Syria to join our efforts
in a constructive way.

We are disappointed that consensus could not be
reached on most issues during the recent discussion of
the situation in Idlib. But the blame in that regard is on
those who, under humanitarian pretexts, deliberately
submitted a draft resolution (S/2019/756) that was
politicised and had no chance of being adopted. Of
course, we cannot but be concerned about the situation
in north-eastern Syria, where ISIL sleeper cells are
becoming more active. We believe that achieving
stability and security in those areas is ultimately
possible only if they are returned to the control of
the legitimate Government. It is also unacceptable to
consolidate the dividing lines that, unfortunately, exist
in Syria today, in particular under the pretext of a socalled nationwide ceasefire. Declaring a truce with
terrorists is not possible by definition, and the problems
within Syria ought to be resolved through a broad,
inclusive dialogue.

It has been said that it is strange that the
representative of Iran should be at the table with us. It
seems strange to me that those words were heard in this
Chamber at all. As a member of the Astana troika, Iran
has done much to defeat terrorism in Syria, but I have
difficulty remembering what some Western members
of the small group have done to launch the political
process and create the conditions for it. There is a lot of
talk and lecturing, but little is actually done. I hope that
that will change.
We may be talking about Syria today, but we are
well aware that if we can move towards a sustainable
and lasting political settlement in that country — based,
I repeat, on a commitment to its sovereignty and
territorial integrity — it will certainly have a much-

The Syrian people, including with the support of
Russia, have won a decisive victory over terrorism. The
main forces of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), the Jabhat Al-Nusra, or whatever it may be
called nowadays, and other terrorist groups recognized
as such by the Security Council have been eliminated.
But the eradication of terrorists, including in such
major hotspots as Idlib, must continue with the utmost
care for the lives and security of civilians.

Today’s turnaround in the political settlement
creates the conditions for taking concrete steps to
provide comprehensive humanitarian assistance in the
post-conflict reconstruction of Syria. That will help to
strengthen the country’s economy and create conditions
conducive to the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons to their homes. That is precisely what
our Western partners have been talking about over the
past year, literally pleading for help in launching the
Constitutional Committee as a key precondition for
unfreezing funding for necessary post-war recovery.
I believe it is immoral to condition conciliatory
gestures towards Damascus with constantly changing
political demands.
Finally, I support the coordinated and coherent
efforts of the international community, provided that
they are meant to advance a genuine peace process

19-2962617/26

S/PV.8628

The situation in the Middle East

rather than serving narrow geostrategic aims. I am
convinced that, if we act together — all together — we
will be able to do more for Syria and Syrians than we
would if we acted on our own.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of China has asked to make a
further statement.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): In his
statement, the representative of Germany once again
referred to China’s position with respect to the voting
on the draft resolutions concerning the humanitarian
situation in Syria (see S/PV.8623). We have clearly
asserted that we do not accept such accusations. Like
others, China pays close attention to the humanitarian
situation in Syria, which is precisely why China,
together with Russia, submitted an alternative draft
resolution (S/2019/757) that comprehensively addresses
the humanitarian and counter-terrorism situation in
the country, reflecting the humanitarian needs of the
Syrian people. Regrettably, the draft was not adopted.
As I said earlier, if we wish to improve the overall
humanitarian situation for the Syrian people, one
important step would be lifting the economic sanctions
imposed on Syria.
Lastly, I emphasize once again that China supports
the Syrian Government in its reasonable demands, as
well as the good offices of the United Nations and the
Special Envoy. We also support the ongoing efforts to
advance the political process in Syria through a Syrianled and Syrian-owned process and resolution 2254
(2015). China stands ready to play a constructive role
in that regard.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Önal (Turkey): I would like to begin by
congratulating Russia upon the successful completion
of its presidency. I thank you, Sir, for organizing today’s
Council briefing, with our participation.
Another word of appreciation goes to Ambassador
Geir Pedersen, the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria. As perhaps one of the closest
witnesses to his dedication and professionalism, I would
like to congratulate Ambassador Pedersen and his team
on their efforts in the finalization of the Constitutional
Committee and its rules of procedure.
18/26

30/09/2019

The establishment of the Committee is an important
first step. It could not have been possible without the
constructive engagement of the Syrian parties within
the Astana context, in coordination with the United
Nations. In this respect, I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Russian Federation and Iran
for their contributions to bringing about this result. As
we keep emphasizing, it takes an alignment of positions
among all major stakeholders to advance the political
process and bring it to a final conclusion.
The international community, first and foremost
the Security Council, should continuously support and
encourage the Committee to achieve an end result that
should eventually pave the way for free and fair elections
under United Nations supervision, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015) and in line with the aspirations
of the Syrian people.
The political process and the upcoming round
of negotiations in Geneva can hardly yield a positive
outcome unless a conducive environment is ensured on
the ground. Idlib is a case in point. We are pursuing
our efforts within the Astana format for the full
implementation of the Sochi memorandum. As such, the
preservation of the status quo in the province remains
crucial. We recognize the presence of radical elements,
as well as the necessity to address this threat.
However, we do not agree that the targeting of
civilians and civilian infrastructure is the right way
to achieve this objective. There can be no military
solution to the crisis. We subscribe to the principle that
the political process should be led and owned by the
Syrians themselves. The success of this process will
depend to a large extent on the ability of the international
community and the United Nations to create a certain
level of mutual confidence among Syrians. Special
Envoy Pedersen will enjoy Turkey’s continued support
in this regard.
On our part, Turkey will continue our efforts
within the Astana format to contribute to putting in
place confidence-building measures in support of the
United Nations endeavours. We consider the projects of
the Astana format working group on the simultaneous
release of abductees and detainees to be modest but
promising practices. We will continue to support the
working group’s activities.
As one of the countries most affected by the conflict
in Syria, Turkey is determined to tackle the threats
emanating from the conflict. Terrorist elements — be it
19-29626

30/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

in Idlib or in the north-east; be they Da’esh or the Partiya
Yekitiya Demokrat-People’s Protection Units, should
have no place in Syria. The presence of such terrorist
organizations, let alone their empowerment, constitutes
a direct threat not only to our national security but also
to Syria’s territorial integrity and political unity.
Turkey has always been in the forefront of efforts
to alleviate the plight of Syrian refugees. While hosting
3.6 million Syrians in our country, we spare no effort
in facilitating humanitarian assistance to those living
in difficult conditions inside Syria as well. On the
other hand, we believe that the time has come to think
seriously and start to act on creating conditions for the
safe and voluntary return of Syrian refugees to their
homeland. That is an exercise that we have started first
with neighbouring countries and in coordination with
regional and international stakeholders.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming Turkey’s
commitment to remaining engaged in efforts to find a
sustainable political solution in Syria.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
you, Sir, for organizing this meeting. I also thank the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. Pedersen, for his input and his tireless efforts.
The agreement on the formation of the Constitutional
Committee is a positive step towards ending the Syrian
crisis through a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned, United
Nations-facilitated political process to reach a political
solution that my Government has called and striven
for from the inception. We welcome the formation of
the Committee, which is the result of continued close
consultations of the guarantors of the Astana format
and a clear sign of its effectiveness.
Along with the other guarantors of the Astana
format — the Russian Federation and Turkey — we
are resolute in our determination to actively participate
in helping the Syrian Government to launch the
Committee and to support its work, as declared in the
ministerial meeting of the guarantors in New York on
24 September. In that context, we fully support the
principle stipulated in the Committee’s Core Rules of
Procedure that the Constitutional Committee

S/PV. 8628

“shall work expeditiously and continuously …
without foreign interference, including externally
imposed timelines.” (S/2019/775, annex, para. 21)
Therefore, while the Committee should be extended
every support to do its work, everyone must avoid any
and all forms of external pressure or setting of artificial
deadlines. That is what the Committee expects and what
must be observed by everyone. Any possible assistance
to the Committee, even by the United Nations, must be
extended only on the request of the Committee itself
in accordance with its Core Rules of Procedure and in
full respect for the sovereignty, political independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria.
The recent Astana format summit reaffirmed those
principles and rejected any and all attempts to create new
realities on the ground under the pretext of combating
terrorism, including illegitimate self-rule initiatives.
The guarantors of the Astana format also expressed
their determination to stand against separatist agendas.
Accordingly, all foreign forces whose presence is
not authorized by the Syrian Government must leave
the country. The living example in that regard is the
occupation of certain parts of Syria by forces of the
United States, which continue to support and shield
terrorist groups under the mask of combating terrorism.
Obviously, Israel’s acts of aggression against Syria
are in gross violation of those principles and further
complicate the situation. The international community
must compel Israel to stop its aggression and violations.
In the face of those acts of aggression, the Syrian
Government has a sovereign right to decide how and
when to exercise its inherent right to individual or
collective self-defence. In that context, Iran also
stresses that the occupation of the occupied Syrian
Golan by Israel is illegal, and the recognition by the
United States of its annexation by Israel is null and
void. While condemning such unlawful, irresponsible
acts, we stress that the Golan is, and will remain, part
and parcel of the Syrian territory.
While the Constitutional Committee should fulfil
its mandate expeditiously, there should be no linkage
between its work and other such important measures
as fighting terrorism, the restoration of control of
the Syrian Government over its entire territory, the
return of all refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and the reconstruction of Syria. A large
number of Syrians are trapped in terrorist-held areas.
Ensuring their security against terrorists is the main

19-2962619/26

S/PV.8628

The situation in the Middle East

responsibility of the Syrian Government. At the same
time, while fighting terrorists must continue unabated,
every effort should also be made to protect the lives
of civilians. Likewise, the international community
should contribute to and facilitate the speedy, safe and
voluntary return of all refugees and IDPs. No refugee
or IDP should be forced either to return or not to return.
More important, all refugees and IDPs shall return to
their place of origin. Politicization or impeding the
return of refugees and IDPs is unacceptable. Moreover,
supporting the reconstruction of Syria is essential.
That should be neither politicized nor linked to any
other issue.
To end the Syrian crisis, we will continue our
cooperation with the Syrian Government. Through
hosting the next summit of the Astana Format, Iran will
endeavour to fulfil that aim.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Russian presidency of the
Security Council for this month, which has been very
busy with important issues. I would also like to express
our appreciation to Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria, for his informative
and invaluable briefing.
My country’s delegation would like to congratulate
the fraternal Syrian people for the achievement
represented in their agreement to establish the Syrian
Constitutional Committee, which we hope will be
instrumental in ending the suffering of the Syrian
people and reaching a Syrian-led political settlement
under the auspices of the United Nations for the yearslong Syrian crisis, which has only grown deeper. We
appreciation the tireless efforts of Secretary-General
António Guterres and the key role played by Special
Envoy Pedersen, who has been working in collaboration
with the relevant parties to reach that important
agreement. We also express our appreciation for the
positive spirit that was shown by the Syrian parties
in concluding that achievement. Perhaps that progress
now calls on all of us to rapidly build upon it by taking
tangible steps, as follows.
First, the work of the Constitutional Committee
should start as soon as possible and focus on substantive
issues, while avoiding any complexities or procedural
disputes that would only prolong the suffering of the
fraternal Syrian people.
20/26

30/09/2019

Secondly, we have to work in parallel and without
delay on the remaining issues of the political settlement,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), and not to
use the Constitutional Committee as an alternative to
other necessary procedures.
Thirdly, serious and collective measures should be
taken to fight terrorism and illegitimate armed groups
throughout Syrian territory, and not to blindly follow
the attempted change of names that those terrorist
groups have used to conceal their identity. At the same
time, measures should be taken against the parties that
continue to finance those terrorist groups and provide
them with weapons, not to mention the related political
cover, which is seen by all and ignored by some.
It is perhaps our right, or it is our duty, to
legitimately wonder about who contributed to the
arrival of thousands of foreign fighters in Syria, who
armed and funded them, who provided them with
safe havens in egregious violation of international
law and the resolutions of this Council, as well as the
sovereignty of Syria and the rights, security and life
of its fraternal people. I would like mention that there
has been a spillover of this danger outside of Syria, as
thousands of terrorists are now in Libya.
In the same vein, Egypt calls upon the Security
Council and its Counter-Terrorism Committee to
shoulder their responsibilities and immediately stop
the flow of terrorists and foreign fighters from Syria
to Libya and other areas in Africa. In recent months,
thousands of them were transferred supported,
financed and protected by certain parties that provide
these terrorist elements with safe corridors to move to
other regions so as to continue their subversive acts
and their destructive schemes in the Middle East, in
flagrant violation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. That also constitutes a very serious threat
to international peace and security.
Fourthly and lastly, the efforts of certain parties
to undertake demographic engineering so as to change
the demographic composition of northern Syria should
cease, since they seek only to expand their regional
influence. We must emphasize the importance of
accurate implementation of international standards on
the voluntary and safe return of refugees to their homes
and of not transferring them to other areas in order to
alter the original Syrian demography in certain areas of
the country.
19-29626

30/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

My country’s delegation would also like to draw
the Council’s attention to the importance of the
elements contained in the joint communiqué issued on
26 September by the Foreign Ministers of the small group
on Syria, reflecting a balanced and objective vision of
the next steps to bring about a political settlement of the
crisis and put an end to the humanitarian tragedy.
In conclusion, Egypt reiterates its determination
to tirelessly support all efforts to achieve a balanced
and sustainable political settlement that ensures the
restoration of security and stability to sisterly Syria,
while fully maintaining its sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity as well as the safety of its people.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting and for the efforts made during
the Russian Federation’s presidency of the Security
Council to deliver on the Security Council’s mandate
on the maintenance of international peace and security.
I would also like to thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, for his
comprehensive briefing. In that regard, I express my
appreciation for his ongoing tireless efforts to reach a
political solution to the Syrian crisis, which culminated
recently in the announcement of the formation of the
Constitutional Committee.
Since the start of the Syrian crisis, the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan has stressed that there is no
military solution to the crisis. We have worked with
the international community to find a peaceful solution
that would spare Syria and its people destruction
and displacement, put an end to the humanitarian
repercussions and mitigate the suffering of the fraternal
Syrian people. Jordan will continue to support all efforts
to achieve a political solution of the Syrian crisis, in
line with resolution 2254 (2015), by engaging positively
with the international community both through our
membership of the small group and as an observer to
the Astana meetings.
My country emphasizes its support for the efforts
of the Special Envoy for Syria to reach a political
settlement based on resolution 2254 (2015). We also
welcome the announcement by the United Nations
of the agreement reached by all parties regarding the
formation of the Constitutional Committee, which will
launch the political process (see S/2019/775, annex).

S/PV. 8628

This is a positive and long-awaited step to which all
relevant parties contributed and merits success. That
requires cooperative efforts so as to build on the
agreement rapidly and effectively in order to reach a
comprehensive solution to the crisis that is acceptable
to Syrians and that will restore security, stability
and unity to Syria and free the country of terrorist
gangs, while creating a climate conducive to the
voluntary, safe and dignified return of refugees. All the
aforementioned also requires greater efforts ensure the
necessary funding so as to restore stability throughout
the Syrian territory.
My country hosts 1.3 million Syrian brothers
and sisters. Despite the fact that the capacity of the
Kingdom has been exceeded, we spare no effort in
responding to the needs of the refugees and assisting
them, notwithstanding the resulting enormous pressure
on our national economy. In that regard, we reiterate that
the refugee crisis is an international responsibility and
therefore requires a collective solution. International aid
to date has not been commensurate with all the needs of
the refugees and host communities, for whom we need
a more coordinated effort. The Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan encourages the voluntary return of Syrian
refugees to their homes. However, we stress the need
for all parties to coordinate their efforts to that end by
creating a climate conducive to the voluntary, dignified
and safe return of our Syrian brothers and sisters.
I am fully confident that the Security Council
appreciates the serious task and daunting responsibility
for our brothers in Syria, who hope that the Council
will restore stability, peace and normalcy. That requires
the international community to spare no efforts to serve
the interests of the fraternal Syrian people.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me first to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
managing wisely the work of the Security Council
this month.
We meet today amid critical challenges in the Middle
East. However, the announcement early last week is a
glimmer of hope regarding the situation in Syria (see
S/2019/775). My country’s Government welcomes
the announcement of the agreement on forming the
Constitutional Committee and the imminent onset of
its work to draft a constitution, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015). That is a decisive step towards

19-2962621/26

S/PV.8628

The situation in the Middle East

achieving a long-awaited political solution that can put
an end to the suffering of the brotherly people of Syria
and ensure the safe, voluntary and dignified return
of refugees.
The Syrian Negotiation Commission, as testified by
all parties, has cooperated with the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen, whose
efforts we support. In line with current requirements, the
Commission will convene a meeting of candidates and
advisors to the Constitutional Committee in Riyadh on
7 October so as to prepare the constitutional documents.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia will ensure a successful
outcome of this meeting and urge the Commission to
seriously and objectively cooperate in the upcoming
phase. The Commission is serious in its work to let the
Committee reach a successful conclusion.
My country’s Government calls on the Syrian
authorities to use this opportunity to engage seriously
and sincerely in the Constitutional Committee’s first
meeting, to take place at the end of October, and not
to obstruct it. The Syrian authorities must therefore
acknowledge that this first step towards a political
solution requires a serious commitment to the political
process and tangible measures. The voice of reason
must prevail in order to ensure an end to the eightyear crisis in Syria, which has been exploited by the
enemies of the people of Syria and the Arab world
to implement a foreign agenda aimed at plunging the
region into devastation as part of destructive sectarian
politics based on expansionism within the region, while
keeping it ablaze in the interest of that agenda.
We have to realize that the terrorist sectarian
militias supported by Iran that have infiltrated Syria
have played a major role in Syria’s destruction. Any
solution to the Syrian crisis will therefore require that
these militias leave Syrian territory.
Iran must also realize that Syria is an Arab State
and that its natural place is among its brother Arabs.
Iran’s blatant interference in Syria clearly shows that
this terrorist regime has transformed it from a normal
State respecting international norms and laws as well
as good-neighbourly behaviour into a rogue State that
sows chaos, heedless of the suffering it causes to the
peoples of the region.
My country rejects and condemns the killing and
displacement of civilians as well as the use of chemical
weapons in Syria, and we call for accountability for
those who have committed such inhuman crimes. The
22/26

30/09/2019

crimes being committed in Idlib must stop immediately,
without preconditions. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
supports the Syrian people by all means possible to
ensure that Syria gets back on the right track while saving
its people from further destruction and suffering. The
safe return of refugees must be guaranteed as provided
for by international law. We call on the international
community to stand united in supporting the efforts of
the United Nations Special Envoy in order to arrive at
the desired political solution, as set out in resolution
2254 (2015), with full respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Syria.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like, Mr. President, to express once
again on behalf of my country, the Syrian Arab
Republic, our pride in the Russian presidency of the
Security Council this month. We believe that the
coincidence of the announcement of the formation of
the Constitutional Committee with your presidency of
the Council once again asserts your country’s key role
in establishing international peace and security and
upholding the principles of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations, especially the principles
of sovereignty and non-interference in other countries’
internal affairs.
The Syrian Government, in close coordination
with its friends in Russia and Iran, and in collaboration
with the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Geir Pedersen, was able to achieve the formation
of the Constitutional Committee, as announced by the
Secretary-General, and to agree on its terms of reference
and rules of procedure. The Committee is Syrianled and -owned and free of any foreign interference,
as reiterated by Mr. Pedersen at the beginning of this
meeting. This success represented by the establishment
of the Constitutional Committee is a Syrian national
success par excellence, overcoming all the impediments
placed by Governments hostile to Syria so as to prolong
the crisis and obstruct a political solution.
Syria’s determination to establish a Constitutional
Committee, with close follow-up by the President of
the Republic, contributed to this important national
achievement for the Syrian people. Indeed, all of us
are familiar with the famous saying, “Victory has a
thousand fathers, but defeat is an orphan”. Given the
fact that the Constitution is the supreme legislation
19-29626

30/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

reflecting the aspirations of any given people and that it
determines their national, political, economic, cultural
and social visions and choices, national ownership of
the Constitution is its cornerstone and foundation. The
Syrians alone have the exclusive right to discuss their
national Constitution and to adopt it of their own free
will, without any foreign interference, preconditions or
extortion by parties or Governments that wish to see
the country’s destabilization and the destruction and
pillaging of its assets, violating its sovereignty and
prejudicing its national, independent determination by
engaging in terrorism in all its political, military and
economic forms.
Syria is as ancient as history itself. The tomb of
our joint ancestor, Abel, is in the suburbs of Damascus,
and Ugarit, Syria, provided humankind with the first
alphabet, in 1700 B.C.E. The Syrian legislator Emilios
Babinos, who was born in Homs in 142 B.C.E. and whose
statue still stands at the Palace of Justice in Rome, was
one of the five Syrian legislators whose national laws
constitute 80 per cent of the Justinian law code. The
engineer Apollodorus, born in Damascus in the year
60 A.D., was the greatest architect in the history of
humankind and designed the great bridge over the
Danube. I say this so that everyone can know that we
are not novices when it comes to politics, history, law
or economics.
My country’s Government continued to participate
in the Astana meetings as a framework that has yielded
tangible results on the ground. We have positively dealt
with the outcomes of the national dialogue conference
in Sochi, as represented by the agreement on the
establishment of the Constitutional Committee. That
has crystallized into the agreement with the Special
Envoy on the terms of reference and rules of procedure
of the Constitutional Committee. We have agreed on its
regulatory principles, foremost of which is the principle
of a full and strong commitment to the sovereignty and
independence and to the unity of the people and land
of the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as the Syrianowned and -led nature of the political process. No
preconditions or prejudged conclusions will be dictated
regarding the Committee’s work and recommendations.
The Committee is the master of its own modus
operandi and decisions, and no country or party,
especially the one known as the small group, may
intervene in its work, either directly or indirectly.
We also agreed that no ultimatum or timetable can
be imposed on the Committee and that every single

S/PV. 8628

step should be studied and clear, as the Constitution
will determine Syria’s future for coming generations.
Mr. Geir Pedersen, the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, is fully aware of all these facts.
We in Syria are keen on seeing progress in the
political process based on sound foundations that meet
the aspirations of the Syrian people. The role of the
Special Envoy for Syria is to facilitate the work of the
Committee and ensure compromise between the parties
thereto through his good offices, if necessary, as he
himself noted in his briefing.
On that basis, we reiterate that we stand ready to
actively work with friendly countries and the Special
Envoy to launch the Committee. We look forward to
the visit to be made by the Special Envoy to Damascus
in a few days to coordinate with the Syrian State for
the first meeting of the Constitutional Committee and
on the steps necessary for the Committee to produce
serious outcomes that respond to the aspirations of the
Syrian people.
At the time when my country’s Government
stands ready to engage positively in the work of the
Constitutional Committee, we are very realistic,
responsible and cognizant of the fact that the political
process is not a walk in the park. The Council might
recall that we and other Members States, in this very
Chamber, have warned against allowing some to
tamper with the Charter of the United Nations and the
principles of international law, as was done when Iraq
and Libya were invaded. What our States really need is
to inhibit the ball of flame that some have been trying to
fan across our region for decades in order to destabilize
the region, pillage its assets and displace its peoples.
Nevertheless, we remain confident in our national
capacities and in the support and assistance of our
friends and allies, who wish only good and stability
for Syria, the region and the world, while they reject
any foreign intervention and insist on an exclusively
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process. We
look forward to working with honest country partners
that genuinely seek to build the future of Syria and are
committed to the best interests of the Syrian people
and to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic. We do not want any untrue
partners whose only aim is to impose the agendas of
their paymasters or any other foreign interventionist
conditions as a pretext for acts of aggression, occupation
and terrorism under any name whatsoever.

19-2962623/26

S/PV.8628

The situation in the Middle East

Yes, we unequivocally state that we look forward
to working with true and honest country partners that
will confront the policies and practices of the infamous
countries that, up to this very moment, are trying to
impose their will at the expense of the Syrian national
interest by supporting terrorism and the separatist
militias known as the Syrian Democratic Forces, and
by using the platform of the Security Council to defame
the Syrian Government and its allies while imposing
continued unilateral, compulsory economic procedures
on the Syrian people to impede reconstruction and
prevent Syrian refugees and internally displaced
persons from returning to their homes.
I would like to tell those who have been decrying
the situation of Syrian civilians that, to this very
moment, no magnetic resonance imaging machines or
computed tomography scanners are being allowed to
enter Syria. We asked the World Health Organization
to send us such devices and it replied that it could not
do so because certain influential States object to such
medical equipment being sent to Syria. Those are the
very same countries that are shedding crocodile tears
in the Council on behalf of civilians.
The success of any political process in Syria
requires the end of the illegitimate presence of United
States, British, French and Turkish forces on the Syrian
territory. Our faith in the progress of the political process
does not mean in any way whatsoever that we relinquish
our right and constitutional commitment to liberating
every single inch of our territory from terrorism
and illegitimate military presence. My country will
continue to work in parallel on many tracks, including a
political solution, fighting terrorism, getting rid of any
illegitimate foreign presence, fostering deeper national
reconciliation and repairing the damage caused by
terrorism and the international coalition, while relying
on our own potential and the support of our true allies.
That being said, what Syrians need is for the
Council to back a serious, lasting political solution, to
support our efforts with our allies in fighting terrorism
and eliminating terrorism financing, and to put an end
to the unilateral, compulsory economic procedures
imposed on the Syrian people by the United States, the
European Union and other Governments.
In conclusion, my country’s delegation would like
to draw the attention of all who supported the formation
of the Constitutional Committee to the fact that the
enemies of a settlement will never pass up any means,
24/26

30/09/2019

including baseless fiction, to impede the Committee’s
work. That has been proven by the spread of hearsay
and lies. As soon as the Committee was formed two
days ago, the Syrian Government was falsely accused
of using chemical weapons against its own people. We
stress that those who seek to impede the work of the
Committee should be held accountable and that, in order
to ensure that the Committee’s discussions are fruitful,
the Governments of the notorious States must cease
their hostile practices and fabrication of accusations
and lies, and stop interfering in Syrian internal affairs.
We never falsely point a finger at others. No sooner
had the Secretary-General sent his letter to the President
of the Security Council two days ago regarding the
Terms of Reference and Core Rules of Procedure of the
Constitutional Committee (S/2019/775, annex), than
new ideas and proposals were made that ran counter to
what had been agreed by the Syrian Government and
the Secretary-General, with a view to overshadowing
the achievement before the work of this important
Committee had even been launched.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran has asked
to make a further statement. I give him the floor.
Mr. Seifi Pargou (Islamic Republic of Iran): It
is not surprising that, once again, the Ambassador of
the child-killer regime, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
has tried his best to divert the attention of the Council
from the realities on the ground in Syria and the region
in order to cover up its crimes against the peoples of
the region, particularly innocent children in Yemen.
Similarly, by accusing others, the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia desperately wants to divert attention from its
support of terrorism in the region and the world.
Saudi Arabia is the main ideological, financial
and logistical source of the most dangerous terrorist
groups in our region, namely, Al-Qaida, Da’esh and the
Al-Nusra Front. The chief example of this is its support
for those terrorist groups in Syria and Iraq. What it is
doing is in gross deviation from Islamic teachings and a
flagrant violation of international law, thereby flouting
its international responsibility. Accordingly, the Saudis
must be held to account for all their support of terrorism
and for all the other crimes they are committing in the
region, from Syria to Yemen. Instead of lying, spreading
misinformation and preaching to others, that abnormal
regime must stop supporting terrorists, killing innocent
19-29626

30/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

children and destroying mosques, schools and hospitals
in Yemen and elsewhere in our region.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has
asked to make a further statement. I now give him
the floor.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): I had not hoped to hear the representative of
Iran to resort to his tired polemics and false accusations
about the role played by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
in the region.
Who supported incidents of terrorism in Argentina,
the Arabian Gulf, Syria, Europe, Berlin and elsewhere?
All these incidents were the work of the ultimate
terrorist State, the Iranian regime. Now we hear the
representative of that country talking about the role
of my country in this regard and decry the situation
of our brethren in Yemen. He applies the famous Arab
proverb about those who accuse others of what they
are doing. This regime is shedding crocodile tears for
Yemen while it has offered that country nothing but
bullets, destruction and damage. That is also exactly
what it has offered Syria, where it has sought to spread
sectarianism and terrorism. In Iraq, the Iranian regime
continues to destabilize that deep-rooted Arab country.
I therefore call on the representative of Iran to
refrain from his silliness. He knows fully well that his
accusations are false.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of Iran has asked for the floor to make a
further statement. I give him the floor.
Mr. Seifi Pargou (Islamic Republic of Iran): In
fact, since we are discussing the issue of Syria, we did
not intend to raise such matters in today’s meeting, but
it is the representative of Saudi Arabia who took us in
this direction.
It is very unfortunate that, not just in this meeting
but in each and every meeting, the Saudis are trying to
divert people’s attention from the realities in our region.
It is a fact that Saudi Arabia is the major problem; it
is the main source of instability in our region. Look
at the seminaries from Central Asia to Libya. Who is
nourishing them? Who provides financial assistance to
the seminaries who train the takfiri and other extremists
who have spread throughout the region and elsewhere,
destabilizing them entirely?

S/PV. 8628

I do not want to go into our history with Saudi
Arabia, but it is well known that its hostility
towards Iran is boundless. Think of its support for
Saddam — $100 billion dollars during the course of the
war to kill and maim around 1 million Iranians — or for
terrorism in Afghanistan, Syria and Iraq. Who provides
those terrorists with arms?
And it is continuing, unfortunately. Whenever we
introduce a peace plan, they say, “This is the Arab
world, so it is not your business”. If it is not our business,
why are they always and everywhere blaming us? They
make accusations against us with regard to human
rights, inter alia, while their dark human rights record
is so well known. Eleven out fifteen of the perpetrators
of the crimes on 11 September 2001 here in the United
States were Saudi citizens.
They are blaming us for terrorism. Every week we
arrest groups of terrorists that are trying to infiltrate
our borders from the west and the east parts. These
groups are equipped and armed and financed by Saudi
Arabia. We can provide evidence of this and we have
told them about it. They know it very well.
A regime that has a very dark human rights record
should not preach to others. Its behaviour with respect
to minorities, in particular the Shia people, is appalling.
Just ask what happened in the town of Al-Awamiyah,
in eastern Saudi Arabia. It is not good to raise such
matters in this Chamber, but it is their policy. We do not
want to go into such matters.
We have proposed a peace plan for Yemen, and at
the outset we also suggested a peace plan for Syria, Iraq
and elsewhere, but the Saudis were the impediment;
they were the main obstacle. They are always saying
that it is none of our business. We are always making
offers to them, including, even now, the Hormuz peace
plan proposed by our President. We are always inviting
all countries of the region, including Saudi Arabia, to
come together, sit and discuss the issues of the region,
but to no avail.
The representative of Saudi Arabia has proposed
a peace plan for the region. We all can work on that
and hopefully bring stability back to the region. First,
support for terrorism must be stopped. Secondly, the
war in Yemen must be stopped. And all of that is in the
hands of Saudi Arabia.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of Saudi Arabia has asked for the floor to

19-2962625/26

S/PV.8628

The situation in the Middle East

make a further statement. Before giving him the floor,
I just want to remind everyone of the need to be as brief
as possible and not to digress from the subject at hand,
which today is the main item on the agenda.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): I will be brief. It is unfortunate when I hear
our colleague, the representative of Iran, trying to
prolong this discussion. He is openly repeating his lies.
He says that we tell him “It is none of your business”.
That is true; it is none of his business. It is none of
Iran’s business to interfere in the Arab world. Iran
always boasts that it is occupying Arab capitals. It is
none of its business to interfere in Iraq, Syria, Bahrain
or anywhere else.
He says that every week his country is detaining
terrorists. Yes, every week it detains its own citizens. It is
torturing and prisoning them. That is well known about
Iran. It has spread sectarianism. Our relationship with
Iran has been historically positive. However, it soured
after the Iranian revolution, which called for exporting
sectarianism across the Arab and Islamic world.
The President (spoke in Russian): In my capacity
as President of the Security Council, I would like to
underscore that anyone who wished to take the floor
has had the opportunity to do so.
We have listened very carefully to all of those who
asked to speak to address the main agenda item, Syria,
as well as broader, more regional issues. I think the
statements made by everyone today and the exchange
that ensued were undoubtedly useful and will be
continued in future.
I shall now speak briefly in my national capacity.
I would like to say that the exchange and statements
made in the past few minutes of our meeting showed
how all the peace and security issues in the Middle East
are interlinked. In my national statement, I underscored
the deep regional significance of our swift action with
regard to a lasting and reliable settlement in Syria, and
our exchange of opinions demonstrated that, yet again,
if we seize the present opportunity to move quickly
towards a good and reliable settlement in Syria in the
interest of all Syrians, I believe that would make a

26/26

30/09/2019

decisive contribution to the architecture of peace and
security that we all are trying to create in the Middle
East and in the Persian Gulf.
The exchange of statements we have had just
now only reconfirms that fact. In this regard, I would
also like to express my certainty that the ideas and
proposals that the Council has heard from the Russian
Federation with respect to the creation of a reliable
security arrangement in the Persian Gulf is a necessary
and useful foundation for the discussion of how we
can all jointly — together — help to create such a
security arrangement. I propose that we do not waste
that opportunity in our future discussions.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
Before I adjourn the meeting, as this is the last
scheduled meeting of the Council for the month of
September, I would like, on behalf of the Russian
Federation, to express our sincere appreciation to the
members of the Council and the Secretariat for all their
support to us. It has indeed been a busy month. And, while
I might not be the one to say this, as I witnessed it more
from Moscow, as I saw today, and know from the work
of our Permanent Mission, headed by our Permanent
Representative, it has indeed been a busy month in
which we rallied to consensus on several important
issues within our purview. Unfortunately, that was not
the case on all of them, as was mentioned today. But
the consensus we did reach we could not have achieved
alone or without the hard work, support and positive
contributions of every delegation and representatives
of the Secretariat, including the conference servicing
officers, the interpreters, the translators, the verbatim
reporters and the security staff.
As we end our presidency, I know I speak on behalf
of the Council in wishing the delegation of South Africa
good luck in the month of October.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

19-29626
