UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/38
30 January 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 80
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/49/622)]
49/38.

Questions relating to information
A
INFORMATION IN THE SERVICE OF HUMANITY

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the comprehensive and important report of the Committee
on Information, 1/
Also taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on questions
relating to information, 2/
Urges all countries, organizations of the United Nations system as a
whole and all others concerned, reaffirming their commitment to the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and to the principles of freedom of the
press and freedom of information, as well as to those of the independence,
pluralism and diversity of the media, deeply concerned by the disparities
existing between developed and developing countries and the consequences of
every kind arising from those disparities that affect the capability of the
public, private or other media and individuals in developing countries to
disseminate information and communicate their views and their cultural and
ethical values through endogenous cultural production, as well as to ensure
the diversity of sources and their free access to information, and recognizing
the call in this context for what in the United Nations and at various
______________
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session,
1/
Supplement No. 21 (A/49/21).
2/

95-76459

A/49/385.

/...

A/RES/49/38
Page 2

international forums has been termed "a new world information and
communication order, seen as an evolving and continuous process":
(a)
To cooperate and interact with a view to reducing existing
disparities in information flows at all levels by increasing assistance for
the development of communication infrastructures and capabilities in
developing countries, with due regard for their needs and the priorities
attached to such areas by those countries, and in order to enable them and the
public, private or other media in developing countries to develop their own
information and communication policies freely and independently and increase
the participation of media and individuals in the communication process, and
to ensure a free flow of information at all levels;
To ensure for journalists the free and effective performance of
(b)
their professional tasks and condemn resolutely all attacks against them;
(c)
To provide support for the continuation and strengthening of
practical training programmes for broadcasters and journalists from public,
private and other media in developing countries;
To enhance regional efforts and cooperation among developing
(d)
countries, as well as cooperation between developed and developing countries,
to strengthen communication capacities and to improve the media infrastructure
and communication technology in the developing countries, especially in the
areas of training and dissemination of information;
(e)
To aim, in addition to bilateral cooperation, at providing all
possible support and assistance to the developing countries and their media,
public, private or other, with due regard to their interests and needs in the
field of information and to action already adopted within the United Nations
system, including:
(i)

The development of the human and technical resources that are
indispensable for the improvement of information and communication
systems in developing countries and support for the continuation
and strengthening of practical training programmes, such as those
already operating under both public and private auspices
throughout the developing world;

(ii)

The creation of conditions that will enable developing countries
and their media, public, private or other, to have, by using their
national and regional resources, the communication technology
suited to their national needs, as well as the necessary programme
material, especially for radio and television broadcasting;

(iii)

Assistance in establishing and promoting telecommunication links
at the subregional, regional and interregional levels, especially
among developing countries;

(iv)

The facilitation, as appropriate, of access by the developing
countries to advanced communication technology available on the
open market;

/...

A/RES/49/38
Page 3

(f)
To provide full support for the International Programme for the
Development of Communication 3/ of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, which should support both public and private media.
83rd plenary meeting
9 December 1994
B
UNITED NATIONS PUBLIC INFORMATION POLICIES AND ACTIVITIES
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its primary role in elaborating, coordinating and
harmonizing United Nations policies and activities in the field of
information,
Also reaffirming that the Secretary-General should ensure that the
activities of the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, as the
focal point of the public information tasks of the United Nations, are
strengthened and improved, keeping in view the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, the priority areas defined by the General
Assembly and the recommendations of the Committee on Information,
Taking note of all reports of the Secretary-General submitted to the
Committee on Information at its sixteenth session,
1.
Decides to consolidate the role of the Committee on Information as
its main body mandated to make recommendations relating to the work of the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat;
2.
Calls upon the Secretary-General, in respect of the public
information policies and activities of the United Nations, to implement fully
the recommendations contained in paragraph 2 of resolution 48/44 B of
10 December 1993;
3.
Decides, however, following the establishment of a united, nonracial and democratic South Africa, to discontinue United Nations information
efforts in support of the eradication of apartheid;
4.
Notes with appreciation the valuable contribution of the
Department of Public Information in support of the eradication of apartheid;
____________
3/
See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, Records of the General Conference, Twenty-first Session, vol. I,
Resolutions, sect. III.4, resolution 4/21.

/...

A/RES/49/38
Page 4

5.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General regarding the
continuous and major publications of the Department of Public Information 4/
and urges all efforts to ensure timely production and dissemination of its
major publications, in particular the UN Chronicle, the Yearbook of the United
Nations and Africa Recovery, maintaining consistent editorial independence and
accuracy and taking the necessary measures to ensure that its output contains
adequate, objective and equitable information about issues before the
Organization, reflecting divergent opinions wherever they occur;
6.
Also takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the
status of Development Forum, 5/ and encourages the Joint United Nations
Information Committee to continue its consideration of the matter;
7.
Requests the management of the Department of Public Information to
review its publications and proposals for publications to ensure that all
publications fulfil an identifiable need, that they do not duplicate other
publications inside or outside the United Nations system and that they are
produced in a cost-effective manner, and to report thereon to the Committee on
Information at its seventeenth substative session;
8.
Reaffirms the importance attached by Member States to the role of
United Nations information centres in effectively and comprehensively
disseminating information, particularly in developing countries and countries
in transition, about United Nations activities;
9.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the results
of the trial of integrating United Nations information centres with field
offices of the United Nations Development Programme, 6/ and invites the
Secretary-General to continue the integration exercise whenever feasible, on a
case-by-case basis, taking into account the views of the host country, while
ensuring that the information functions of the United Nations information
centres are not adversely affected, and to report thereon to the Committee on
Information;
10.
Reaffirms the role of the General Assembly in relation to the
opening of new United Nations information centres, and invites the SecretaryGeneral, as well, to make such recommendations as he may judge necessary
regarding the establishment and location of these centres;

_____________
4/

A/AC.198/1993/5.

5/

A/AC.198/1994/3.

6/

A/AC.198/1994/5.

/...

A/RES/49/38
Page 5

11.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General regarding the
allocation of resources to United Nations information centres in 1993 7/ and
calls upon him to continue to study ways and means to rationalize and effect
equitable disbursement of available resources to all United Nations
information centres and report thereon to the Committee on Information at its
seventeenth session;
12.
Welcomes the action by some Member States with regard to financial
and material support to United Nations information centres in their respective
capitals;
13.
Notes the progress made towards finalizing arrangements for a
United Nations information component at Warsaw, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue, within existing resources of the Department of Public
Information, preparations with the Government of Poland to that end;
14.
Notes also the progress made by the Secretary-General and the
German authorities towards establishing, within existing resources of the
Department of Public Information, a United Nations information centre at Bonn;
15.
Notes with appreciation the action taken, or being taken, by the
Secretary-General regarding the establishment, reactivation and enhancement of
the United Nations information centres at Sana’a, Bujumbura, Dar es Salaam and
Dhaka;
16.
Notes the action being taken by the Secretary-General regarding
the reactivation of the United Nations information centre at Tehran, and calls
upon the Secretary-General to report to the Committee on Information at its
seventeenth session on the full reactivation of that information centre;
17.
Welcomes the continued enhanced cooperation between the Department
of Public Information and the University for Peace in Costa Rica as a focal
point for promoting United Nations activities and disseminating United Nations
information materials;
18.
Takes note of the requests of Bulgaria, Costa Rica, Gabon, Guinea,
Haiti and Slovakia for information centres or information components;
19.
Expresses its full support for the wide and prompt coverage of
United Nations activities through a continuation of United Nations press
releases in both working languages of the Secretariat;
20.
Encourages the Secretary-General to explore ways and means to
improve the access of United Nations radio to airwaves worldwide, bearing in
mind that radio is one of the most cost-effective and far-reaching media
available to the Department of Public Information;
___________
7/

A/AC.198/1994/6.

/...

A/RES/49/38
Page 6

21.
Takes note of the recommendations and observations by Member
States contained in the report of the Secretary-General 8/ and invites Member
States that wish to do so to submit to the Secretary-General, by 1 February
1995, their observations and suggestions on ways and means of furthering the
development of communication infrastructures and capabilities in developing
countries, with a view to consolidating recent experience in the field of
international cooperation aimed at enabling them to develop their own
information and communication capacities freely and independently, and
requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to the Committee on
Information at its seventeenth session;
22.
Recommends, in order to facilitate continued contact between the
Department of Public Information and the Committee on Information between
sessions, that the Bureau of the Committee on Information, together with
representatives of each regional group, the Group of 77 and China, in close
contact with members of the Committee, should meet, as required, and consult
at periodic intervals with representatives of the Department;
23.
Takes note of the request by Belarus and Ukraine to consider the
development and implementation of a system-wide programme for the tenth
anniversary in 1996 of the Chernobyl disaster;
24.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Committee on
Information at its seventeenth session and to the General Assembly at its
fiftieth session on the activities of the Department of Public Information and
on the implementation of the recommendations contained in the present
resolution;
25.
Decides that the seventeenth session of the Committee on
Information should last ten working days, and invites the Bureau of the
Committee to explore ways and means of making optimum use of the Committee’s
time;
26.
Requests the Committee on Information to report to the General
Assembly at its fiftieth session;
27.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fiftieth
session the item entitled "Questions relating to information".
83rd plenary meeting
9 December 1994

___________
8/

A/AC.198/1994/8.
