United Nations

S/PV.6506

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6506th meeting
Friday, 25 March 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Li Baodong . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Berger
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Parham
Mr. Dunn

Agenda
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-27744 (E)

*1127744*

S/PV.6506

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire
The President (spoke in Chinese): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Côte d’Ivoire to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Atul Khare, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Khare.
Mr. Khare: We last provided an update to the
Security Council on the situation in Côte d’Ivoire on
3 March. Since then, the security situation has further
deteriorated with security forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo
using heavy weapons against civilians in Abidjan,
particularly in the Abobo, Adjamé, Attécoubé,
Koumassi,
Treichville
and
Williamsville
neighbourhoods, which are known as strongholds of
President Ouattara and which are shown on the map
distributed to the members of the Council.
Allow me to mention a few of the most egregious
incidents of the use of excessive force against civilians.
On 3 March, in Abobo, security forces loyal to
Mr. Gbagbo used heavy machine guns against a group
of women demonstrating peacefully in support of
President Ouattara, killing seven women and seriously
wounding many others.
On 7 March, the Ebrié ethnic community in
Anonkoua-Kouté, located outside Abidjan, which is
believed to support Mr. Gbagbo, was attacked by
armed individuals, allegedly partisans of the so-called
invisible commandos supporting President Ouattara.
The attack resulted in the displacement of most of the
community’s some 5,000 inhabitants. On 8 March, at
least four people were killed in Treichville when
security forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo and armed
individuals supporting President Ouattara clashed
following a demonstration by women commemorating
those who had been killed on 3 March.

2

On 11 March, in Abobo, eight civilians, including
three children, were killed when elements of the forces
loyal to Mr. Gbagbo used heavy weapons, including
rocket-propelled grenades and mortars. On 15 March,
unidentified persons threw a grenade into a heavily
populated area of Attécoubé, killing one person and
wounding at least 18. On 17 March, more than
25 people were killed and more than 40 wounded when
security forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo fired several
mortar shells at a market building in Abobo. On
19 March, the village of Akeikoi, near Abidjan, which
is predominantly inhabited by the Attié ethnic
community believed to support Mr. Gbagbo, was
raided by armed men who were allegedly partisans of
the so-called invisible commandos.
Yesterday, on 24 March, the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) received
information that civilians had been shelled from Camp
Commando in Abobo-Samanké. A UNOCI patrol
attended the scene. Upon reaching the location, the
patrol observed security forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo
firing mortars. UNOCI opened fire at the mortar
position and the security forces consequently fled their
position.
Numerous smaller-scale incidents also continue
to take place in these areas. Many of the wounded
civilians are being brought to the headquarters of
UNOCI, which has been providing medical treatment.
To date, UNOCI — the mission authorized by the
Security Council — has treated 254 wounded persons,
of whom 131 had gunshot wounds, 77 were wounded
by grenades and 46 by machete or had burn injuries.
The capacity of the mission’s level-I plus hospital is
seriously overstretched and immediate support in terms
of a surgical team would help the mission to address
that challenge.
Many clashes between the Young Patriots and
supporters of President Ouattara have also occurred in
the Yopougon neighbourhood of Abidjan. There have
also been attacks by both the Young Patriots and the
armed forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo targeting nationals
from West African countries. Business premises owned
by nationals of Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) countries have been vandalized and
looted in Abidjan. Forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo also
vandalized and looted residences of several Ministers
of President Ouattara’s Government in Abidjan
between 3 and 5 March. In retaliation, youth groups
loyal to President Ouattara looted two houses

11-27744

S/PV.6506

belonging to senior officials of Mr. Gbagbo’s party in
Bouaké and Abidjan.
Meanwhile, fighting between elements of the
defence and security forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo and the
Forces nouvelles, in violation of the Comprehensive
Ceasefire Agreement signed on 3 May 2003, remains a
major issue of concern. Both sides are reportedly using
heavy weapons, while continuing to recruit, train and
arm their forces. On 6 March, the Forces nouvelles took
control of Toulepleu, a key town on the border with
Liberia, after heavy fighting with forces loyal to
Mr. Gbagbo, capturing a multibarrel rocket launcher —
known in military parlance as a BM-21 — abandoned
by the Forces de défense et de sécurité (FDS). From
there, the Forces nouvelles advanced towards Guiglo.
Fighting was reported in Daloa and Bonoufla, with the
Forces nouvelles reportedly taking control of the
villages of Doke and Zaibo, as well as Bloléquin, after
heavy fighting on 20 March.
While President Ouattara signed a decree on
17 March unifying the Ivorian defence and security
forces and the Forces nouvelles under a single
command, called the Forces républicaines de Côte
d’Ivoire, on 19 March the leader of the Young Patriots,
Mr. Charles Blé Goudé, called on the Young Patriots to
report to FDS headquarters on 21 March to enrol in the
army in order to “liberate” the country.
The deteriorating security situation and the
escalation in the use of heavy weapons have taken a
serious toll on the lives and well-being of the Ivorian
people. The human rights situation is very grave, with
a high number of human rights violations reported.
UNOCI reported 462 killings between mid-December
and 23 March, of which 72 victims were ECOWAS
nationals; at least 520 cases of arbitrary arrest and
detention, some involving torture; and at least 72 cases
of disappearances.
I am also very concerned about the dire
humanitarian situation and its potential to exacerbate
the situation in Côte d’Ivoire and in the subregion,
particularly in Liberia. To date, over 93,000 people
have sought refuge in Liberia, while up to 1 million
have been internally displaced, of whom some 300,000
are in Abidjan, while many are leaving the city. In that
regard, I would stress that the emergency humanitarian
flash appeal for Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia remains
seriously underfunded, hampering the ability of the
United Nations to provide much-needed services to

11-27744

those forced to flee their homes. Access to those
affected by the ongoing crisis remains a serious
concern. It is essential that all sides allow unhindered
access for humanitarian actors to reach those in need.
Meanwhile, the Young Patriots and security
forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo continued to obstruct
UNOCI operations, including by blocking access by
UNOCI patrols to areas where clashes between forces
loyal to Mr. Gbagbo and supporters of President
Ouattara were ongoing. In addition, a number of
attacks against United Nations personnel were
reported. For example, on 12 March, Young Patriots
attacked a UNOCI staff member in the parking lot of a
supermarket. He was wounded and robbed, while the
United Nations vehicle was set on fire. On 15 March,
one peacekeeper was reported missing, allegedly
abducted by Young Patriots; he is still unaccounted for.
On 16 March, a UNOCI supply convoy was fired upon
by forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo in the area of Abobo in
Abidjan. On 23 March, in Guiglo, armed elements
forced their way into the premises of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
several times, removing equipment and a number of
vehicles. A crowd of Young Patriots prevented a
response by UNOCI forces.
On the political front, as Council members are
already aware, the High-Level Panel met in Addis
Ababa on 9 March to develop its recommendations to
the African Union Peace and Security Council. Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Djinnit was
present. On 10 March, the African Union Peace and
Security Council met at the level of Heads of State to
receive the recommendations of the Panel, in the
presence of President Ouattara and representatives of
Mr.
Gbagbo,
and
endorsed
the
Panel’s
recommendations. The African Union Peace and
Security Council requested the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission to appoint a high
representative to facilitate the implementation of the
Panel’s recommendations.
In an address to the nation on 15 March,
President Ouattara stated that he had accepted the
decisions of the African Union Peace and Security
Council and outlined his vision, with an emphasis on
national reconciliation, including the formation of a
Government of national unity and a truth and
reconciliation
commission,
as
well
as
the
implementation of the unfinished tasks in the
Ouagadougou Political Agreement.

3

S/PV.6506

However, Mr. Gbagbo’s “cabinet” met and issued
a communiqué on 17 March stating that the African
Union had made its decision without a proper evaluation
of the elections, and adding that an inter-Ivorian
dialogue would be the only way to resolve the crisis.
The communiqué further demanded that “the rebels”
disarm. As mentioned earlier, that cabinet statement was
immediately followed by a call from the leader of the
Young Patriots to mobilize the youth to “liberate” Côte
d’Ivoire.
Let me now turn to the actions that UNOCI has
been undertaking to protect civilians, including
investigating and documenting abuses and violations of
human rights under very challenging circumstances.
For example, on 12 March, in Attécoubé in Abidjan,
the FDS blocked a patrol responding to calls by shop
owners and civilians that were being attacked by
Young Patriots. UNOCI reinforced the patrol, which
forced its way through the barricades and reached the
area, where it helped to put out fires in shops that had
been set alight and evacuated the wounded. UNOCI
has also increased the number of patrols to vulnerable
communities or neighbourhoods under attack. UNOCI
has made arrangements for a permanent patrol to be
stationed on a 24/7 basis in the high-risk
neighbourhood of Abobo. We believe that these
measures have prevented additional killings in Abobo,
Attécoubé and Koumassi from taking place.
Aerial reconnaissance is being conducted in
Abidjan and in the rest of the country, using the armed
helicopters temporarily redeployed from the United
Nations Mission in Liberia to UNOCI to deter violence.
Meanwhile, the new Force Commander, General
Béréna, assumed his responsibilities on 20 March, and
we would like to convey again our appreciation to the
former Force Commander, General Hafiz, for his
service.
UNOCI has now been able to access some of the
sites of alleged mass graves that the Mission had
previously been prevented from visiting. Efforts are
under way to investigate reported sites of mass graves.
The Mission received information about alleged
killings of 200 ECOWAS nationals in villages in the
Duekoue area and is preparing to send a team to
investigate these allegations. The Mission continues to
record all reported human rights violations. At the
same time, UNOCI is making every effort to keep
channels of communication open with both sides.

4

Before concluding, I would like to express our
appreciation to the leaders of ECOWAS, who met over
the past two days in Abuja and took very important
decisions on Côte d’Ivoire. Special Representative
Djinnit was invited to the summit. As members of the
Council are aware, in their resolution they strongly
condemned the ongoing violence against civilians and
deplored the deliberate targeting of ECOWAS citizens
and other foreign nationals and attacks on United
Nations personnel. They made it clear that the
deteriorating security situation and the escalating
violence are a “direct consequence of the refusal of
out-going President, Mr. Laurent Gbagbo, to cede
power to Mr. Alassane Ouattara, the universally
recognized winner of the 28 November 2010 election”.
The resolution states that the time has come to enforce
the decisions to ensure the transfer of power to
President Ouattara with out any further delay. To this
end, ECOWAS requested the Security Council to
authorize the immediate implementation of previous
ECOWAS decisions.
The summit also directed the President of the
ECOWAS Commission to explore all avenues to
provide President Ouattara’s Government with the
necessary legal and diplomatic means to exercise its
authority. It further requested the Security Council to
consider the situation in Côte d’Ivoire with a view to
strengthening UNOCI’s mandate, and to adopt more
stringent international sanctions against Mr. Gbagbo
and his associates. Finally, it urged the international
community to ensure an enabling environment for the
population and UNOCI to implement its mandate,
including the protection of civilians, and invited the
African Union Commission to urgently implement the
10 March decisions of the African Union Peace and
Security Council.
I should like to conclude here by again noting
that the Mission is making every effort, in the
challenging circumstances it faces, to enhance its work
and to ensure that the mandates provided by the
Security Council are implemented on the ground.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Khare for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire.
Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): As
this is the first time that I am taking the floor in the
Security Council since having been appointed and

11-27744

S/PV.6506

begun my work as Permanent Representative by the
President of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire, His
Excellency Mr. Alassane Ouattara, on this solemn
occasion I should like to convey the profound and
sincere gratitude of the people, the Government and the
President of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire to the
members of the Security Council for having paid
tireless attention to the Ivorian crisis.

Therefore, taking into account the deep
involvement of ECOWAS in addressing the Ivorian
crisis, the application of Chapter VIII in this regard
seems relevant to us, with a view to ensuring the
necessary coordination and cooperation between
UNOCI and ECOWAS in order to effectively protect
Côte d’Ivoire’s civilian population, millions of whom
were born in other ECOWAS countries.

The obligation and responsibility to protect
civilians in situations of imminent danger is at the
heart of the concerns of the international public
opinion, given the situation that has prevailed in Côte
d’Ivoire since 28 November 2010 and despite the
presence of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire (UNOCI), which is mandated, inter alia, to
protect civilians in imminent danger of violence. Over
the past three months, Mr. Gbagbo’s forces have
committed massive violations of human rights and
massacred more than 500 civilians with their hands
tied. In the light of this duty and responsibility to
protect civilians, my delegation calls on the Security
Council, acting under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter, to authorize the strengthening of the
mandate and current posture of UNOCI.

In its decision taken at the 265th meeting, held in
Addis Ababa on 10 March, the African Union Peace
and Security Council definitively confirmed the
legitimacy of Mr. Alassane Ouattara as President of
Côte d’Ivoire. It also called on Mr. Gbagbo, for the last
time, to peacefully cede power in no more than two
weeks. A high representative of the African Union is to
be appointed to implement that decision. With the
deadline having passed yesterday, a high representative
is yet to be named.

The thirty-ninth Ordinary Summit of Heads of
State and Government of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), held in Abuja,
Nigeria, on 23 and 24 March, adopted resolution
A/RES.1/03/11 of 24 March. The resolution, inter alia,
“requests the United Nations Security Council to
authorize the immediate implementation of the
Authority Decisions of December 2010. In this
context, [it] requests the United Nations Security
Council to strengthen the mandate of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire… enabling
the Mission to use all necessary means to protect
life and property, and to facilitate the immediate
transfer of power to Mr. Alassane Ouattara”.
The resolution also recalled
“the decisions of the Extraordinary Summits of
the Authority of 7 and 24 December 2010,
particularly regarding paragraph 10 of the latter,
which states: ‘In the event that Mr. Gbagbo fails
to heed the immutable demand of ECOWAS to
hand over power, the Community would be left
with no alternative but to take other measures,
including the use of legitimate force, to achieve
the goals of the Ivorian people’”.

11-27744

Assistant Secretary-General Khare referred to the
escalation of violence currently taking place in Côte
d’Ivoire, which is a matter of genuine concern.
Ivorians are dying every day. Human rights violations
are taking place daily. Every Ivorian is experiencing
the traumatic effects of this situation. I would just refer
to two incidents. On the morning of 3 March, women
who had gone out to demonstrate — in a joyous,
carnival-like atmosphere — were machine-gunned by
Mr. Gbagbo’s forces. Like members of the Council,
many people were shocked by the images broadcast
around the world. Four days later, artillery shells were
fired at a market in the neighbourhood of Abobo. The
mortars that fell in the centre of the market, during the
busiest period, killed 40 and injured 60.
My delegation is concerned, and has asked to
speak here to draw the Council’s attention to this
unbridled escalation of violence in Côte d’Ivoire.
Moreover, we wish to reiterate our condemnation,
voiced some time ago, in connection with what is a
situation of ethnic cleansing or premeditated genocide.
Those being targeted include, first, Ivorians of Dioula
and Baoulé ethnicities, whose members include,
respectively, President Alassane Ouattara and President
Henri Konan Bédié, his ally in the coalition with the
Rally of Houphouëtistes for Democracy and Peace;
secondly, nationals from other ECOWAS States living
in Côte d’Ivoire, including from Burkina Faso, Niger,
Senegal, Mauritania, Mali, Ghana, Togo and Benin;
and, thirdly, Africans of the Muslim faith.

5

S/PV.6506

Civilians living in Côte d’Ivoire are victims of
Mr. Gbagbo’s reign of terror, whose atrocities include a
propensity by his militias to desecrate mosques and
assassinate Muslim clergy, in the hope of provoking a
similar reaction by the Muslim community, thereby
sparking an inter-ethnic conflict of incalculable
consequences. Fortunately, in their great wisdom,
leaders of the Muslim community have echoed the
calls for calm and restraint, which have been heeded by
their followers.
The toll of the atrocities since the beginning of
the post-electoral crisis up to 18 March is as follows:
859 killed by gunfire; 1,886 injured, 542 of them
seriously; 100 persons disappeared; and 876 arrests,
with 45 persons still being held.
As expected, this situation has set off an
unprecedented humanitarian catastrophe in Côte
d’Ivoire, with negative consequences for the region.
The Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations has already cited statistics, so I shall not
repeat them.
Faced with a situation that is further deteriorating
on a daily basis, the tragedy being experienced by our
people and the danger of increased crimes against
humanity, my delegation solemnly calls on the Security
Council to immediately adopt robust measures against
former President Gbagbo and all those who support
him. Those measures should include, first, the
immediate establishment by UNOCI and the Licorne
force of a comprehensive plan throughout the country
to provide security for civilians in imminent threat of
danger, especially in Abobo and Anyama, by putting in
place a security cordon; second, the destruction of
military weapons used by Mr. Gbagbo’s forces to carry
out the massacre of civilians; third, completely
isolating Mr. Gbagbo by not recognizing his
representatives, in particular in Africa; fourth, a
prohibition on the issuance of visas to Mr. Gbagbo and
members of his family and inner circle; fifth, the

strengthening of monitoring of the embargo on
weapons and the application of sanctions against
countries that contribute to its violation; sixth, freezing
the assets held abroad by Mr. Gbagbo, his family and
his inner circle; seventh, submitting the serious
violations of human rights and crimes against humanity
in Côte d’Ivoire to the International Criminal Court;
and, lastly, emergency authorization of the legitimate
use of force to safeguard Côte d’Ivoire’s population,
democracy and peace, as well as to install President
Alassane Ouattara fully into office.
We have recently learned that Mr. Gbagbo’s
militias have acquired weapons of mass destruction,
including BM-21 multiple rocket launchers and a
Mi-24 helicopter, which they are preparing to use
against civilians. In addition, we have been informed
that heavy weapons are pointed at the Golf Hotel,
where the President of Côte d’Ivoire is temporarily
lodged. Those weapons pose an ongoing real threat
against the personal security of the country’s President,
his Government and all those inside the Golf Hotel.
The question that arises is, Can the Security
Council content itself with remaining a passive
observer in the face of the calculated extermination of
many thousands of people living in Côte d’Ivoire?
In his latest message to the nation, President
Ouattara expressed his desire to bring together, without
distinction, all the people of Côte d’Ivoire, carrying out
a concrete programme for national reconciliation and
the unification of the army and the country as a whole.
President Ouattara believes that we must close the
chapter on violence and civil war. Côte d’Ivoire should
once again become the country of peace and hospitality
it has always been, and once again follow its calling, in
the words of its national anthem, as a united and
welcoming country.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

6

11-27744
