United Nations

A/RES/65/162

General Assembly

Distr.: General
15 March 2011

Sixty-fifth session
Agenda item 20 (g)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2010
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/65/436/Add.7)]

65/162. Report of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme on its eleventh special session
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2997 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, 53/242 of
28 July 1999, 55/200 of 20 December 2000, 57/251 of 20 December 2002 and 64/204
of 21 December 2009 and other previous resolutions relating to the Governing
Council/Global Ministerial Environment Forum of the United Nations Environment
Programme,
Recalling also the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 1
0F

Recalling further the High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly on
the Millennium Development Goals and its outcome document, 2
1F

3

Taking into account Agenda 21 and the Plan of Implementation of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 4
2F

3F

Reaffirming the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development 5 and its
principles,
4F

Reaffirming its commitment to strengthening the role of the United Nations
Environment Programme as the leading global environmental authority that sets the
global environmental agenda, promotes the coherent implementation of the
environmental dimensions of sustainable development within the United Nations
system and serves as an authoritative advocate for the global environment, as set out
in the Nairobi Declaration on the Role and Mandate of the United Nations
_______________
1

See resolution 60/1.
See resolution 65/1.
3
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex II.
4
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
5
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
2

10-52226

*1052226*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/65/162

Environment Programme of 7 February 1997 6 and in the Nusa Dua Declaration of
26 February 2010, 7
5F

6F

Noting the role played by the United Nations Environment Programme in the
organization of the three ad hoc intergovernmental and multi-stakeholder meetings
on an intergovernmental science-policy platform on biodiversity and ecosystem
services,
Reiterating that capacity-building and technology support to developing
countries in environment-related fields are important components of the work of the
United Nations Environment Programme,
Recalling the Bali Strategic Plan for Technology Support and Capacity-building, 8
7F

Recognizing the need for heightened efforts to increase the political priority
attached to the sound management of chemicals and wastes and the increased need
for sustainable, predictable, adequate and accessible financing for the chemicals and
wastes agenda,
Takes note of the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations
1.
Environment Programme on its eleventh special session 9 and the decisions
contained therein; 10
8F

9F

2.
Welcomes the Nusa Dua Declaration of 26 February 20107 as a contribution
to the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, to be held in 2012,
and calls for the active and effective participation of the United Nations
Environment Programme in the preparatory process of the Conference;
0H

Recognizes that the ratification and implementation of relevant
3.
multilateral environmental agreements contribute to more effective international
environmental governance and better protection and management of the global
environment, and in this context invites Member States to ratify and implement
relevant multilateral environmental agreements;
Welcomes the outcome 11 of the Simultaneous Extraordinary Meetings of
4.
the Conferences of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of
Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, 12 the
Rotterdam Convention on the Prior Informed Consent Procedure for Certain
Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides in International Trade 13 and the Stockholm
Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, 14 held in Bali, Indonesia, from 22 to
24 February 2010, also welcomes the consultative process on financing options for
chemicals and wastes and supports further efforts through the United Nations
Environment Programme to continue these discussions, and in this regard
encourages cooperation and coordination among the secretariats of the Basel,
Rotterdam and Stockholm conventions and support for Governments in their efforts
10F

1F

12F

13F

_______________
6

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/52/25), annex,
decision 19/1, annex.
7
Ibid., Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/65/25), annex I, decision SS.XI/9.
8
UNEP/GC.23/6/Add.1 and Corr.1, annex.
9
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/65/25).
10
Ibid., annex I.
11
See UNEP/FAO/CHW/RC/POPS/EXCOPS.1/8.
12
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1673, No. 28911.
13
Ibid., vol. 2244, No. 39973.
14
Ibid., vol. 2256, No. 40214.

2

A/RES/65/162

to implement, comply with and enforce these multilateral environmental
agreements;
5.
Stresses the importance of the implementation of the Strategic Approach
to International Chemicals Management, 15 particularly through its Quick Start
Programme; 16
14F

15F

6.
Notes with appreciation the progress achieved at the first session of the
intergovernmental negotiating committee to prepare a global legally binding
instrument on mercury, held in Stockholm from 7 to 11 June 2010, 17 and encourages
further efforts towards a successful conclusion to the negotiations, and invites the
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme to continue to
ensure full support for the negotiation process with the goal of completing the
instrument prior to the twenty-seventh session of the Governing Council/Global
Ministerial Environment Forum with the aim of agreeing on a legally binding
instrument on mercury, to include provisions, among others, aimed at reducing
atmospheric emissions of mercury and to specify arrangements for capacity-building
and technical and financial assistance, recognizing that the ability of developing
countries and countries with economies in transition to implement some legal
obligations effectively under a legally binding instrument is dependent upon the
availability of capacity-building and adequate technical and financial assistance;
16F

Recognizes the important role played by the regional centres of the Basel
7.
and Stockholm conventions, particularly in the implementation of international
commitments and in the area of technology transfer, and in this regard encourages
Member States and other stakeholders to promote the full and coordinated use of the
centres to strengthen the regional delivery of assistance for the implementation of
the Basel, Rotterdam and Stockholm conventions;
Takes note of United Nations Environment Programme Governing
8.
Council decision SS.XI/1 of 26 February 2010 on international environmental
governance, the set of options for improving international environmental
governance identified by the consultative group of ministers or high-level
representatives referred to therein and the invitation by the Governing Council to
the President of the Council to transmit the set of options to the General Assembly
at its sixty-fourth session as an input to the continuing process of improving
international environmental governance,10 and notes the ongoing work of the
consultative group of ministers or high-level representatives, which will present its
final report to the Governing Council at its twenty-sixth session in anticipation of
the contribution of the Council;
1H

Encourages the United Nations Environment Programme to support the
9.
ongoing work of the Joint Liaison Group of the secretariats and offices of the
relevant subsidiary bodies of the Convention on Biological Diversity, 18 the United
Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing
Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, 19 and the United
17F

18F

_______________
15
See the report of the International Conference on Chemicals Management on the work of its first session
(SAICM/ICCM.1/7), annexes I–III.
16
Ibid., annex IV, resolution I/4.
17
See UNEP(DTIE)/Hg/INC.1/21.
18
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.
19
Ibid., vol. 1954, No. 33480.

3

A/RES/65/162

Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 20 (“the Rio Conventions”) and
the Liaison Group of Biodiversity-related Conventions, acknowledges the
importance of improving coherence in the implementation of the Rio Conventions,
recognizes the importance of enhancing synergies among the biodiversity-related
conventions, without prejudice to their specific objectives, and encourages the
conferences of the parties to the biodiversity-related multilateral environmental
agreements to consider strengthening efforts in this regard, taking into account
relevant experiences and bearing in mind the respective independent legal status and
mandates of all these instruments;
19F

10. Underlines the need to further advance and accelerate the full
implementation of the Bali Strategic Plan for Technology Support and Capacitybuilding8 with a view to achieving its objectives in the areas of capacity-building
and technology support for developing countries and countries with economies in
transition, invites relevant United Nations funds and programmes and the specialized
agencies and the secretariats of multilateral environmental agreements to consider
mainstreaming the Bali Strategic Plan in their overall activities, and calls upon
Governments and other stakeholders in a position to do so to provide the funding
and technical assistance necessary to further advance and fully implement the Bali
Strategic Plan;
2H

11. Recognizes that South-South cooperation is not a substitute for, but rather
a complement to, North-South cooperation, and in this regard requests the United
Nations Environment Programme to deepen its cooperation with related United
Nations agencies, regions, subregions and existing South-South cooperation
initiatives to develop joint activities and synergies of capacity in advancing SouthSouth cooperation in support of capacity-building and technology support in the
context of the Bali Strategic Plan;
12. Invites the United Nations Environment Programme to contribute,
notably by providing ideas and proposals reflecting its competencies, experiences
and lessons learned, to the preparatory process of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development;
13. Reiterates the continuing need for the United Nations Environment
Programme to conduct up-to-date, comprehensive, scientifically credible and
policy-relevant global environment assessments, in close consultation with Member
States, in order to support decision-making processes at all levels, and in this regard
notes that the fifth report in the Global Environment Outlook series and its related
summary for policymakers is currently under development, and stresses the need to
enhance the policy relevance of the Outlook by, inter alia, identifying policy options
to speed up the achievement of the internationally agreed goals and to inform global
and regional processes and meetings where progress towards the agreed goals will
be discussed, including the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development;
14. Emphasizes the need to further enhance coordination and cooperation
among the relevant United Nations organizations in the promotion of the
environmental dimension of sustainable development and to enhance cooperation
between the United Nations Environment Programme and regional and subregional
organizations, and welcomes the continued active participation of the Programme in
the United Nations Development Group and the Environment Management Group,
_______________
20

4

Ibid., vol. 1771, No. 30822.

A/RES/65/162

as well as in the United Nations exercises at the country level, including United
Nations Development Assistance Framework processes and “Delivering as One”
programmes for those countries implementing this initiative;
15. Reiterates the instrumental role of regional offices of the United Nations
Environment Programme in assisting countries in mainstreaming their
environmental priorities and maintaining the strategic presence of the Programme at
the national and regional levels as part of the continued efforts of the Programme in
shifting emphasis from delivery of outputs to achievement of results within its
budget and programme of work, and calls for increased support to strengthen the
human, financial and programmatic capacities of all regional offices;
16. Notes the cooperation of the Environment Management Group, including
by working with the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination and its subsidiary bodies, in enhancing, inter alia, cooperation in
programming environmental activities in the United Nations system in the areas of
biodiversity and land degradation, including by supporting the implementation of
the strategic plans of the secretariats of the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification and the Convention on Biological Diversity, including the post-2010
biodiversity targets;
17. Takes note of United Nations Environment Programme Governing
Council decision SS.XI/4 of 26 February 2010 entitled “Intergovernmental sciencepolicy platform on biodiversity and ecosystem services”, 10 the Busan outcome of the
third ad hoc intergovernmental and multi-stakeholder meeting on an
intergovernmental science-policy platform on biodiversity and ecosystem services,
held in Busan, Republic of Korea, from 7 to 11 June 2010, 21 the decision entitled
“Science-policy interface on biodiversity, ecosystem services and human well-being
and consideration of the outcome of the intergovernmental meetings” adopted by the
Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity at its tenth
meeting, held in Nagoya, Japan, from 18 to 29 October 2010, 22 and the decision on
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the
intergovernmental science-policy platform on biodiversity and ecosystem services
adopted by the Executive Board of that Organization at its one hundred and eightyfifth session, 23 and requests the United Nations Environment Programme, without
prejudice to the final institutional arrangements for the intergovernmental sciencepolicy platform on biodiversity and ecosystem services and in consultation with all
relevant organizations and bodies, in order to fully operationalize the platform, to
convene a plenary meeting providing for the full and effective participation of all
Member States, in particular representatives from developing countries, to
determine modalities and institutional arrangements for the platform at the earliest
opportunity;
3H

20F

21F

2F

18. Calls upon international and bilateral donors and other countries in a
position to do so to support the full and effective participation of representatives
from developing countries in the plenary meeting;

_______________
21

A/65/383, annex.
See UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex, decision X/11.
23
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Decisions Adopted by the Executive
Board at its One Hundred and Eighty-fifth Session, Paris, 5–21 October 2010 (185 EX/Decisions),
decision 43.
22

5

A/RES/65/162

19. Welcomes the activities undertaken by the United Nations Environment
Programme with a view to strengthening the protection and sustainable management
of marine and coastal ecosystems and further mainstreaming the marine and coastal
strategy of the Programme in line with the United Nations Millennium Declaration 24
and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of
Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States; 25
23F

24F

20. Also welcomes the efforts undertaken to date by the United Nations
Environment Programme in response to the devastating impact of the earthquake of
12 January 2010 on the people, economy and environment of Haiti, and in this
regard urges the Programme, in coordination with the United Nations country team,
to continue to perform its key role in ensuring that environmental considerations are
mainstreamed into the overall humanitarian relief and recovery programme;
21. Further welcomes the increased contributions to the Environment Fund,
and reiterates its invitation to Governments that are in a position to do so to increase
their contributions to the Fund;
22. Reiterates the need for stable, adequate and predictable financial
resources for the United Nations Environment Programme, and, in accordance with
resolution 2997 (XXVII), underlines the need to consider the adequate reflection of
all the administrative and management costs of the Programme in the context of the
United Nations regular budget;
23. Also reiterates the importance of the Nairobi headquarters location of the
United Nations Environment Programme, and requests the Secretary-General to
keep the resource needs of the Programme and the United Nations Office at Nairobi
under review so as to permit the delivery, in an effective manner, of necessary
services to the Programme and to the other United Nations organs and organizations
in Nairobi;
24. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session,
under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, a sub-item entitled “Report of
the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its
twenty-sixth session”.
69th plenary meeting
20 December 2010

_______________
24

See resolution 55/2.
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.

25

6
