S/PV.8591

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8591st meeting

Friday, 2 August 2019, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Czaputowicz/Ms. Wronecka. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Ipo
Mrs. Cedano
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce
Ms. Norman-Chalet

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2019/509)
Letter dated 30 July 2019 from the Permanent Representative of Poland to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/605)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-24353 (E)
*1924353*

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on Children
and armed conflict (S/2019/509)
Letter dated 30 July 2019 from the Permanent
Representative of Poland to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2019/605)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Georgia,
Guatemala, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mexico, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar,
Norway, Pakistan, the Philippines, Portugal, Qatar,
the Republic of Korea, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Sierra Leone, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, the Sudan,
Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Viet Nam and
Yemen to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the observer of
the Observer State of Palestine to the United Nations
to participate in this meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous practice
in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Virginia
Gamba, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict; Ms. Henrietta
Fore, Executive Director of the United Nations
Children’s Fund; Ms. Mariatu Kamara, UNICEF
Canada Ambassador; and Mr. Majok Peter Awan, child
protection professional.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
2/90

02/08/2019

following individuals to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Gerton van den Akker, Chargé d’Affaires ad
interim of the Delegation of the European Union to
the United Nations; and Ms. Clare Hutchinson, NATO
Secretary General’s Special Representative for Women,
Peace and Security.
I propose that the Council invite the observer of the
Observer State of the Holy See to the United Nations
to participate in this meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous practice
in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/509, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on Children and armed conflict,
and document S/2019/605, which contains a letter dated
30 July 2019 from the Permanent Representative of
Poland addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting
a concept paper on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. Gamba.
Ms. Gamba: On behalf of the Secretary-General,
I would like to thank the Republic of Poland, and
Foreign Minister Czaputowicz personally, for holding
this open debate. It is vitally important that we take this
opportunity to come together and focus on the current
plight of children affected by armed conflict across the
four corners of the globe.
As many in the Chamber will be aware, 2019 marks
20 years since the Security Council first adopted a
resolution on children and armed conflict (resolution
1261 (1999)) and the 30th anniversary of the entry into
force of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
The date of 4 August is also the 10th anniversary of
the adoption resolution 1882 (2009), in which this
organ decided it was necessary to increase the focus
of the children and armed conflict mandate on killing,
maiming and rape and other forms of sexual violence.
Today’s debate therefore provides a milestone where we
can take stock of our collective efforts to date.
Given these important anniversaries, I am very
pleased that we have Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan
here today to provide us with their insight from their
experiences in Sierra Leone and South Sudan. I hope
that they will both talk about the impact of conflict of
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

children and also inspire us with guidance. We need to
better understand how we can build upon and improve
the current work on the ground and better utilize child
protection expertise to end and prevent violations. I
extend a very special thank you to Peter and Mariatu
for being here today.
To give my own insight, last month I travelled to
Mali to assess first-hand the situation of children and
advocate for increased protection measures for boys and
girls. My visit was the first of a Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
to the country. I travelled to Mopti, in the centre of the
country, a region recently affected by dramatic spikes of
violence. I met representatives of the authorities, child
victims of the conflict and members of the Dogon and
Peul communities. Time constraints meant that a joint
meeting with representatives of the two communities
was necessary, and it was held. This format led to a
very constructive engagement. I was struck by their
common recognition of the importance of protecting
children from violence. It was clear to me that the
protection of children can act as a confidence-building
measure between opposing parties. It can demonstrably
and positively impact peace processes and agreements,
as we recently saw with the commitments of the two
groups to ceasing hostilities last week.
This trip focused on the fundamentals of the
mandate I represent. Over the time I have been
Special Representative, I have expended much energy
in engaging with parties to conflict where there is a
willingness to engage. This has inspired positive
results. In many situations where the monitoring and
reporting mechanism has been in place, Governments
have put in place clear measures, such as establishing
interministerial committees to interact with the
country task force, or passed laws on the protection
of children. This has galvanized action and allowed
progress to develop quickly as a direct result of highlevel engagement. The formula will work with our
teams on the ground.
Action plans are perhaps the most tangible example
of the outcome of such engagement with parties to
conflict. In recent months, three new action plans
have been signed with non-State actors and other
engagement tools have been put in place. However, we
understand that these tools are only the beginning of
a process to better protect children. They are not an
end in themselves. I take this opportunity to call on
all concerned Governments and on all those who

S/PV. 8591

can provide support, including the Council, to do
their utmost to ensure the full implementation of
these commitments. When we have worked together
effectively, we will see real tangible progress through a
reduction of violations and the release of children.
Regional and subregional work is a key element of
this direct engagement. I take this opportunity to thank
the Council for giving us the tools last year, within the
context of resolution 2427 (2018), to pursue prevention
plans with these entities. I hope that soon we will
have new instruments in these forums to aid our other
engagement on the protection of children. This highlevel political engagement supports the cornerstone of
our endeavours — child protection efforts in situations
of armed conflict. Access and actors in the field must be
the priority to protect children and prevent violations.
We cannot achieve anything without the tireless work
on the ground of so many colleagues and partners — the
sterling work of UNICEF in particular.
For our part, in late 2018 I launched the ACT to
Protect campaign with the African and European
Unions. This campaign is aimed at supporting the work
on the ground and has already been launched in Mali
and utilized in Somalia. I hope that we can count on the
support of the Security Council and individual Member
States as we push to create a tangible difference for all
children affected by the six grave violations.
Unfortunately, for all our efforts to date we are
not yet at a point where we can be confident that the
situation is improving year upon year. The report before
the Council (S/2019/509) speaks for itself. Although we
have fewer violations across four categories, we have
an increase in killing and maiming and similar levels of
sexual violence. In last year’s report (S/2018/465) two
figures stand at very high levels: one for killing and
maiming, with over 12,000 children affected by these
violations, and one for children who benefitted from
reintegration assistance — over 13,500. That, too was a
historic high. Let me refer to both.
In 2018, verified cases of children killed and
maimed reached record levels since the creation of
the monitoring and reporting mechanism. I echo
the Secretary-General’s concern that unprecedented
numbers of violations were attributed to national and
international forces. It is vital that the Council redouble
its efforts to ensure that all parties abide by the
principals of distinction, proportionality and military
necessity. We must make sure that all military actions

19-243533/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

are guided by the fundamental tenets of international
humanitarian law. In this regard, I urge parties to
conflict issue specific command orders that address
reducing child casualties. This will help us uphold the
spirit of this Council when it adopted resolution 1882
(2009) and recognized that more need to be done to stop
killing and maiming of boys and girls.
About 40 per cent of the casualties in the global
figure are caused by unexploded ordnance, improvised
explosive devices and landmines. This a real
preoccupation of my Office, particularly as they cause
long-term and serious disability. I believe this is one
area where quick wins can be made if there is a focus
and a will on the part of the international community to
reduce the use and clear up these explosive remnants of
war when peace agreements have been reached. I hope
that next year we can see a reduction in these types
of casualties. Of course, overall the majority of cases
are ascribed to armed groups, crossfire and violent
ground engagements.
While the other topic that the Council addressed 10
years ago in resolution 1882 (200) is not as numerically
startling at first glance, we still have a long way to go
in tackling this issue. Rape and other forms of sexual
violence are significantly underreported, including
when perpetrated against boys. The fear of stigma and
retaliation, involvement of powerful perpetrators, lack
of services and concerns for the protection of survivors
and witnesses discourage children and witnesses from
coming forward. It is clear that, unfortunately, this
violation has proved difficult to address. I believe
that greater accountability mechanisms and adapted
responsive care services for survivors can contribute
to making significant progress in addressing this issue.
Moreover, too many children continue to be detained
as a result of conflict. I urge that children exposed to
alarming levels of violence not be further ostracized
once released from armed groups and armed forces. We
must allow these children to be considered as what they
are — victims of a conflict This is particularly true for
the most vulnerable ones, such as children currently or
allegedly associated with foreign fighters. I would like
to reiterate the message of the Secretary-General that
no child should be deprived of a nationality. In this year
of the thirtieth anniversary of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, it is pertinent to recall that actions
for all children affected by armed conflict should be
taken with the best interests of the child in mind.
4/90

02/08/2019

The facts contained in the report serve to emphasize
my reoccurring point. We need to prioritize action on
the ground and also protect the staff who undertake it.
In 2018, conflict and military operations, insecurity,
constraints on humanitarian access, staff reductions,
threats, violence and infrastructure prevented child
protection actors from doing their most fundamental
mission of protecting children. I ask the Council and
individual member States to work with us to address this
issue by emphasizing the need for humanitarian access
in resolutions and bilateral relations. Child protection
actors need to have access to provide life-saving support
to victims and survivors of violations. We can strain
every sinew at the highest level to prevent violations,
but we also need to be able to respond quickly to
violations when they occur.
Notwithstanding the restrictions on access, I
am pleased that a high number of children have been
separated from parties to conflict and provided with
reintegration assistance. These releases have occurred
due to the engagement of child protection actors as
part of the development of action plans or as a result
of emerging peace processes, mediation and dialogue
between Governments and armed groups. It is therefore
important for me to reiterate that these figures justify
the extensive effort in engaging with joint action plans
with all parties to conflict, as well as promoting child
and armed conflict language and concerns at the heart
of all peace dialogue and processes. Separating children
provides opportunities for boys and girls to be given a
second chance at life. We must ensure more dialogue
and more engagement.
By the same token, we must also ensure that we
are ready to receive released children appropriately
through adequate and comprehensive programmes that
are funded and readily available. We cannot afford to
lose children once they are released and we cannot
afford to make them wait their turn for reintegration
assistance because of a lack of resources. That is why
reintegration and considering the real reintegration
needs of boys and girls globally is so urgent. I would
like to thank Poland for the priority it has given to the
task through its important role in the Group of Friends
of Reintegration of Child Soldiers, which was launched
by my Office, together with UNICEF, in late 2018.
I would like to end by imploring the Council to
support the mandate to the greatest extent possible.
We need the Council’s support to engage with parties
to conflict to end and prevent violations. We need its
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

support to ensure that there is sufficient pressure to
make commitments mean something. Most of all, we
need the Council’s support to ensure that there exists
the requisite child protection capacity to give children
affected by conflict all the support they need — their
one chance.
The President: I thank Ms. Gamba for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Fore.
Ms. Fore: I join the members of the Security
Council today in our shared and steadfast commitment
to protect children affected by armed conflict, prevent
their physical and psychological harm and provide them
with a future. First, however, we must face facts. As
Special Representative Gamba noted, there were more
than 24,000 documented violations against children
in armed conflict in 2018 — up from 21,000 the year
before. Half of those violations involved the killing
or maiming of children. Those are just the verified
incidents; the numbers are higher. We must do better.
We at UNICEF are deeply distressed about the
continued and rampant use of explosive weapons
and their impact on children. Air strikes, landmines,
improvised explosive devices, rocket attacks, cluster
munitions and artillery shelling cause the great majority
of child casualties in armed conflict today. We know
too that children account for more than two thirds of
all civilians killed or maimed by explosive remnants
of war. Their bodies are small and fragile and they are
attracted by the shiny coloured metals. Not only are
children harmed in disproportionate numbers because
of their size and other factors, the severity of the harm
must be borne in mind. They are also much more
likely than adults to be disabled or killed as a result of
blast injuries.
Those appalling facts speak for themselves. Ten
years after the Security Council adopted resolution
1882 (2009), the facts tell us that we have miles to go to
end grave violations against children in armed conflict.
But they do not tell the whole story. There is so much
we can do, and so much we are doing, to come to the
aid of children at risk. Day in and day out, UNICEF and
our many partners work with courageous and resilient
children and young people in conflict zones around
the world. They give us hope for the future — theirs
and ours.
Let me tell members about two of them. Saja is a
13-year-old from Aleppo who has spent half her life

S/PV. 8591

living in conflict. In recent years, she lost her home,
her brother and several other loved ones. She also lost
her left leg to a bomb. But she has not lost hope. Every
day, she makes the long walk to school to continue her
education. Saja says that her most prized possession is
her prosthetic leg. She was an aspiring gymnast before
losing her leg and still practices flips in her family’s
tiny apartment. Her wonderful new dream is to compete
in the Paralympic Games.
Then there is Fatima, a young girl I met at a social
support centre in Aden where we provide psychosocial
support for young people. Fatima talked to me about
fleeing the terrible violence in her hometown. She said
she was now learning to reconnect with her peers and
showed me a drawing that she had just made. It was
a picture of a girl and her girlfriend sitting in a park
on a sunny day. Staff members at the centre later told
me that, when Fatima first arrived she drew pictures
of only guns and blood, but that she had begun to heal.
In 2018, UNICEF reached 6.9 million children
and adolescents like Saja with emergency education
in humanitarian crises. We focused greater attention
on the needs of children living with disabilities in
the midst of conflicts. To help prevent disabilities
from explosive remnants of war, we worked on risk
education programmes in places such as Syria, Mali
and Myanmar. Simple posters and leaflets could mean
the difference between life, death or disability for
children in conflict areas.
Also last year, UNICEF provided 3.6 million
children and adolescents like Fatima with psychosocial
support to help them cope with trauma and regain the
childhood that they deserve. But we must do even more
to meet the mental health needs of children affected by
armed conflict That is an area that cries out for more
robust and sustainable funding. UNICEF remains
especially concerned about the mental health, physical
security and basic rights of children associated with
armed groups. Tens of thousands of those children
languish in camps, detention centres and orphanages
in Syria, Iraq and other countries. They are shunned by
their communities because of perceived or actual links
with groups designated as terrorists.
When children leave those groups they should
receive urgently needed protection and humanitarian
assistance after the harrowing experiences they
have endured — often for years. Instead, they are
ostracized, rejected or locked up. Under resolution

19-243535/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

2427 (2018) — a critical achievement of the Security
Council last year — children associated with armed
groups should be treated primarily as victims. That
means all children, not just children under a specific
age, including those who may have committed crimes.
They should never be deprived of liberty solely because
of their alleged or actual association with armed groups.
Boys and girls often join or support armed
groups under extreme duress, coercion, fear or
manipulation — or simply as a matter of survival. The
evidence suggests that they are rarely driven by ideology.
Rather than being detained they should be reintegrated
into society, with a holistic approach to address their
complex needs. Along with many others working on
child protection, UNICEF has developed sustainable
and evidence-based reintegration programmes to do
just that. As Special Representative Gamba said, those
programmes take time but carry great rewards.
UNICEF calls on all Member States to reintegrate
children associated with armed groups into society
and support holistic, evidence-based reintegration
programming. We commend the States that are already
doing so. Member States — indeed, all Governments
and their militaries — are themselves accountable for
preventing the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflict. UNICEF continues to provide a strong voice
on the issue. As we speak, UNICEF is supporting an
age-verification workshop with the Sudanese military
and Rapid Support Forces in Khartoum. Next week,
our teams will conduct age verification with the Rapid
Support Forces in Nyala, Darfur.
At the same time, we remain concerned about
the excessive use of military force against civilians,
including children, who engage in peaceful protest.
Authorities should exercise maximum restraint in such
situations. Otherwise, they risk killing children or
causing grave injuries that lead to permanent disabilities.
Protecting the lives and futures of children affected by
armed conflict is not just the right thing to do; it is in
our collective self-interest. In conflict and post-conflict
situations worldwide, we must engage actively with
young people to prevent spiralling violence and achieve
lasting peace. They are the adults and the leaders of
tomorrow. In the spirit of the thirtieth anniversary
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, let us
do better — let us do more — to protect vulnerable
children. Our global future will depend upon it.
The President: I thank Ms. Fore for her briefing.
6/90

02/08/2019

I now give the floor to Ms. Kamara.
Ms. Kamara: I wish to convey my special thanks
to the Permanent Mission of the Republic of Poland to
the United Nations, the Government of Poland and the
President of the Security Council for giving me this
wonderful opportunity. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his outstanding report on children and
armed conflict (S/2019/509).
When the Revolutionary United Front began its
attacks on the Liberian border in 1991, one of the
bloodiest civil wars in the past 30 years was initiated.
Sierra Leone became a part of that brutal, senseless and
bloody war, which changed the lives of 95 per cent of
Sierra Leone’s people. Children became targets, used
by lawless land leaders to fight against their will.
Killing, rape and maiming were common. Following
that bloody armed conflict, men, children and women
were left with permanent trauma and stigmatization.
Today these children are seen as enemies, unwanted
or unaccepted by their communities and even their own
family members. The possibility of a brighter future
for them is limited by the lack of proper resources,
including education, counselling, vocational training
and psychological assistance, which would equip
them with the tools necessary to give them hope for a
promising future.
Every once in while we come across the story
of someone’s life experiences, and we have to take a
breath and reflect. This story is not the plot of a movie
or a novel, the fruit of someone’s imagination. This
story is mine; it is about my life. I am honoured to make
this statement before the Council and hope that it will
inspire it to make a move in a positive direction.
My name is Mariatu Kamara. I was born and raised
in a small village in the West African country of Sierra
Leone. In 1999, when I was 11 years old and living
through the 11-year civil war in my country, my life was
changed forever. We lived in a brutal and lawless land,
and one day the rebels attacked my village, captured my
three cousins and myself and held us hostage for a day.
During that time, I witnessed acts of great brutality:
killing, maiming and the burning of houses. Yet my life
was spared.
The rebels left me for dead in the dark of night,
after they had used machetes to completely cut off
both of my hands. A few hours later I found myself in
the middle of dead bodies, bleeding profusely, scared
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

S/PV. 8591

and very confused. I managed to make my way into
the deep, dark forest, where I spent the night. The next
morning, I met a man who helped to save my life. After
all this savagery and brutality, I forged on, and with the
help of strangers and my own strong will to survive, I
made my way to the hospital in Freetown.

communities so as to raise awareness of what they
have been through. During my trip to Sierra Leone
with UNICEF, I also visited schools and camps in
rural areas and spoke to them about forgiveness and
the importance of hope and faith and of finding the
strength to move forward.

After my treatment, I left the hospital and spent a
lot of time — years — begging for money, food and
clothing while living in an amputee camp in Freetown.
At the camp, I joined a theatre group along with many
other young amputees that helped to raise awareness of
our country’s plight.

I have also been working for a while on my own
project in Sierra Leone for women and children war
amputees, providing counselling mainly for the girls,
who have been traumatized and mentally affected and
often feel forgotten.

Through the kindness of a family from Canada,
I was able to come to Canada. Moving to Canada
was the step I needed to pursue a change in my life.
It was in Canada that I was able to go to school and
get an education for the first time in my life. I studied
in the Assaulted Women’s and Children’s Counsellor/
Advocate programme, in Toronto. Some years ago,
I managed to transform my life story into a book
called “The Bite of the Mango”, with the help of my
family, my friend Susan McClelland and Annick Press,
the publisher.
I have been working for the protection of children
in armed conflict. A few years ago, I was named
a UNICEF Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict. That assignment gave me the
opportunity to reach out to those who have never had
the chance to share their stories; to raise awareness; and
to advocate for children affected by armed conflict. I
do this by promoting their rights and raising awareness
about their condition throughout the world, with the
goal of ensuring that such atrocities will not be allowed
to continue.
Serving as a UNICEF Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict is an honour for me. It
gives me an opportunity and a platform to share my
story and the stories of many, and to help educate the
world about the impact of war on children throughout
the world.
I first participated in this work when UNICEF took
me back to Sierra Leone for the first time to visit and
to see the wonderful work it has been doing there to
promote the rights and welfare of children in Sierra
Leone. I visited a centre where children affected by
armed conflict are given the opportunity to share their
stories as they go through the healing process. They
write and publish their thoughts and views for their

Some final thoughts: all of us here have the right
to do what we want to do. When you have children and
families, you wish the best for them. We also wish the
best for our friends and colleagues around the world
who are affected by senseless wars.
We need the Security Council to stand up and
do more. Yes, its members are doing something,
but we need them to do more. As a UNICEF special
representative, I believe in providing those people
with the tools necessary for a better future through
education. It is not just about reintegration, even if that
is part of it. It is not just a question of releasing those
kids from the war zone or from the bad people. They
need life, they need futures — brighter futures. If we
leave them outside on the street, what do we think we
are creating? Clearly we are creating more conflict,
because those kids are going to go right back to where
they started. They do not have the proper training, tools
or resources to go back to their communities and make
positive changes for themselves.
We therefore need education, training and
counselling. We need funding, especially for disabled
people, including children. All forms of disability need
to be addressed, but special focus is required for people
who have been disabled owing to the impacts of war.
In Sierra Leone, there are many cases, including mine.
I am a good example, in fact. In some places, I do not
have the right to do the things that I want because of
disability. I have been subject to discrimination.
We need those things to stop. We cannot do it
alone. Security Council members have the tools and the
power to make those things stop, to make violence stop.
I know that there are rules of war and the law of war.
Who made those laws? The Council has to stand up and
make those laws more effective.
The President: I thank Ms. Kamara for her briefing.

19-243537/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

I now give the floor to Mr. Awan.
Mr. Awan: First of all, let me express my
appreciation to the Permanent Mission of the Republic
of Poland to the United Nations for having invited me
and facilitated my coming to New York for today’s open
debate. My thanks also go to War Child Holland, and
my colleague with me now, Mr. Eamonn Hanson, for
allowing me to take the floor at this important meeting.
The world today has become a global village, which
is quite different from the way it was when I was a boy.
My name is Majok Peter Awan, and I know exactly what
it is like to live in a village. I was born in 1979, in a
remote village called Pakeer, located in what is now the
Jonglei state of South Sudan. At that time, we did not
have any hospitals or schools or even infrastructure to
connect us with the world outside the village. The world
was unaware of our existence, much less the suffering
we endured during the Sudanese civil war. And we had
no idea what the rest of the world looked like.
Yet, since the time when I was a child, the Security
Council has recognized the severe impacts of war and
other forms of armed conflict on boys and girls, whose
protection it has taken steps to improve. It has developed
a unique monitoring and reporting mechanism to
collect information on the grave violations of children’s
rights in conflict, and, over the past two decades, it has
increased its attention to children involved in armed
conflict. But despite improved information systems
and stronger normative frameworks, children living
in conflict zones continue to face many of the awful
abuses and violations of their rights that my peers and I
faced in the Sudan a long time ago.
As a child, I lived in a village where our community
took care of its members, although with little. We still
felt responsible for the well-being of our children,
parents and grandparents. But our well-being was not
defined by material things; it was about the love and
tenderness we shared with each other in the hope that
the children would grow up peacefully.
At the age of five, I was already herding cattle, goats
and sheep in the hot sun of tropical Africa, together
with other children of my age. I was one of those many
smiling, innocent, playful children. Little did I know
what was to follow. The civil war in the Sudan broke
out and soon reached my village. I really had no clue
why the adults were fighting. Unfortunately, I found
out very soon.
8/90

02/08/2019

When I was seven years old, the local rebel group
fighting the Government in Khartoum took me from
my home and made me undergo a six-month intensive
military training. I was then assigned to local rebel
commander to work as his bodyguard and perform such
additional duties as cooking, fetching water, gathering
firewood, spying and looting. It was an overwhelming
and debilitating situation of do-or-die. My four friends
and I would play under the shadow of fear, because it
was illegal to play. With that high level of vulnerability,
there was nothing I could do but follow orders.
There was no social media to share my experiences,
no United Nations monitors to document my story and
no child-protection actor to calm my fears. It was me,
myself and I in a devastating situation. Nobody saw me.
The world had no clue as to what was going on. I felt
totally abandoned by it. The serious trauma caused will
have a lasting impact on the rest of my life. Of that I
am sure.
But you know what? I managed to escape and
survived the brutal killings and massive abuses of the
1992-1994 period of confusion in the Sudan. At the age
of 15, I managed to reach the Kakuma refugee camp
in Kenya, which was managed at that time by Rädda
Barnen; it is now run by Save the Children International.
Much was accomplished thanks to the camp’s
capacities and the support I received. I remember that
they urged us to go to the church, play with other children
and not stay by ourselves. After two years of trauma, I
was able to socialize with other children again. Not all
children can recover like I did without assistance from
the outside. Child-protection programming, including
individualized psychosocial support, education and
livelihood opportunities, is key in the recovery of
children and their families affected by conflict.
With unconditional support from my maternal
uncle and child-protection actors, I went to school
and university and finally got a job with War Child
Holland as a child-protection and psychosocial-support
coordinator in South Sudan. I am now able to help
other little Majok Peters in my own country, which
has been torn by a series of wars. Every single day,
when I am in contact with all those innocent children
affected by conflict, I see myself. As a child-protection
and psychosocial-support coordinator, administering
psychosocial support, managing cases, tracing and
reunifying families and helping children formally
associated with armed groups, survivors of sexual
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

violence, children with disabilities, children who are
separated from their parents and detained children is
not a simple thing, but a commitment.
Naturally, carrying out those functions makes
me sad and brings back many bad and sad memories.
But I am also happy that the world today knows, at
the very least, what child protection, mental health
and psychosocial support are and what they do. Not
enough has been done, which is a shame since there is
no excuse or reason for not knowing the harsh situation
of those children.
Yes, we can switch off our televisions when it
shows children with war trauma, but one minute later
we will see it on our daily Twitter news feed or in our
Instagram stories or we will see bloody pictures of
wounded children on the leading international news
websites. It is here and now. We cannot deny it anymore
like the world did when I was a child.
In 2018, almost 50 million children were
in need of protection in humanitarian settings.
Yet child protection has not been systematically
prioritized during humanitarian responses. It remains
underfunded, deprioritized and even too late when
children’s lives are at risk. During a crisis, children
are among the most vulnerable. They are exposed
to life-threatening risks, extreme violence, abuse,
physical and sexual exploitation, abduction or military
recruitment — voluntary or forceful. Child protection
programmes are essential for preventing violence
against children, facilitating family tracing and
reunification and ensuring proper and timely referrals
of children in need of health care, food, education and
psychosocial support.
My appeal to the Security Council is to ensure that
children affected by conflict get the full support they
need to heal their physical and psychological wounds.
Otherwise, their past will become their burden.
We know that today about 420 million children are
growing up in conflict-affected zones. One of five will
require urgent psychosocial support. In South Sudan
alone, 19,000 children are associated with armed
groups or forces. Every year, at least $200 million of
humanitarian aid is needed to scale up basic mental
health care packages to reach children and adolescents
in conflict zones. Additional support is needed for
comprehensive child protection, case management,
including reintegration, and livelihood and education
programmes in order to provide individualized, gender-

S/PV. 8591

sensitive support to address affected children’s needs.
What can the Governments in this Chamber do?
First, I call on them to promote the right to mental
health and psychological well-being in international
forums and to integrate mental health in their national
laws, policies and emergency plans. All Governments
should commit to increase their mental health spending
allocation to at least 5 per cent of their total health
budget. That should be in addition to budget allocations
within their relevant sectors.
Secondly, I urge them to invest in child protection
systems and services at the national, regional, and
international levels. That includes increased longterm funding for reintegration programmes for former
child soldiers, like me, as well as support services for
survivors of sexual violence, children with disabilities
and others in need, family tracing and reunification
for those separated from their parents or guardians
and timely referrals for children in need of health care,
food, education, shelter and psychosocial support.
Thirdly, I encourage them to ensure that United
Nations peace operations and political missions have
the necessary resources to advance the children
and armed conflict agenda. Such funding should be
structured as long-term funding, rather than bursts
of short-cycle humanitarian funding. That will allow
multi-year interventions, in line with the long-term
impact of war on children and the necessary deep
social transformation to address factors that predispose
children to recruitment. Where missions are downsized
or transitioning, we must make sure that United Nations
country teams are equipped to carry out those functions.
And, lastly, I urge them to take action to address
the ongoing violation of children’s rights. That includes
calling on all countries to endorse the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers and the Paris
Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with
Armed Forces or Armed Groups, and putting pressure
on them to end and prevent grave violations against
children, as well as to prioritize justice for crimes
against children. Only through those measures will
we be able to contribute to improving the lives of our
youngest citizens in our global villages.
For me personally, the main character of a good
and nice village is social cohesion — the duty to watch
after each other. This is true for the elderly, but also
for our children — especially those who cannot stand

19-243539/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

up for their own rights or grow up in conflict-affected
zones. That is exactly how we lived in my village when
I was that smiling 5-year-old boy — not driven by any
materials wants, but by love, tenderness and the hope
for children to grow up peacefully.
We can no longer ignore the facts, we can no
longer wait, and we cannot we stand still. Please take
responsibility as the adults of our global village and
take care of our children in conflict-affected zones. The
worlds is engulfed by wars and conflict in Asia, Africa,
the Middle East and the rest of the globe. Children are
the victims of such wars. We must redouble our efforts
and support our children for the betterment of our
global village. We are all inhabitants of the same global
village. It is therefore time to act accordingly, since no
child should ever be part of war.
The President: I thank Mr. Awan for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland.
First, let me thank the Secretary-General for his
latest annual report (S/2019/509). We particularly
welcome the focus in this year’s report on prevention
and reintegration efforts. I also commend the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative for
their commitment and continued efforts to mainstream
the issue of children in armed conflict as a priority on
international agendas.
I would also like to thank Ms. Henrietta Fore,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s
Fund, for her tireless and dedicated work. In addition,
we highly appreciate the moving and inspirational
testimonies of Ms. Mariatu Kamara and Mr. Majok
Peter Awan.
For the first time in the Security Council, the
intention to pay serious attention to the situation of
children affected by armed conflict was voiced through
a presidential statement (S/PRST/1998/18) during
the Portuguese presidency in 1998. Since then, in the
Chamber we have agreed on a number of legal and
systemic improvements — to name but a few, resolution
1261 (1999), which placed the issue of children affected
by conflict on the Security Council agenda; resolution
1612 (2005), which appointed the working group; and
resolution 1882 (2009), which extended the list of
triggers of the six grave violations against children by
adding sexual violence against children to the nexus in
the Secretary-General’s annual reports.
10/90

02/08/2019

Notwithstanding those efforts, we still struggle to
provide the right protection and preventive measures
for girls and boys caught in conflict settings as we face
a severe reality of complex crises and new conflict
dynamics. The number of verified cases is still striking
and the full scale of violence, neglect and exploitation
still remains unknown. In 2018, despite some positive
developments on the ground, the report (S/2019/509)
identifies more than 20 countries with verified cases
of grave violations against children and an alarming
increase in incidents involving State actors.
Children are among the first victims of war and
violence. The Secretary-General’s report shows that in
conflicts around the world children are being maimed,
abducted, attacked in schools and hospitals, recruited
to fight, sexually abused and denied humanitarian
aid. Such traumas deprive them of their childhood and
dignity and leave permanent marks on their adult lives.
Most of the current conflicts originate from poor
political and economic governance, violations of
fundamental human rights and freedoms, impunity,
corruption, injustice and inequalities. We should start
every single discussion by acknowledging the most
obvious truth, namely, that addressing the root causes
of conflicts, prevention and finding political solutions
should come before anything else.
Conflict and post-conflict periods deprive children
of one of their basic needs and rights — safety. Their
protection and the prevention of grave violations are
a fundamental priority within the United Nations
mandate to safeguard civilians and put human rights
at the centre of peace and security efforts. The issue
of child protection should be taken into account in
all phases of the conflict cycle: mediation, ceasefire,
peacekeeping, peace talks and post-conflict situations.
Protecting children affected by armed conflict is a
joint responsibility that requires a collective response to
all forms of violence. Still, for the protection mandates to
be more effectively executed by the United Nations, the
bottom-up approach must be one of the principles. That
should be achieved by extending and supporting the role
of child protection advisers responsible for addressing
child rights and protection issues at all stages of the
peacebuilding process, as well as protection actors on
the ground, including those based in the community.
Last year, child protection actors were able to support
the reintegration of more than 13,600 children.
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

The protection of vulnerable and fragile groups
of children, namely, refugees, internally displaced
persons and children with war trauma, remains one
of the priorities of Polish development cooperation.
Poland has been assisting the youngest victims of
conflict in eastern Ukraine with psychological support
and has been providing the most basic needs, shelter,
rehabilitation and education in the Middle East.
In that context, we want to reiterate our strong
support for the efforts of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and UNICEF in drawing
attention to the importance of reintegration
programmes that benefit children formerly associated
with armed groups. We are also very honoured to
serve as a member of the steering committee of the
Global Coalition for the Reintegration of Former Child
Soldiers, as well as a member of the Group of Friends of
Reintegration of Child Soldiers. Poland strongly calls
for full inclusiveness of the reintegration programmes
and underlines the fundamental importance of the
community-based approach, including the role of local
and religious leaders in supporting the fight against the
stigmatization of children previously associated with
armed conflicts.
The scale of violation and suffering of children often
remains unnoticed despite the heroic and persistent
efforts of humanitarian, social and protection officers
around the world. Earlier this year, the Office of the
Special Representative launched the global advocacy
campaign Act to Protect. Let us therefore reflect on
ways that the Act to Protect advocacy campaign could
further serve as a genuine and measurable tool in
accelerating progress on the ground.
Resolution 1882 (2009) fed into the process of
strengthening the zero-tolerance approach towards
killing, maiming, rape and other violations of a sexual
nature against children. We renewed our commitment
to safeguarding children against sexual violence in the
recent resolutions 2427 (2018) and 2467 (2019).
During an armed conflict, children with disabilities
are more likely than others to experience violence.
Also, the fundamental legal framework is in place and
efforts to ensure the fulfilment of their rights have
improved. Girls and boys with disabilities continue to
remain among the most marginalized and exploited.
The further strengthening of the foundations for
the protection of the most vulnerable groups is critical.
Poland actively participated in the process through the

S/PV. 8591

adoption of resolution 2475 (2019), on persons with
disabilities, which stresses the specific needs of those
with disabilities in armed conflict.
What I believe we all wish to achieve is to give
children their childhood back and to stop the cycle of
violence. We should act together in order to achieve
that goal.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Allow me first of all to thank all the briefers for their
valuable contributions. I would like to especially thank
Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan for their moving and very
courageous testimony and for today recalling today
of what is at stake in this debate. It is not a question
of talking or holding philosophical, unproductive and
academic discussions. We are talking about real lives,
people’s lives and the lives of thousands and thousands
of children who are victims of armed conflict.
This open debate marks the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1882 (2009), as a number of
speakers have mentioned. While considerable progress
has been made over the past decade, this year’s annual
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/509) reflects
a number of unprecedented serious violations against
children since monitoring began. Belgium is deeply
concerned by the particularly high number of child
victims and calls on all parties to take measures to
protect children in accordance with the principles
of distinction and proportionality. The increase in
protracted conflicts around the world, and long-lasting
wars, causes greater indirect damage and affects more
and more children. The shift of conflict to urban
areas and the use of long-range explosive weapons in
populated areas have devastating effects on boys and
girls. Belgium is particularly alarmed by the use of
the refusal of humanitarian aid as a weapon of war,
preventing children from having access to life-saving
assistance. At the same time, the data on the serious
violations committed against children are considered
underestimates due to lack of access, stigma and the
fear of reprisal. Our work is therefore far from over.
In its capacity as Chair of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, Belgium helped to build
consensus on two sets of conclusions. One concerns
serious violations of children’s rights in Syria and the
other in Myanmar. The unity of the Security Council on
those two situations is an important signal.

19-2435311/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

Belgium supports the mandate and work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict. As such, we mobilize
all the instruments at our disposal. We have organized
joint meetings with the sanctions committees focused
on following up on the Working Group’s previous
conclusions and have organized videoconferences with
field missions before the renewal of their mandates.
Finally, we want to integrate the dimension of children
and armed conflict in all the work of the Security
Council. We propose that the Special Representative
regularly address the Council on national situations, as
has already been the case for Yemen and the Central
African Republic. The United Nations monitoring
and reporting mechanism is essential to that mandate.
The annual report of the Secretary-General, based on
factual and verified information, is a fundamental tool
for engaging in dialogue with the parties to conflicts
and for achieving concrete commitments through, inter
alia, national action plans. Such an approach is essential
to maintaining the credibility and independence of the
children and armed conflict mandate. That would be
the best way to make real change for children affected
by conflict.
The effective implementation of the children and
armed conflict agenda is a responsibility that we all
share. That implies the maintenance of a specialized
child protection capacity within United Nations
peacekeeping and political missions. It also means
prioritizing child protection concerns. But let us
not forget prevention. It is in the name of prevention
that we must work for the long-term comprehensive
reintegration of children, investing in programmes that
provide individualized support that address protection,
psychosocial support and education needs. Experience
shows that children who have gone through such
programmes become less vulnerable to re-recruitment
by armed groups. Through reintegration, boys and girls
have an opportunity to build a life away from conflict
and to move towards the future without being haunted
by the past. While prevention is obviously preferable,
Belgium also recalls the need to bring to justice those
responsible for war crimes and other serious violations
of international law and human rights law, including,
where appropriate, through full cooperation with the
International Criminal Court.
In conclusion, I would like to point out that Belgium
fully associates itself with the statements of the
12/90

02/08/2019

European Union and the Group of Friends on Children
and Armed Conflict to be delivered later.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
As this is the first time that I am attending a formal
meeting of the Security Council since I assumed my
role as the Permanent Representative of China five
days ago, please allow me to take this opportunity to
extend my cordial greetings to you, Mr. President, and
the colleagues present. I look forward to working with
you, Sir, and every colleague in close communication,
coordination and cooperation.
China thanks Peru for its productive work as
President of the Council for the month of July and
congratulates Poland on its assumption of the Council
presidency for the month of August. We welcome
Mr. Czaputowicz, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Poland, who is presiding over this
meeting. We give special thanks to Ms. Gamba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict; Ms. Fore, Executive Director of
the United Nations Children’s Fund; and the two other
briefers for their statements, which were very moving.
Children are the hope of every country. Caring for
children is protecting our future. In recent years the
international community has made tremendous efforts
to protect children affected by conflicts and achieved
positive progress, but armed conflicts, far from being
eliminated, have intensified. As was pointed out by
Ms. Gamba in her statement, 12,000 children died or
were maimed in 2018, setting a new record high. That
record high serves as a sad reminder that we have a heavy
and arduous responsibility to protect children from the
scourge of war so that they can grow up in safety and
security. China opposes and condemns violations of
children’s rights and interests in armed conflicts and
supports the efforts of the United Nations and the
Security Council to protect children in armed conflicts.
I would like to emphasize the following points.
First, achieving peace provides the best protection
for children. As children bear the brunt of war and
conflicts, preventing, resolving and diffusing conflicts
is a top priority. That is the fundamental way out. Being
the primary organ for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Security Council should
fulfil its duties by using all political means, such as
mediation, good offices, dialogue and negotiation,
as is stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations,
promote cooperation with regional and subregional
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

organizations and support and urge parties to a conflict
to resolve disputes by peaceful means so as to create a
safe environment for children to grow up.
Secondly, we should support the countries concerned
as they take up their primary responsibilities. The key to
implementing resolution 1882 (2009), on the protection
of children affected by armed conflict, lies in the
efforts and cooperation of the Governments concerned.
The international community should fully respect the
leadership of the countries concerned, enhance dialogue
and communication and provide effective support and
assistance in addressing difficulties, including financial
and technical assistance. In the long run, sustainable
development is the foundation underpinning lasting
peace. The international community should respect
and guarantee the rights of the countries concerned and
their status as developing countries.
Thirdly, we should forge synergy in international
efforts to tackle both the symptoms and the root
causes of problems. In the collective endeavour of
the international community to resolve conflicts, the
protection of children should be treated as an integral
part and given full attention in political negotiations
and peace agreements. In advancing the post-conflict
reconstruction and peacebuilding strategy, we should
give priority to children’s return to school and
reintegration in society and enhancing child-protection
mechanisms. Adequate financial resources should be
provided and development assistance scaled up. The
countries concerned should be actively supported in
their efforts to eradicate poverty, promote education and
protect children’s rights. China is ready to work with all
parties in that respect so that children in conflict areas
can bid farewell to weapons, stay away from war, lead
a happy life, with dignity, and create a bright future for
themselves, their countries and the world, at large.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Côte
d’Ivoire congratulates Poland on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and wishes it every
success. We also congratulate the delegation of Peru for
an excellent presidency in July.
My delegation welcomes the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Poland, who is presiding over today’s open
debate on children and armed conflict. It demonstrates
that your country, Mr President, is interested in solving
the problem. We also cordially welcome Ambassador
Zhang Jun, Permanent Representative of China.

S/PV. 8591

My delegation congratulates Ms. Virginia Gamba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, on her briefing on the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/509). We also
commend Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of
UNICEF and Ms. Mariatu Kamara and Mr. Majok
Peter Awan, civil society representatives, for their
illuminating briefings.
In recent years, the issue of the protection of
children in armed conflict has been a source of concern
for the international community, in particular the
Security Council, whose commitment to the subject is
reflected through its adoption of resolution 2427 (2018),
That resolution provides an adequate framework for
protecting the rights of the child and promoting the wellbeing and empowerment of children throughout the
conflict cycle as well as during peacebuilding. However,
my delegation notes that, in spite of the relevant legal
norms, as underscored in the report, the fate of children
in armed conflict is increasingly worrisome.
In 2018, the United Nations documented and
reported more than 24,000 violations of all kinds
of which children were victims in 21 countries, as
compared to 21,000 in 2017. In addition, according to
the monitoring and reporting mechanism created by
resolution 1612 (2005), the total number of children
murdered or maimed rose to 12,038. Against that
already grim backdrop, there is also a growing trend
of using child soldiers to carry out suicide attacks or
as human shields, as well as of destroying schools and
health facilities, which deprives thousands of children
of their right to education and health.
Côte d’Ivoire believes that cooperation among
affected States, the United Nations and bilateral partners
must be strengthened in order to prevent and combat
violations of all kinds that undermine the well-being
and development of many children. The SecretaryGeneral’s guidelines with respect to the commitment of
the parties to conflict and the responsibility borne by
Governments with regard to the protection of children
affected by armed conflict, which align perfectly with
the provisions of resolution 1539 (2004) and 1612
(2005), are, for my country, the relevant measures that
enabled tangible progress to be made on the ground.
Today’s debate provides my delegation with an
opportunity to humbly recall that, Côte d’Ivoire, which
was listed in the annex to the Secretary-General’s
reports on the plight of children in armed conflict from

19-2435313/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

2003 to 2006, during its sociopolitical crisis, provides
a good example of implementing an action plan for the
protection of children in armed conflict. As early as
2005, the Forces armées des forces nouvelles signed
with the United Nations the first-ever action plan for
the protection of children in armed conflict.
Thanks to the collaboration between the United
Nations and partner non-governmental organizations,
that action plan and those that followed allowed for the
release of hundreds of children and for them to return
to school and reintegrate into society. In addition,
national efforts resulted in bringing together former
child soldiers in a transit centre in order to facilitate
their social reintegration through skills-training and
schooling. Progress recorded in 2007 showed that
Côte d’Ivoire was the first country to be removed
from the annex to the Secretary-General’s reports on
the plight of children in armed conflict. That outcome
demonstrates that excellent cooperation among affected
States, the United Nations and international partners in
implementing international norms and reintegration
programmes remain indispensable to the protection of
children in armed conflict.
Côte d’Ivoire encourages the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to continue her efforts with
all parties with a view to integrating the protection of
children into initiatives to resolve conflicts and build
peace. We believe that achieving that goal requires
adequate training in all components of security
institutions. From 10 March 2004, the authorities of
Côte d’Ivoire have included training on the protection
of the rights of the child in the training manuals at
military training schools, including for combat units,
by employing decentralized focal points throughout the
country. All of Côte d’Ivoire’s military regions today
have in place a unit for the protection of the rights of
the child.
Côte d’Ivoire also believes that the protection
of children in conflict must be accompanied by the
strict application of the principle of accountability for
armed organizations or groups that use child soldiers,
encourage them to engage in violent extremism or
reduce them to sexual slavery. We also underscore the
essential role of civil society organizations in raising
awareness and developing and implementing assistance
programmes for affected States in transition.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its support
for the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
14/90

02/08/2019

UNICEF and all relevant actors, and encourages them
to continue their efforts to protect children in general,
and, in particular, children who are the victims of abuse
of all kinds in armed conflict.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
We congratulate Poland on its assumption of the
Security Council presidency for August and for holding
today’s annual open debate as the first signature event of
its presidency. Your presence here today, Mr. President,
underscores the urgent need to collectively address the
issue of children and armed conflict around the world.
We would also like to take this opportunity to thank
Peru for its presidency in facilitating a productive
month of July.
We, too, would like to welcome Ambassador Zhang
Jun to the Council.
We also thank Special Representative Gamba and
UNICEF Executive Director Henrietta Fore for their
briefings today. I would like to join other colleagues in
thanking Mariatu Kamara and Majok Peter Awan for
their incredible determination and moving testimonies
today, which, as others have said, take us beyond the
discussions and compel us to act in a meaningful way.
I thank them very much for being here and sharing
their stories. Their advocacy has helped focus the
world’s attention to children in armed conflict and
reminds us of our responsibility as Member States to
protect civilians from harm, especially children. We
are proud of the work of our partners to better protect
children affected by armed conflict all over the world.
The United States strongly supports UNICEF in its
mandate to protect and assist children all over the
world, including specialized support for the survivors
of violence and assured access for children to a range
of life-saving assistance, including nutrition, health,
water and sanitation.
Majok Peter Awan’s testimony, as a former child
soldier and now a United Nations child protection
officer, is particularly inspiring for all of us here today.
As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/509) this
year starkly makes clear, the number of children killed,
kidnapped, maimed and used and abused is even more
staggering today than it was when the Council began to
collectively address children and armed conflict more
than a decade ago. The United States remains fully
committed to the critical work of the United Nations and
the Office of the Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict in ending the impact of conflict
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

on children wherever possible to prevent their future
involvement in war and to assist affected children in
recovering from violent conflict. Our actions taken
today to protect children from armed conflict will
matter in the years ahead for future generations, as
Ms. Kamara so eloquently said. Protecting children
today means staving off future conflict and the radical
radicalization to violence of scores of young people.
We appreciate the particular focus on the needs of the
disabled, making sure that they, too, are reintegrated.
The United States remains deeply concerned about
continuing violations and abuse against children,
particularly in Burma, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Mali, the Sudan, South Sudan, Somalia and
Syria. The United States welcomes the great progress
achieved by the Council’s Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict in recent days to adopt conclusions
on Burma and Syria with the consensus of all 15
Council members. We commend Belgium’s leadership
as Chair of the Working Group and for facilitating these
important discussions.
Moreover, the United States endorses the Working
Group’s conclusions reiterating that the regimes in both
Damascus and Naypyitaw must immediately address
the Council’s calls to take steps to halt the recruitment
and use of children. While we acknowledge that the
Working Group has achieved progress with the adoption
of its recent Burma and Syria conclusions, much more
remains to be done.
The United States is committed to better integrating
the children and armed conflict agenda when we discuss
conflict situations in the Security Council. The United
States will continue to address ways to strengthen
the protection of children across all of the Security
Council mandates.
We further welcome the signing by the Syrian
Democratic Forces of an action plan to end and prevent
the recruitment and use of children in Syria. We also
commend the efforts made by the Government of
Yemen and the coalition to strengthen child-protection
issues. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
efforts by United Nations child-protection specialists
to work with the Government resulted in 14 armedgroup commanders renouncing the recruitment of child
soldiers, releasing all child soldiers from their ranks and
allowing the United Nations to verify that commitment.
In the Central African Republic, the engagement
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated

S/PV. 8591

Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
with armed groups on action plans to protect children
appear to offer the same inroads for education and
change. In both of these cases, the immediate goal is
to protect children from violations and abuses in the
context of armed conflict. By engaging with armed
groups, building trust and offering alternatives to
violence, United Nations actors on the ground are able
to open up new possibilities for sustainable peace.
For our part, the United States continues to prioritize
child-protection programming that is life-saving and
essential for survival as well as longer-term recovery,
resilience and healing. We will continue to invest in
preventive and responsive programming to protect
children from violence. We know that the resumption
of familiar, safe and nurturing routines, particularly
within a family, helps children heal, build resilience and
better cope with stress. The United States calls on all
countries to join our efforts and increase contributions,
so as to do their part to help children in need of safety,
food and other life-saving interventions.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to commend the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Poland on his commitment to the rights of children. I
also thank Ms. Mariatu Kamara; Mr. Majok Peter Awan;
and the Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Henrietta
Fore, for their statements.
This year we mark the thirtieth anniversary of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the sixtieth
anniversary of the Declaration on the Rights of the
Child and, in two days’ time, the tenth anniversary
of resolution 1882 (2009), submitted at the initiative
of France and adopted unanimously by the Council.
This is an opportunity to take stock not only of the
progress made, with more than 130,000 children freed
in approximately 20 years, but also of the considerable
challenges ahead. In 2018, there were 25,000 verified
violations, including 12,000 killings and cases of
maiming. This is an inadmissible record, and that is
why the Council must step up its action in order to
better protect the more than 200 million children who
are confronted daily with a situation of war.
We commend the role of Belgium as Chair of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
We must use all the tools available to us to protect
children. First and foremost, we must make full use
of the mechanisms created by the Council. Resolution
1882 (2009) in particular strengthened the monitoring

19-2435315/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

and reporting mechanism, which must remain at
the heart of our strategy. I would like to commend
the Special Representative on her recent visits to the
Central African Republic and to Mali, which are vital
in order to establish a dialogue with the authorities and
with armed groups. Such visits are imperative. We are
encouraged by the signing of additional plans of action
by the Central African Patriotic Movement and the
Syrian Democratic Forces, which we hope will lead to
positive results.
Child-protection advisers also play a key role.
We owe them, for instance, the successes obtained
by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
and the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It is vital that their functions and specific roles be
maintained within peacekeeping operations. I welcome
also the adoption by the Working Group of the
conclusions on Syria and on Burma, which now must
be fully implemented.
Lastly, I would like to reiterate the importance
of the annexes to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/509), which list the parties to armed conflict
that commit violations against children. Their role as
a deterrent and a motivating force needs no further
demonstration. It must be made clear that no party
will be struck from these annexes without first
having demonstrated real progress. Resolution 1882
(2008) defines sexual violence as a criterion for the
inscription of parties on the blacklist. However, we
must acknowledge that 10 years later we have not put
an end to such violence and must therefore redouble
our efforts. The cooperation between the two Special
Representatives on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and for Children and Armed Conflict is vital. Their
interaction with the sanctions committees and the
exchange of information on individual cases must also
be further bolstered.
We must also step up our efforts to prevent violations
and reintegrate children who are victims of conflict. On
31 October 2017, the French Minister for Europe and
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, presided over
an open debate in the Security Council (see S/PV.8082)
and proposed measures based on prevention and the
reintegration of children. Bearing this in mind, we call
once again on those States that have not yet done so
to adopt the constitutional bloc to protect children in
conflict by signing and ratifying the Optional Protocol
16/90

02/08/2019

to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and by
endorsing the Paris Commitments to protect children
from unlawful recruitment or use by armed forces
or groups; the Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups (Paris
Principles); the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping
and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers; and the Safe Schools Declaration.
This legal corpus must be fully implemented,
which involves punishing and trying those responsible
for grave crimes against children through the use of
national, joint or international legal mechanisms. This
involves also ensuring access by children to education,
health care and other essential services in safe schools
and hospitals. This is a priority of President Macron,
who decided that France would contribute €200 million
to the Global Compact on education and set up
innovative financing by focusing as a priority on the
education and empowerment of girls.
France is furthermore fully committed to the
reintegration of children, not only as co-Chair of the
Group of Friends of Reintegration of Child Soldiers,
but also and especially on the ground, including in the
Central African Republic, where France is funding
several projects related to the access to education.
We will continue to play an active role in shielding
children from the suffering of war. We often say that
children represent the future and coming generations
and that they are the condition of a lasting peace, but
protecting them is also a universal moral obligation,
and we must redouble our efforts.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to begin by congratulating Poland
on having assumed for the second time the presidency
of the Security Council, as well as by expressing our
gratitude and appreciation to His Excellency Minister
Mr. Jacek Czaputowicz, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Poland, for having convened this open debate on
the extremely complex, important and timely topic of
children and armed conflict. We are very pleased that
he has travelled to New York to preside over this debate.
At this time, we would like to congratulate
Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra on Peru’s
successful presidency of the Security Council during
the month of July. We also welcome Ambassador Zhang
Jun among us.
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

We would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba, as well as
our guests, Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director
of the United Nations Children’s Fund, Ms. Mariatu
Kamara and Mr. Majok Peter Awan, for their important
and informative briefings.
The Government of Equatorial Guinea is extremely
concerned that a year ago the Security Council adopted
its twelfth resolution on children and armed conflict
(resolution 2427 (2018)), with the aim of addressing the
widespread impact of armed conflict on children and
the long-term consequences of this impact on peace,
security and sustainable development (see S/PV.8305)).
Despite the fact that, since the publication of the historic
Graça Machel report (A/51/306) in 1998, progress has
been made in advancing the protection of the rights of
children in situations of armed conflict, the statistical
figures provided in the annual report of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations (S/2019/509), which
covers the period from January to December 2018,
illustrate great violations against children both in
situations included in the agenda of the Council and
in those that are not: recruitment, exploitation, killing,
abduction, rape, mutilation and all forms of sexual
violence, attacks on schools and hospitals and the denial
of access to humanitarian aid. More than 24,000 grave
violations against children in 20 countries have been
documented. Even more seriously, the report indicates
that the number of violations attributed to State actors
and international forces is increasing, while those
attributed to non-State actors have remained stable.
Today we have witnessed two moving stories told
in the first person by two young people who have lived
the horror and meaninglessness of war in their very
own flesh. Their stories, however, are two stories of
overcoming, of resilience and extraordinary fortitude.
These stories should never have happened, but they did
happen, and they are happening every day; while we are
sitting here, they are happening. Right now, in South
Sudan, in the Central African Republic, in Yemen, in
Syria, in Libya, and many other places, thousands of
children are still being recruited to fight adult wars. In
the twenty-first century, they continue to be exploited,
brutalized, raped, mutilated, mercilessly murdered.
These barbaric acts remain ongoing.
Where is the progress that humankind claims to
have achieved? Let us not fool ourselves. We are all
fathers and mothers. As long as the children of some

S/PV. 8591

may enjoy a full childhood and those of others have
to lose their innocence fighting wars from the age
of five, humankind has not made and will not make
progress. I sincerely thank Mariatu and Majok Peter for
their courageous testimony. Let us seriously consider
adhering to the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping
and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers in order to make a better village.
In conclusion, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
applauds the release and reintegration of 13,600
children, and expresses its support for efforts to protect
children in armed conflict, thanking and congratulating
UNICEF and non-governmental and civil society
organizations that are sparing no effort in their noble
work to protect children. In addition, we call on all
States Members of the United Nations to continue to
support the implementation of action plans and other
commitments to strengthen the protection of children
in armed conflict.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I would like to
thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland, His
Excellency Mr. Jacek Czaputowicz, for convening this
important debate.
Today some 420 million children worldwide are
affected by conflict. We therefore face the real danger
that the Security Council sits idly by as a whole
generation of children grows up without knowing
peace and without having access to basic services and
education. We need to change that, and I would like
to extend our utmost appreciation to Ms. Kamara and
Mr. Awan for briefly showing us the way forward and
reminding us of the brutal realities on the ground. I
also thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Gamba for Children and Armed Conflict and
Ms. Henrietta Fore for their outstanding and important
work. Germany is proud to be one of the largest donors
to UNICEF.
We take our commitment to children’s rights
seriously and see our engagement in the Working
Group on Children in Armed Conflict as an important
part of that. I would like to thank Belgium for its
excellent chairmanship of the Working Group. We are
pleased that under Belgium’s leadership the Group has
been able to agree on strong conclusions on Syria and
Myanmar this year and has developed more innovative
ways of following up on its conclusions. Let me focus
on three brief points.

19-2435317/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

First of all, on the United Nations framework for
children in armed conflict, we welcome the annual
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/509) and note
the listings contained in the annexes. We are aware that
this is not an easy exercise, but there is intrinsic value
in the report and the listing. It will open further avenues
for engagement by the United Nations. We would
therefore encourage Special Representative Gamba to
continue to work towards concluding and implementing
action plans with the listed parties and further engage
the countries mentioned in the narrative of the report.
In this vein, we also welcome Special Representative
Gamba’s recent travel to Mali and the Central African
Republic, her recent public statements about situations
of concern and her successful efforts to conclude an
action plan with the Syrian Democratic Forces. We
encourage her to dig even deeper into the issue of
children deprived of liberty for alleged association
with armed groups, for example in Nigeria and Iraq.
We will specifically be providing funding to her Office
to engage in more regional prevention programmes as
per resolution 2427 (2018).
We also very much appreciate her cooperation with
the European Union and with NATO, where we have
supported the position of Senior Children and Armed
Conflict Adviser. Since much of the work on children in
armed conflict is entrusted to child-protection advisers
in United Nations peacekeeping operations, Germany
underlines the need United Nations missions to be given
adequate resources in this regard, which is especially
important since human rights and other protection
functions have in some cases been consolidated, and
thus the distinct role of child-protection adviser needs
to be preserved.
Secondly, let me say a few words on the grave
violations described in the report. We deeply regret,
as many speakers before is have, that 10 years after
the adoption of resolution 1882 (2009), there seems
to be no end in sight for the killing and maiming of
children. In fact, we have been reminded of the fact
that the numbers are unfortunately at a record high.
The Secretary-General has identified Afghanistan,
Syria and Yemen as cases of particular concern. The
use of explosive weapons in populated areas needs to
be avoided at all costs in that regard. In Syria alone,
air strikes, barrel bombs and cluster munitions have
killed and maimed over 1,850 children, which is both
unacceptable and tragically unnecessary.
18/90

02/08/2019

We also deeply concerned about sexual and genderbased violence, the levels of which are constantly
underreported in the monitoring and reporting
mechanisms, owing to the difficulty of verification.
Despite the strict verification requirements, the
Secretary-General was able to confirm appallingly
high figures in some cases in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Somalia, for example. In April this
year, the Security Council called for a more consistent
focus on the gender-specific nature of sexual violence
against all affected populations, including men and
boys, and recognized the situation of children born out
of sexual violence. We will keep our attention on these
issues and we need to ensure non-discriminatory and
multisectoral assistance to all child survivors of sexual
violence. That also must include access to sexual and
reproductive health services.
Finally, as initiators of resolution 1998 (2011), on
attacks on schools and hospitals, we condemn all such
attacks, which contravene international law, in the
strongest terms. We have seen such attacks in Syria and
Afghanistan. With 225 recorded attacks on schools and
hospitals in Syria, the number for 2018 was at an alltime high since the beginning of the conflict. We urge
all States to sign on to the Safe Schools Declaration.
Germany is working hard to ensure compliance
with international humanitarian law so as to prevent
all six grave violations documented by the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2019/509). That is why, together
with France, we are drawing up a humanitarian call for
action to improve compliance with international law and
humanitarian principles, to be presented in September.
In that context, we particularly look forward to the
upcoming debate about the Geneva Conventions, under
the Polish presidency’s initiative.
Lastly, I want to share a few words on accountability
and integration. In our view, the most effective way
to prevent grave violations is to ensure that there
is accountability instead of impunity. Impunity
regarding violations against children must be stopped.
In Myanmar, for example, accountability for mass
atrocities, including sexual violence, killings and
maimings in Rakhine, is wanting.
Germany also reiterates its fullest confidence
in the work of the International Criminal Court in
ensuring accountability as well as that of international
investigative mechanisms, such as those set up by the
Human Rights Council. It is clear, however, that for
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

long-term reconciliation and reintegration of children
affected by armed conflict, we need community-based
programmes anchored in a child-rights approach that
complements accountability mechanisms. All too
often, staying with armed groups appears to be a more
viable option for children than being released into an
environment with no basic services, no education and,
crucially, no psychosocial support. That underlines the
urgent need for more predictable long-term resources
for integration, and we are encouraged by the work of
UNICEF and the Special Representative in looking at
reintegration more fundamentally. We hope to soon be
able to examine concrete suggestions for improvement.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we congratulate Poland on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of August.
We also thank Poland’s Minister for Foreign Affairs
for convening this important meeting on children and
armed conflict, which is a priority for Peru. We also
thank you, Sir, and other colleagues for their kind
words on Peru’s presidency for the month of July.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, Ms. Henrietta Fore of UNICEF,
Ms. Mariatu Kamara and Mr. Majok Peter Awan for
their briefings.
Peru is fully committed to the agenda of children and
armed conflict. Children are one of the most vulnerable
segments of the population due to their helplessness
and dependence. In situations of armed conflict,
humanitarian crises and forced displacement, that
vulnerability increases exponentially, to the detriment
of their right to grow and develop in an environment
of sustainable peace. Special mention should be made
of the situation of girls in such scenarios. Sexual
exploitation, gender-based violence and trafficking in
persons are illicit acts that increase their vulnerability
and undermine their physical safety, empowerment and
attainment of gender equality.
With regard to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/509), Peru is concerned about the serious
violations of children’s rights and brings them to the
attention of State actors who, through their action or
inaction, have contributed to the spread of those crimes.
Peru condemns all forms of violence against children,
including physical and psychological violence. It is
incumbent on the Council and on the States Members
of the United Nations to recommit to implementing

S/PV. 8591

urgent and effective measures to halt and reverse this
trend. It is undoubtedly a question of emphasizing not
only preventive and rehabilitative measures, but also
corrective measures that involve sanctions that serve as
an example in order to ensure the well-being of children.
Peru endorses the Secretary-General’s appeal to
the actors involved to take all necessary actions to
prevent the serious violations described in his report.
In that regard, it highlights the need to establish
synergies among the various United Nations agencies,
Member States and civil society organizations, taking
into consideration the most relevant international
instruments that form part of the global institutional
framework to address this problem.
In that regard, Peru highlights the contribution
made by the Safe Schools Declaration, the Principles
and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed
Forces or Armed Groups and the Vancouver Principles
on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers, which provide guidelines for
protecting children against their recruitment and use by
armed forces or armed groups, allowing their release
and achieving their effective social reintegration.
In that connection, Peru believes that the
rehabilitation of children affected by armed conflict is
of paramount importance, as it not only restores their
dignity and hope, but also empowers them as active
promoters of peace. We therefore stress the importance
of promoting psychological, educational and
professional training programmes that will contribute
their full rehabilitation and social inclusion.
Within the framework of peace operations, it is
also indispensable to establish special and priority
mechanisms for the protection of children in conflict,
as well as to offer adequate training on this topic to
troop-contributing countries.
In conclusion, I wish to offer Peru’s full support for
the work of the Special Representative and commend
the priority that the Secretary-General attaches to
this issue as a vital element of the establishment of
sustainable peace. In the light of the complex situation
that has been set out today and in the context of its firm
commitment to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, Peru will continue to
work constructively on behalf of children in armed
conflict with a view to ensure their well-being and
guarantee their exercises of their fundamental rights.

19-2435319/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

Mrs. Cedano (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): We welcome the convening of this important
meeting and thank the briefers for their presentations.
We also thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
the representative of UNICEF and the other relevant
actors for their work, and reiterate the Dominican
Republic’s support for the agenda of children and
armed conflict within the framework of the Council.
The testimonies of Ms. Mariatu Kamara and Mr. Majok
Peter Awan confirm the importance of the agenda and
call on us to promote it through action.
We believe it is critical to increase the capacities of
United Nations peacekeeping and political missions by
granting them the resources and ability needed to protect
children in conflict. That includes equipping them with
child protection advisers, as well as prioritizing actions
with the affected communities in order to promote
early warning and protection mechanisms. We see
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
as a valuable tool for maintaining open channels of
communication with actors on the ground, as well as in
country-specific approaches.
The Dominican Republic is concerned about
the number of children whose lives are threatened
by indiscriminate attacks on civilian areas and
infrastructure. Last year, in Afghanistan alone, the
United Nations verified reports concerning 3,062
child victims, including 927 deaths and 2,135 cases
of mutilation.
The psychological effects on a child victim of
sexual violence have unimaginable consequences. We
must therefore prioritize concrete measures to prevent
and respond to sexual violence in conflict, as well
as to identify those responsible and ensure that the
perpetrators pay for their horrendous acts.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/509)
highlights, for example, that in Yemen there were 275
incidents of denial of humanitarian access in 2018,
including restrictions on movement, interference in
the implementation of assistance, violence against
humanitarian personnel and attacks on water facilities.
Such events threaten the livelihoods of more than
7 million children in one of the most devastating
humanitarian crises in history.
The report also highlights that in Somalia, by
means of intimidation, a total of 2,228 boys and 72 girls
were recruited and used by parties to the conflict. That
20/90

02/08/2019

trend is repeated in many other contexts, not only in
Africa but also in the Middle East, and is used as a way
of perpetuating hatred and exclusion.
To break that cycle, we advocate for greater
protection of children and for the subsequent
reintegration of those recruited by armed groups. That
requires greater investment in education, training,
counselling and family reunification programmes.
Children too often continue to be stigmatized and
criminalized for acts that they were forced to commit.
All the aforementioned shows us that there is still a
long way to go to eradicate the abuses and horrors faced
by children in conflict that do so much harm to their
lives, well-being and development. In that context, last
February we endorsed the Principles and Guidelines
on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups and the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping
and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of
Child Soldiers.
In conclusion, children’s education is one of the
main rights affected and is very often the last to be
restored. In Syria, the hundreds of verified attacks on
schools have forced more than 2 million children to
interrupt their studies in order to save their lives. The
Dominican Republic is a signatory to the Safe Schools
Declaration as an initiative to raise awareness of the
reprehensible war practice of using school premises for
military purposes, and we advocate the immediate and
complete elimination of such a practice.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): At the outset, I would
like to thank Poland for organizing this open debate on
children and armed conflict. The debate is timely, as it
coincides with the celebration of the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1882 (2009), which gave an
additional emphasis to the children and armed conflict
agenda regarding the violations of killing, maiming and
sexual violence. We wish to congratulate Peru on its
successful presidency in July.
I would also like to thank all the briefers for
their insightful briefings and express my gratitude to
Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan for sharing with us their
stories as they journeyed through the valley of death to
freedom and its possibilities today.
It is concerning that a decade since the adoption
of resolution 1882 (2009), there are still thousands of
boys and girls killed, maimed and abducted, who fall
victim to sexual violence and who are denied access
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

to humanitarian assistance. Their basic rights to
education and health are threatened and their schools
and hospitals are closed or cease to function as a result
of violent attacks, as witnessed in many parts of the
world today.
We are deeply disturbed by the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2019/509), which states that more than 24,000
grave violations against children were verified by
the United Nations in 20 countries in 2018. Children
represent an alarming percentage of the overall number
of casualties of war as refugees, internally displaced
persons, unaccompanied minors, trafficked persons or
sexual slaves. Those are some of concerns to which we
are witness.
South Africa welcomes the efforts of Mrs. Gamba
de Potgieter, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, to sign
action plans with the parties to armed conflict so as to
end and prevent the recruitment and use of children, as
well as other grave violations. It is paramount that such
action plans be concrete and their timebound measures
be implemented.
We also commend Ms. Fore, Executive Director
of UNICEF, for the Fund’s rapid response to urgently
support children in emergencies and engagements with
all parties to negotiate humanitarian access and build
trust on all sides in order to serve children.
South Africa welcomes the release of 13,000
children from armed forces and armed groups.
However, we remain concerned about the manner
in which children are forced to take an active part in
hostilities, including carrying out suicide bombings
against civilians.
We call upon the armed groups to stop the
recruitment and use of children in armed forces, as
Mr. Awan justified this morning. We are aware that
children, particularly girls, associated with such armed
conflicts are vulnerable to sexual abuse, including
sexual slavery. Resolution 2467 (2019) is instrumental,
as it aims to prevent those grave violations and
provide for the protection of girls from sexual violence
during conflict.
The detention of children who are part of, or
perceived to be associated with, parties to conflict is
worrisome. It is important that such children be treated
primarily as victims. States have an obligation to ensure
that relevant programmes are put in place to ensure that

S/PV. 8591

children are reintegrated into society after they have
been released from armed groups. South Africa applauds
the measures put in place by countries such as the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic and South Sudan to improve the protection of
children and emphasizes that a greater focus needs to
be placed on extensive child reintegration programmes,
as was recommended by Ms. Kamara this morning.
We therefore commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and UNICEF for launching
the Global Coalition for the Reintegration of Former
Child Soldiers in September 2018 to encourage greater
support for child reintegration.
We are aware that, in many situations, perpetrators
of grave violations remain unidentified. Even in
cases where programmes and mechanisms to advance
accountability exist, they often fail to achieve tangible
outcomes for children. Access to justice is imperative
for the advancement of children’s rights and for
defending their legitimate interests. That is paramount
to their psychological and psychosocial development in
ensuring that they are able to grow and develop into
adulthood free from fear and unintended irreversible
consequences, such as those described in Peter
Awan’s testimony.
On 16 June 1976, thousands of black South African
children took to the streets to protest about the inferior
quality of education to which they were subjected
and demanded the right to be taught in their native
languages. A hundred of them were shot dead and in
the weeks of protests that followed, more hundreds of
children were killed and a thousand injured. To honour
their courage and in memory of those killed, in 1991
the Organization of the African Unity established the
Day of the African Child. The Day also draws attention
to the lives of African children today. The Day of the
African Child’s objective is to remember those children
as well as to inspire sober reflection and action towards
addressing the plethora of challenges that children in
Africa face daily.
Children are fundamental to the future of peaceful
and prosperous societies in all corners of the world.
It is imperative that we partner globally, regionally
and nationally to combine our efforts to collectively
strengthen institutions and services for children,
including justice, education and health services.
In conclusion, addressing the root causes of conflict
should be the primary objective to prevent violations

19-2435321/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

against children. My delegation wishes to emphasize
the importance of providing the necessary support
to such boys and girls so that they can thrive in their
reintegration processes and have opportunities for a
better and brighter future. We should all remember an
African saying: any child is my child.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to wish Poland every success
during its Council presidency for the month of August.
We would also like to commend Peru for its exceptional
presidency during the month of July.
We would like to thank the briefers for the valuable
briefings that they have given. Their interventions will
undoubtedly enrich our discussion today.
I will focus my intervention on an important matter:
the implementation of Security Council resolutions
with a view to putting an end to violations perpetrated
against children in armed conflict. I would also like to
stress the importance of the role of the United Nations
and regional organizations, as well as mechanisms and
initiatives aimed at protecting the child.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/509)
cites some positive developments, which we welcome,
especially the success of Governments and the United
Nations in releasing and rehabilitating over 13,000
children former child soldiers throughout the world.
That notwithstanding, this year the Secretary-General’s
report portrays a horrific image of the continued
escalation of the six grave violations against children
in armed conflict the overall number of which has
reached 24,000. There have been a record number of
such violations since the monitoring and reporting
mechanism was established, including the astronomical
figures of killings and maiming and alarming cases
of sexual violence against children. To put an end
to these violations we must first work to guarantee
the implementation of Security Council resolutions,
including those pertaining to children in armed
conflict and to the protection of civilians, the most
recent of which is resolution 2475 (2019) on persons
with disabilities in times of conflict.
The Security Council has succeeded in putting in
place a strong normative framework on the protection
of children, starting with resolution 1261 (1999);
followed by resolution 1882 (2009), which was adopted
10 years ago; and arriving at resolution 2427 (2018),
which was adopted last year. Those resolutions do not
just guarantee the protection of children from grave
22/90

02/08/2019

violations; they also recognize the need to guarantee
free access of humanitarian aid to children affected
by conflict.
Putting an end to conflict and achieving lasting
peace is the only sure way to end these violations. More
than 20,000 children have fallen victim to the Syrian
crisis that began in 2011. Here, I recall the unarmed
Palestinian children who are suffering because of Israeli
violations. Israel, the occupying authority, has been
perpetrating violations against Palestinian children
for many decades. I should also mention the innocent
children of Yemen who are being recruited, abused and
killed due to non-compliance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, conventions and international law,
and to the attack perpetrated by the Houthi rebels.
My delegation also stresses the importance of
augmenting resources and capacities to protect children
and reintegrate them within society. Countries and
Governments have the primary responsibility to protect
their citizens, including the most vulnerable, such as
children in general and children with disabilities in
particular. Kuwait supports the vital role played by
the United Nations in that regard. We also express our
appreciation for the outreach conducted by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict with national Governments with
a view to drawing up action plans to protect children,
in addition to the outreach she carries out with the
various parties to conflict to put an end to violations.
I reaffirm the need to provide the necessary technical
and human resources to enable peacekeeping operations
to implement their mandates and protect children in
conflicts, including by deploying child protection
advisers to United Nations peacekeeping missions,
as needed.
Finally, we reiterate Kuwait’s commitment to
upholding the rights of children, especially children in
armed conflict. We support all initiatives that would
enhance compliance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the achievement of international peace
and security. We have taken upon ourselves the task of
saving future generations from the scourge of war, and
we have granted the Security Council special privileges
in order to achieve this noble goal. Therefore, we as
Member States must uphold that responsibility. We
must take it upon ourselves to implement Security
Council resolutions in order to achieve the purpose for
which the Council was formed.
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

Today is the anniversary of the despicable Iraqi
invasion of the State of Kuwait, which killed many
of Kuwait’s sons and daughters. With the grace of
Allah Almighty and because of the Security Council’s
commitment to the implementation of its resolutions,
the first of which was resolution 660 (1990), which was
adopted on this day in 1990, my country was liberated
with the support of sisterly and friendly countries, at
the forefront of which were the countries of the allied
coalition armed forces, which took the side of justice,
righteousness and international legitimacy. I renew
our thanks and appreciation from this very Chamber,
the image of which is carved into the consciousness of
every Kuwaiti citizen.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I too would like
to express our thanks to His Excellency the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Poland for being here today to
conduct this debate. I join others in thanking all our
briefers, particularly Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan, for
sharing their very compelling testimonies with the
Security Council this morning.
I want to add my voice to those congratulating Peru
on a very successful presidency. I also welcome Poland’s
assumption of the presidency and pledge the support of
the United Kingdom. I welcome our Chinese colleague,
whom we had the pleasure of seeing earlier, and I wish
to thank the Kuwaiti representative for drawing our
attention to that very important anniversary.
What we have heard today shows that everybody
has been deeply moved by the bleak picture of the
impact of armed conflict on children that is conveyed
in the report of the Secretary-General for the year
2018 (S/2019/509). I will not repeat many of the very
pertinent points that have been made around the table. It
is very clear that the issue of children in armed conflict
is something that unites the Council. I suspect that it
unites the whole membership. We ought to hold on to
that as we try to find a way to enhance all the measures
we have taken. If I may, I will use this meeting to focus
on six ideas for further action to reverse some of the
incredibly worrying trends of 2018.
First, and at the heart of all the violations against
children set out in the report, is the widespread disregard
we are seeing for international law, not just by non-State
armed groups but also by Governments. We all know
the situation in Syria, in particular in Idlib. We need
to have an urgent conversation about the international
legal framework, how to strengthen adherence to

S/PV. 8591

international humanitarian law, and accountability
for those who disregard it. In that connection, it is
very welcome that the Polish presidency will also be
conducting a debate on international humanitarian law
and another very important anniversary.
Secondly, levels of rape and other forms of sexual
violence against children in conflict remain prevalent
and too high. In Somalia for example, sexual violence
was committed against hundreds of girls and boys
by State and non-State actors alike. In South Sudan,
sexual violence continues to be used as a weapon of
war in concert with abductions, although we welcome
the willingness of the Government to engage with the
United Nations to develop a comprehensive action plan
on all six violations there.
In November, the United Kingdom will have the
pleasure of hosting the Global Conference on Preventing
Sexual Violence in Conflict. The Conference will focus
on addressing the root causes of sexual violence, tackling
stigma, strengthening justice for survivors and holding
perpetrators to account. We also hope that it will be
able to launch a code ensuring that signatories uphold
international standards and best practice when dealing
with sexual violence. I hope many of the countries
represented in the Chamber and our colleagues from
the United Nations will be able to join us at that event.
Thirdly, and as was very clear from the testimony
of Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan, we need to improve
approaches to re-integrating children who have been
recruited and used by parties to conflict. In situations
such as that in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where more than 2,000 children were separated from the
parties to conflict in 2018, we need to increase funding
for reintegration programmes. It also means that we
need to improve the availability of psychosocial and
mental health support, education, vocational training,
jobs and support to the community. That came over
really clearly from both of our civil society briefers
today. For our part, we look forward to the outcomes of
the studies commissioned by the Global Coalition for
the Reintegration of Child Soldiers, of which we are a
member and financial supporter.
Fourthly, we should strengthen our response to the
denial of humanitarian access. The Secretary-General’s
report states that the number of incidents of denial of
access decreased in 2018. It tells us little, however,
about the extent of the impact on children. In Yemen,
for example, the impact was clearly devastating and

19-2435323/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

in Myanmar, the United Kingdom remains deeply
concerned about the lack of humanitarian access. I take
this opportunity to call on the authorities in Myanmar to
honour fully the memorandum of understanding signed
with the United Nations in June. As a first stage, we
would hope that children and armed conflict reporting
might be able to provide more information on impact in
that regard. Looking forward, we should look further
at how we make the denial of humanitarian access a
trigger for listing in the annual report.
Fifthly, Member States should do more to embed
child-protection mechanisms into their domestic
systems. I was very interested in what Mr. Awan
and the Executive Director had to say about that, in
particular. We urge Member States to join us in signing
and ratifying the Optional Protocol on the Involvement
of Children in Armed Conflict and in endorsing
initiatives, such as the Safe Schools Declaration,
the Paris Principles and Paris Commitments and the
Vancouver Principles.
We ourselves have provided an extra £2.3 billion — in
other words, more than $3 billion for mental health care
support, which includes extra funding for children. In
June this year, we were able to launch a child’s mental
health prevention plan. In our royal family, Princes
Harry and William have launched a mental health line
called Shout. We take very seriously that aspect of
the problem.
Sixthly, we should remain vigilant in our
monitoring of ongoing conflict situations where there
have been unlawful attacks on education, including
in the Anglophone region of Cameroon and in
eastern Ukraine.
Finally, I would like to express our admiration and
respect for the United Nations own work; the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General; the monitoring
and reporting personnel and the child protection staff
and their partners on the ground for the tireless work
they do at great personal risk to themselves, and as we
heard today, in very harrowing circumstances. They
deserve our full support.
I would like to end by recalling what the Executive
Director said about looking after the children as they
are an investment in our global future. I do not think
there can be a truer word than that.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would ask you, Madam President, to convey
24/90

02/08/2019

our gratitude to Minister Czaputowicz for attending
our meeting today. I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for convening today’s meeting on such an
important topic.
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome
our new Chinese colleague, Ambassador Zhang Jun,
who is taking part for the first time in a meeting of the
Security Council and in an open debate.
We thank Virginia Gamba, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, for participating in today’s debate
and for sharing her views on the protection of children
in various countries. We thank UNICEF Executive
Director Henrietta Fore for her briefing. We listened
with great interest to Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan. Their
remarks were deeply disturbing. Such acts should not
be occurring in today’s world.
The Russian Federation expresses its concern
about the plight of children in many parts of the world
that are engulfed in armed conflict. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/509) clearly illustrates that
fact. Based on the report, the most worrisome situations
can be seen in Afghanistan, Yemen, Syria and several
other countries.
The Security Council takes consistent measures
to protect children and prevent acts of violence
against them. In accordance with resolution 1612
(2005) and subsequent documents, greater attention
should be paid to the six categories of the most serious
violations against children, within the framework of
both the monitoring and reporting mechanism and the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. Such
violations include the recruitment and use of children
as combatants, killing and maiming, abduction, sexual
violence, attacks on schools and hospitals and the denial
of humanitarian access. We should strive to counter
those violations in the course of our work. In that
regard, we believe that attempts to dilute the mandate
of the Security Council in that area, by forcing it to
consider other issues related to rights of children in a
context outside the maintenance of international peace
and security, are a step in the wrong direction. Such
issues are part of mandates of other United Nations
entities, whose work the Security Council should not
duplicate. Only by adhering to the principle of the
division of labour will we be most effective in solving
all issues pertaining to the plight of children.
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

Preventing crimes against children is an important
aspect of the package of measures on conflict resolution
and post-conflict reconstruction. We highly appreciate
and support the efforts aimed at reintegrating children
liberated from armed groups. We highlight the fact
that the majority of States affected by armed conflict
do a great deal to improve the plight of children. They
often need international assistance. However, national
Governments should play the primary role in protecting
children in armed conflict. The role of the United
Nations is first and foremost to complement and support
those efforts. In that regard, we believe that Security
Council mechanisms can be efficient only when they
cooperate constructively with the country affected by
armed conflict. In addition, resolution 1612 (2005)
outlines the role of national Governments in interaction
between the United Nations and armed groups with
regard to children. Underestimating that requirement
could lead to regrettable results as the leaders of armed
groups may attempt to use their contact with United
Nations agencies to make themselves appear legitimate
in the eyes of the global community rather than to
protect children.
The Russian Federation strongly condemns the
violations of the provisions of international law,
international humanitarian law, human rights and rights
of refugees as they pertain to children. Indiscriminate
attacks, the use of unmanned aerial vehicles, the use
of civilians, children, schools and hospitals as shields
by terrorists and other violations of international
humanitarian law are unacceptable. All those
responsible for such crimes must be duly prosecuted
and held accountable. International humanitarian law
comprises a broad set of norms aimed at protecting
children and civilian infrastructure during armed
conflict. The efforts of the international community
should be focused on adhering to those norms. The
primary responsibility in that area lies with States.
We note with regret attempts to use children
propaganda tools by involving them in plots and
staged videos of all kinds. Apart from being extremely
immoral, such actions undermine the efforts of the
international community to protect children in armed
conflict. In recent years, there have been increased calls
to join various declarations, guidelines or principles
that have been developed outside the framework of the
United Nations and that address separate humanitarian
aspects. We believe that the participation of States in
these documents is a matter of their good will. However,

S/PV. 8591

we would like to emphasize that such declarations,
guidelines and principles cannot substitute for, amend
or elaborate upon universally recognized norms of
international humanitarian law.
Russia supports the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. Her active and unwavering stance
on the protection of children and her efforts to maintain
a constructive dialogue with the States concerned
make possible the achievement of notable progress. We
also commend her impartial and objective approach
in identifying and gathering reliable information on
violations against children, as reflected in the report
of the Secretary-General. We always carefully examine
this information and take account of it in our work.
We call upon all members of the Security Council
to continue to constructively cooperate with a view to
effectively protecting children from the consequences
of armed conflict.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, Mr. President,
I would like to wish you and your team every success in
presiding over the Security Council during the month of
August. Rest assured that you can count on Indonesia’s
full support. Your presence here and your leadership
of today’s open debate demonstrates Poland’s strong
commitment to child protection in armed conflict.
I wish also to congratulate the Peruvian delegation
on its successful presidency during the month of July.
We thank Special Representative Virginia Gamba,
Executive Director Henrietta Fore, Ms. Mariatu Kamara
and Mr. Peter Awan for their very comprehensive and
eye-opening presentations.
Child protection has been an integral part of
Indonesia’s policy and sets the tone for our stance in
condemning the six grave violations against children in
armed conflict. On that note, we are deeply concerned
by the scale and severity of violations in 2018, notably
the record high number of casualties as a result of
killing and maiming, the continued fighting between
parties and new conflict dynamics.
Allow me to elaborate on three pertinent points.
First and foremost, I stress the importance of
reintegration efforts for all children formerly associated
with armed groups so as to allow them to be reunited
with their families or caregivers and go back to their
normal lives; the intensification of efforts by the

19-2435325/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

Security Council to address the root causes of conflict
and prevent former child soldiers from being recruited
again; and the fight against impunity for armed groups
that unlawfully use children for military purposes. At
this point, the reintegration process should be seen
through the lens of conflict prevention.
Children associated with armed groups are usually
stigmatized as immoral and dangerous, and this leads to
my second point: that we should invest in extra efforts
to engage such children who are facing social ostracism
and help them find a constructive role in society.
Mental-health and psychosocial supports that involve
the local community are essential for an effective
reintegration programme, including in ensuring access
to quality education.
In this regard, we commend UNICEF, the Office
of the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, the relevant non-governmental organizations
and personnel on the ground for their significant
contribution to facilitating the transition of former
child soldiers to a normal life.
Thirdly, we deem vital strategic partnerships
between national authorities and personnel on
the ground — peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers — to multiply child-protection efforts. Such
partnerships are of crucial importance to ensuring the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. Any shrinking
of such assistance would translate into widespread
insecurity. We therefore emphasize the merit of
enhancing tailored and context-specific peacekeeping
approaches, including through pre-deployment training
on child protection.
For peacekeepers, child-protection capacity
is crucial to conducting dialogue on action plans,
the release and reintegration of children and the
strengthening of monitoring mechanisms.
In practice, the child-rights-based approach should
be pursued without sacrificing the safety and security
of personnel on the ground, taking into account possible
asymmetrical threats in connection with child soldiers.
The best interests of children must be given
primary consideration in all actions without exception.
Children have the right to be protected from violence
wherever they live, especially those in situations of
armed conflict. Our approach should be clear and
constructive: to find the best, tailor-made solution to
26/90

02/08/2019

prevent and end grave violations against children in
each conflict situation.
Let us translate our words into action for the best
interests of our children. They are our future.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing
and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber.
I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a very large number of speakers.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I wish at the outset to personally
congratulate your friendly delegation on your presidency
of the Security Council for the month of August; you
can rest assured of my delegation’s support. I wish
also to congratulate the delegation of Peru on its very
successful stewardship during the month of July.
I wish to thank you, Mr. Minister, and your country,
Poland, for having organized this very important debate
on the topic of children during this year of historic
commemorations, including the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1882 (2009) and the establishment of the
mandate of the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
as well as the thirtieth anniversary of the Convention
on the Rights of the Child. These are deeply symbolic
milestones that demand reflection and especially a
response in terms of ways and means leading to an
optimal international mobilization to protect children,
prevent them from being recruited or sent into combat,
and ensure that their basic rights are no longer violated
in time of conflict.
Today’s debate will no doubt contribute to raising
international awareness and to strengthening our
determination to act for a better world for all children,
so that no child is left behind.
I would like to thank Mrs. Virginia Gamba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict; Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive
Director of UNICEF; and Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan
for their very highly appreciated briefings.
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

In today’s conflicts children are, unfortunately,
the primary victims: when they are directly impacted,
when they are separated from their loved ones, when
their education is jeopardized, when they are taken out
of school or living in the street, when they are forced to
join armed groups and when they become the victims
of exploitation and sexual abuses. Children who are
victims of armed conflict have their childhood stolen
from them and often suffer a vicious circle of endless
violence. Likewise, children who were abducted
and later released underwent terrible experiences
during their detention that are traumatizing to their
psychological makeup, and they are later stigmatized
by society. All such children need our support as a
priority in order to fully integrate into society.
The efforts of the international community would
benefit from being incorporated into a more realistic
and strategic approach, with respect not only to
conflicts that are under way but also to an emphasis
on prevention. At the same time, an approach that
combines incentives as well as more binding measures,
especially in terms of accountability and fighting
impunity, is necessary.
The prevention of conflicts and their devastating
effects on children requires that national and
international efforts be coordinated, especially through,
inter alia, the entrenchment of democracy, good
governance, the rule of law, respect for human rights
and the promotion of sustainable development, as well
as raising awareness of communities on the importance
of protecting and promoting children’s rights through
use of the media, including television, radio, social
networks, advertising campaigns and schools.
The establishment of legal, policy and institutional
measures for the protection of children and the prevention
and elimination of violence against them, including in
times of conflict, remains a particular focus and should
be guaranteed for those most at risk of being recruited
by armed groups, in particular children separated from
their families or without families, children placed in
institutions, children living or working in the street, and
refugee and migrant children. In addition, it is necessary
to coordinate our actions and chart the path we must
follow together — States, international organizations,
non-governmental organizations and representatives
of civil society — to guide our initiatives and actions
on the ground. Much has been accomplished but more
remains to be done.

S/PV. 8591

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco condemns
in the strongest terms all forms of violence against
children in armed conflict, including their abduction
and conscription by armed groups, their use as human
shields, their being taken as hostages or their recruitment
in refugee camps. Morocco’s focus on children’s rights
at the international level was reflected in its 2019
presidency of the UNICEF Executive Board. I take this
opportunity to reiterate to Ms. Fore and UNICEF, our
confidence and great appreciation for their remarkable
work and dedication in promoting the well-being of all
children in all its dimensions.
In addition, Morocco has always been involved in
international efforts to end the involvement of children
in armed conflict. It has acceded to all international
instruments relating to the rights of the child and was
among the first countries to sign and ratify the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on
the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict and the
Paris Principles and Paris Commitments on this issue.
As part of the extension of these commitments to the
protection of the rights of the child, wherever they may
be, I would like to announce today that the Kingdom of
Morocco has decided to endorse and join the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
presiding over today’s meeting, and to congratulate
Poland on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I wish the Polish
delegation every success and I thank you for holding
his open debate on children and armed conflict.
I like also thank Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, for the extensive efforts she and
her Office are making to protect children in conflict
zones. These efforts are of great importance to the
Yemeni Government, as the recruitment or use of
children as soldiers is one of the six grave violations
prohibited by Yemeni legislation, in accordance with
the Yemeni Child Law and international conventions.
We also welcome the Executive Director of UNICEF.
The Houthi militias have recruited more than 30,000
children and are using them in the conflict. These

19-2435327/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

children have therefore become susceptible to violations,
including killing, maiming and sexual violence, and are
denied humanitarian aid, which has claimed the lives
of more than 3,279 children, constituting an egregious
violation of international humanitarian law and human
rights law as well as all protocols and conventions on
the protection of the children. The Houthi’s rebellious
militias have destroyed the lives of more than 4 million
Yemeni children, forcing them to look for work owing to
the deteriorated economic and humanitarian conditions
caused by the war being waged there. The militias have
drawn them to the battlefront, tempting them with
money to sustain their families and ultimately shoving
them into the pits of death.
These processes of recruitment have included
children in schools, orphanages and juvenile
institutions in local communities, while more than
1.6 million children have been denied education in
the past two years alone. They have also embarked on
shelling, demolishing 2,372 schools in part or in whole.
They have used more than 1,600 schools as prisons
and military bunkers, which has jeopardized the lives
of these children. The children of Yemen living in the
areas controlled by these militias are brainwashed
and indoctrinated through the teaching of a warped
curriculum filled with notions that glorify violence,
sectarianism and incitement in a way that will have a
very long-term impact. It will indeed be very dangerous
for the future generations of Yemen if these extreme
ideologies are not eradicated and eliminated.
The Yemeni Government reiterates its commitment
to protecting children and shielding them from armed
conflict. In fact, that has always been the commitment
of the Government. The commitment manifests itself in
a number of actions taken by the Yemeni Government.
Given that we are short on time, I will not single out
all these actions, but we will inform the Council about
them in writing.
The armed Houthi militias have established
summer camps to attract children into their ranks,
which is an extension of their approach to exploiting
Yemeni children, in violation of all international
laws and norms. We look forward to accelerating the
implementation of the updated plan of action and road
map, which were signed in 2014. We also look forward
to the visit to Yemen of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Gamba, to gain a first-hand overview of
what is happening on the ground and direct experience
28/90

02/08/2019

of the efforts being made by Yemen, especially in terms
of the efforts made by the centre for the rehabilitation
of child soldiers in Marib to reintegrate children. We
call on international organizations to establish similar
institutions for the reintegration of children.
We welcome the fact that the report of the SecretaryGeneral on children and armed conflict (S/2019/509)
takes note of the progress and commitments made by
the Yemeni Government in favour of the protection of
children. We welcome the cooperation and the serious
work of Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
We cannot overestimate the importance of a protective
approach towards children, with due consideration
for our remarks on the report and the significance of
changing the monitoring mechanisms that rely on
the parties or teams in Sana’a and accelerating the
implementation of agreed plans and programmes.
In conclusion, the conflict in Yemen will be
resolved only when its root causes are duly addressed
and a sustainable peace is achieved, thereby ending
the suffering of the Yemeni people. Peace should
be based on the agreed terms of reference, namely,
the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its
Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the
National Dialogue Conference, the relevant Security
Council resolutions — in particular resolution 2216
(2015) — and the reinstatement of the hijacked
State institutions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Ms. Skåre (Norway): I am speaking today on
behalf of Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my
own country, Norway.
We are concerned about the continued increase
in verified violations and abuses against children.
This trend can and must be reversed. First and
foremost, parties to conflict must respect international
humanitarian law and human rights law. Protecting
children and upholding their rights is not only positive
for the individuals involved and their communities;
it also contributions to successful reconciliation,
reintegration and development. It is therefore closely
linked to broader conflict-prevention efforts and the
sustaining peace agenda.
We should give special priority to education in
emergencies, especially the education of girls. The Safe
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

Schools Declaration, which was launched in Oslo in
2015, has been endorsed by 95 States so far. It is the
key initiative in this context. The main objective is to
prevent the military use of schools and stop attacks on
schools during armed conflicts. We are encouraged by
the positive response to the Declaration and the joint
efforts to implement it.
The continued silence and stigma related to sexual
and gender-based violence, exploitation and abuse is of
particular concern. The international conference in May
held in Oslo, entitled Ending Sexual and Gender-based
Violence in Humanitarian Crises, sent a strong message
that strengthening the prevention of, and response to,
sexual and gender-based violence is a humanitarian
priority. It gave visibility and recognition to the key
role of national and local organizations, including local
women’s organizations.
Children involved in armed conflict not only need
protection and comprehensive support and care, but
also justice. In that regard, we want to recognize the
crucial work of Justice Rapid Response in strengthening
accountability for international crimes and human
rights violations against children through the provision
of highly specialized child-focused expertise.
Last year’s unanimous adoption of resolution
2427 (2018) set out a framework for the reintegration
of children associated with armed forces and armed
groups. Successful reintegration is in the best interest
of the child, but also in the best interest of societies.
The human rights of children formerly associated with
armed groups or violent groups must be fully respected,
in line with international law, including the Convention
on the Rights of the Child.
Resolution 2427 (2018) also stresses accountability
for all violations and abuses against children, not only
the gravest crimes. In the process, the Council set a new
standard for the prevention of human rights abuses and
violations of international humanitarian law. Resolution
2427 (2018) must now be translated into reality.
We reiterate our strong support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. Ms. Gamba plays an essential role
at the global, regional and national levels by advocating
for children’s protection and rights and providing
practical guidance.
In conclusion, the Nordic countries urge all States
Members of the United Nations to ensure that children

S/PV. 8591

in armed conflict get the attention and protection to
which they are entitled.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): One fifth of all
children today live in conflict zones, and a record
number of children were killed or maimed in conflict
last year. United Nations reports and today’s briefings
are alarming. Thousands of children have been killed
or maimed in Syria, many as a result of indiscriminate
or disproportionate attacks in populated areas. Others
became victims of unlawful siege tactics or of chemical
weapons, which have been internationally prohibited for
a long time. There is an urgent need for accountability
for the atrocity crimes committed in the Syrian
conflict. Liechtenstein applauds the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria for its
important work in that respect. The progress achieved
in the collection of evidence and the building of case
files constitutes an essential step towards justice for all
victims of the conflict, particularly the children.
In Yemen, almost 12,000 United Nations-verified
grave violations were committed against children
between 2013 and 2018, pointing to much higher
actual figures. Killing and maiming as a result of air
strikes remains the most prevalent violation, but child
recruitment and attacks on humanitarian facilities,
schools and hospitals also prevail. The Council has
the responsibility to stop those violations and enforce
compliance with its own resolutions and respect
for international humanitarian law. In addition,
Liechtenstein sees great value in political commitments
by States, such as the Safe Schools Declaration, to
improve children’s lives during armed conflict.
Liechtenstein remains deeply concerned about
the high occurrence of rape and other forms of sexual
violence against children, including trafficking
for sexual enslavement. Such violence is often
underreported owing to the fear and stigmatization
associated with it, in particular if perpetrated against
boys. A culture of silence continues to impede
accountability and justice and contributes to further
cycles of violence and persistent harmful gender
stereotypes. Liechtenstein welcomes the important
work of non-governmental organizations in that regard.
We support the work of Justice Rapid Response and
its child rights experts, who have investigated grave
violations against children in Myanmar, the Central

19-2435329/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

African Republic and Syria, among other places. The
Liechtenstein-based non-governmental organization
All Survivors Project conducts research and advocacy
to improve global responses for every victim and
survivor of sexual violence, including men and boys, in
situations of armed conflict and forced displacement.
International criminal justice mechanisms, in
particular the International Criminal Court (ICC), have
done groundbreaking work to address grave violations
against children. The ICC case against Dominic
Ongwen illustrates the possible complexity of such
violations. Indicted for war crimes, Ongwen began on
his path as a child soldier himself, kidnapped and forced
into military service at a young age. The judgment in
the case of Bosco Ntaganda, released in July, represents
another milestone in international criminal justice. The
Court held the crimes against male child soldiers to the
same standards as female child soldiers. And it was
explicit in determining that the acts committed against
male child soldiers amounted to rape and needed to be
addressed accordingly. That provides a new basis to
address sexual and gender-based violence in conflict,
for the Council and other stakeholders.
Liechtenstein reiterates its strong support for
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Children and Armed Conflict and thanks her for
her briefing today. Protecting the independence and
integrity of her mandate is crucial to its effectiveness
and credibility. An essential feature of the mandate
has been its impartiality and reliance on evidence,
which have led to concrete improvements by State and
non-State actors in their protection of children. The
strong support of States for the Special Representative
is also a call for the Security Council to do more to
preserve the key tenets of her mandate. In addition,
more effective monitoring, documenting, investigating
and reporting of violations against children by all
relevant United Nations entities would help broaden
the mandate’s reach and depth, which we would
greatly welcome.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Arbeiter (Canada): Allow me to start by
congratulating Poland on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of August and to thank the Foreign Minister for his
personal participation in this open debate.
30/90

02/08/2019

(spoke in Spanish)
I would also like to commend and congratulate
Peru for its successful work during the month of July.
(spoke in English)
I have two statements to deliver. I am pleased
to speak first on behalf of the Group of Friends of
Children and Armed Conflict, an informal network
of 42 interested Member States, representing all five
regional groups at the United Nations.
We wish to thank today’s briefers, in particular
Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan, for their compelling
personal testimony.
The Group is appalled by the scope and scale of grave
violations committed against children, as documented
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/509). On the
tenth anniversary of resolution 1882 (2009), we are
particularly concerned about the large increase in cases
of killing and maiming of children. We urge all parties
to armed conflict to fully comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law, human rights law
and refugee law, and to put in place concrete effective
protection measures for children in armed conflict.
In that regard, we welcome the recent signing of
action plans and Special Representative Gamba’s direct
engagement with parties to armed conflict to end grave
violations. However, action plans are only means to an
end, not ends in themselves. Without their effective and
timely implementation, such plans will not address the
suffering of children in armed conflict. Accordingly,
the mere signing of an action plan should not form
the basis for delisting in the Secretary-General’s
annual report on children and armed conflict. We
therefore commend efforts by the United Nations and
the Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict to follow up on action plans and to
encourage their implementation.
The Group welcomes the recent release of more
than 13,600 children from armed forces and armed
groups and the work of the Global Coalition for the
Reintegration of Former Child Soldiers. We stress
the importance of long-term, comprehensive and
community-based rehabilitation and reintegration
efforts to provide assistance to children and prevent
re-recruitment, including in areas formerly controlled
by Da’esh. Children formerly associated with such
groups should be treated as victims first, consistent
with resolution 2427 (2018). The detention of children
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

in armed conflict should be used only as a last resort
and for the shortest period necessary and should be
in full respect of international humanitarian law and
applicable international human rights law. Failure to do
so will only sow the seeds of future conflict.
The Group is firmly convinced that the protection
of children affected by armed conflicts must be at the
heart of the prevention, development and sustaining
peace agendas. We further welcome the launch of the
ACT to Protect campaign to catalyse global attention
and efforts to prevent and end the six grave violations
against children. Indeed, there are several practical
protection tools available to Member States, notably the
Safe Schools Declaration, the Principles and Guidelines
on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups, the Paris Commitments and the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. We call upon
Member States to further strengthen the protection of
children in armed conflict, including through ratification
of the first Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, as well as consideration of the
endorsement of those commitments.
The Group highlights the contribution of regional
and subregional organizations, as recognized in
resolution 2427 (2018), in preventing grave violations
by reinforcing the normative framework, exchanging
best practices, mobilizing resources, coordinating
humanitarian assistance, applying pressure on parties
to armed conflict and addressing the transnational
dimensions of child recruitment. Regional groups of
friends of children in armed conflict can also play a
helpful role in that regard, and we welcome the recent
establishment of such a group in Mali.
We also welcome other measures adopted by
the Security Council this year that contribute to the
protection of children in situations of armed conflict.
Those include resolution 2467 (2019) — introduced
by Germany — which seeks to take a victim-centred
approach to sexual violence in conflict and children born
of wartime rape; resolution 2474 (2019) — introduced
by Kuwait — which addresses children missing
as a result of armed conflict; and resolution 2475
(2019) — introduced by Poland, with the support of the
United Kingdom — which stresses the specific needs of
children with disabilities in armed conflict.
The Security Council should continue to uphold
child protection through the deployment of child

S/PV. 8591

protection advisers to peacekeeping operations.
However, adequate resources are also needed to deliver
mission success. Therefore, cuts to the staffing and
budgets of child protection adviser positions as well as
consolidation efforts that would undermine the United
Nations ability to deliver on the critical child protection
mandates put forth by the Security Council should
be avoided.
Lastly, the Group underlines that combating
impunity and ensuring accountability are key to
preventing grave violations. We therefore welcome
the efforts of the International Criminal Court against
war crimes and crimes against humanity, including the
recruitment of children, and note the recent conviction
of Bosco Ntaganda in that regard. But, as we heard
during the briefings earlier today, we need to recall
that true justice involves reparations and psychosocial
support for victims of such war crimes, whose trauma
may endure for years.
I will now speak in French.
(spoke in French)
Allow me now to make some additional remarks in
my national capacity. First of all, I would like to warmly
thank Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan for their enlightening
briefings. We are honoured that Ms. Kamara has made
Canada her home, thereby further enriching our diverse
nation. Her courage and resilience inspire us all. I have
read her book. I encourage representatives to buy it. I
would also like to acknowledge the importance of the
sentimental raised by Mr. Awan. The inclusion of that
aspect is absolutely key.
As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/509)
clearly indicates, the situation of children in Syria,
Yemen and other conflict-affected areas is devastating.
To say that we are disappointed that the Council is
unable to maintain international peace and security in
those and other cases would be a blatant understatement,
especially given the number of children who have
been killed or maimed simply because of their place
of birth or the time when they were born. Addressing
vulnerability to serious violations is not the sole
responsibility of the Council. We all have a role to play.
Canada’s efforts have above all focused on
developing the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping
and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of
Child Soldiers. The Vancouver Principles are a set
of 17 political commitments to undertake measures

19-2435331/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

to prevent the recruitment and use of children by
armed forces and armed groups in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
As a testament to the importance of the issue, 91
countries from all regional groups have endorsed the
Vancouver Principles since their launch less than two
years ago. Canada encourages States that have not
yet endorsed the Vancouver Principles or the Paris
Principles to do so without delay.
(spoke in English)
While important, we recognize that political
endorsement alone is insufficient to effect change. For
that reason, in the past year, Canada has worked with
other Member States, the United Nations Secretariat and
civil society to develop implementation guidance for
the Vancouver Principles. That new tool, launched here
at the United Nations yesterday, serves as a practical
resource for military, police and civilian organizations
engaged in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
It takes a gender lens to our efforts, recognizing the
differential impact of child recruitment on boys and
on girls.
Canada is putting that guidance into action. In June,
Canada’s Minister of National Defence announced
the establishment of the Roméo Dallaire Centre of
Excellence for Peace and Security, within the Canadian
Defence Academy, led by Rear Admiral Cassivi, who
is seated behind me. The initial focus of the centre of
excellence will be to support the implementation of
the Vancouver Principles by our own forces. Canada
will also provide the Roméo Dallaire Child Soldiers
Initiative with a contribution of more than $1 million
to conduct research and identify best practices
regarding the prevention of the recruitment and use of
child soldiers.
Canada has been a long-standing advocate for
children in situations of armed conflict. During our
last tenure on the Security Council in 1999-2000, we
introduced the first thematic debate on children and
armed conflict (see S/PV.4176). We have collectively
come a long way since then but much work remains to
be done. Should we be elected to serve again on the
Security Council for 2021-2022, we will continue to
work to put child protection at the centre of our peace
and security efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
32/90

02/08/2019

Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): I will also speak
in French.
(spoke in French)
I thank you, Mr. President, for having organized
this open debate on children and armed conflict.
Despite the efforts of the international community,
children remain among the main victims of such
conflicts. This is an issue that is an absolute priority.
I would like to thank Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan for
their personal testimonies and I congratulate them on
their courage and their journey, which is so inspiring.
I would also like to reiterate my country’s support for
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Virginia Gamba, and thank her for her briefing.
Portugal supports the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union, as well as that on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict, which was just delivered by the representative
of Canada.
Allow me to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2019/509), which unfortunately describes
a very worrying reality of violations of international
human rights law against children and highlights a very
large number of cases of child recruitment as a tactic
of war.
Portugal has signed the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and its Optional Protocols, notable the one
on the involvement of children in armed conflict. We
therefore call on Member States that have not yet done
so to follow that path.
Attacks on schools and hospitals and their use
for military purposes cannot continue in impunity.
Portugal reiterates its firm commitment to access to
education in emergency situations, including higher
education, and also calls on Governments that have not
done so to sign the Safe Schools Declaration. Education
is both a mechanism for preventing recruitment and a
means of addressing the root causes of conflict.
We also wish to emphasize the importance of the
Kigali Principles and the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers, which complement the
Paris Principles. As a whole, those principles should
constitute a frame of reference for our future actions.
We must remain vigilant regarding situations of
sexual violence against children in wartime. In that
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

regard, Portugal welcomes the measures taken by the
Council with the adoption of resolution 2467 (2019),
which has made it possible to identify an approach
centred on victims and survivors of sexual violence.
In addition, we must do everything possible to put an
end to impunity with regard to exploitation and sexual
violence. It should be recalled that sexual violence in
conflict situations is linked to the broader issue of
gender equality, as noted in resolution 1325 (2000).
Portugal has just adopted its third national plan for the
implementation of that resolution, with clear objectives
and a concrete timetable.
In conclusion, I stress the importance that Portugal
attaches to the work of UNICEF and other specialized
agencies, as well as of civil society, to improve the
lives of all those girls and boys who suffer from
varying levels of extreme violence. This scourge can be
combated effectively only through cooperation among
all actors.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank the Permanent Mission of Poland for
convening this open debate. As we celebrate the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1882 (2009),
we reaffirm the importance of monitoring prevention
efforts, particularly in relation to the implementation of
resolution 2427 (2018).
The situation of children is becoming increasingly
worrisome. The number and severity of violations in
countries in conflict, a situation that is evidenced in
the reports submitted, demonstrate a reality in which
children are victims of State and non-State actors,
without a collective, comprehensive response to
protect them.
Ecuador expresses its concern about the persistent
recruitment and use of children throughout the world. As
we know, approximately 420 million children — almost
one fifth of the world’s children — live in conflict
zones. As such, today it is more important than ever
that we step up efforts to strengthen the protection of
the rights of children in armed conflicts. Ecuador’s
Constitution recognizes children as a group requiring
priority attention. It also recognizes State responsibility
for providing support and protecting against all types
of violence, abuse, sexual exploitation and exploitation
of any other kind, as well as for the eradication of all
forms of violence to which children could be subject.

S/PV. 8591

Therefore, as we celebrate the thirtieth anniversary
of the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, and 19 years since the signing of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on
the involvement of children in armed conflict, we call
for universal ratification of the Protocol and encourage
States that have not yet done so to do so without delay.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/509)
also highlights how schools are used for military
purposes and the destruction of educational
infrastructure. Ecuador expresses its full support for
the need to protect students, teachers and educational
infrastructure in times of armed conflict.
Finally, we call for strengthening the Office of
Ms. Gamba, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, so that it
receives adequate political support and appropriate
funding. We welcome the initiatives that have been
carried out, such as the promotional campaign to better
protect children, known as ACT to Protect Children
Affected by Conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Andorra.
Mrs. Vives Balmaña (Andorra) (spoke in French):
Allow me to thank you, Madam President, as well as
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, who joined us earlier
today, for convening this open debate and making the
fate of children in armed conflict one of the priorities
of your presidency.
I would also like to thank the speakers:
Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict;
Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of UNICEF;
and, in particular, Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan for their
poignant and inspiring testimonies.
Andorra also endorses the statement made by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends on Children and Armed Conflict.
To read the report of the Secretary-General is to
be alarmed by the figures, the extent of the conflicts
that involve children and how they have been exposed
“to the highest degrees of violence and exploitation”
(S/2019/509, para. 12). We have heard direct testimony
of that here today. It is paradoxical to see that in this
year, which marks the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1882 (1999) in this very Chamber, the
thirtieth anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of

19-2435333/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

the Child and the sixtieth anniversary of the Declaration
of the Rights of the Child, the figures for the six
violations, especially children killed and wounded,
continue to increase.
The resolutions adopted by the Security Council
and the work of the Working Group on Children in
Armed Conflict, chaired by Belgium, have broadened
the areas of focus and the response to the needs of child
victims of armed conflicts. To ensure that child victims
of conflict have the best conditions for reintegration,
it is crucial to raise awareness among all stakeholders
and actors. In addition to carrying out her mandate,
the initiatives of the Office of Special Representative
Gamba, such as ACT to Protect Children Affected by
Conflict campaign, will bring global attention to the
fight against the six violations, and the reintegration
initiative, managed jointly with UNICEF, will assist in
this multidimensional challenge that multilateralism
can help to overcome.
Andorra is committed to leaving no one behind.
For that, and especially for the protection of children,
education — as Ms. Kamara also mentioned — which
has proved to be one of the most cross-cutting aspects,
if I may say, of the Sustainable Development Goals, is
essential. Thanks to education, a three-tiered approach
is possible. The first is effective prevention efforts aimed
at reducing inequalities, poverty and marginalization.
The second is the flourishing of girls and boys, without
exception, and of persons with disabilities or mental
illness. All aspects must be taken into consideration.
The third tier is the fight against the stigmatization of
survivors, which is one of the biggest problems facing
young victims when they are reintegrated into society.
Quality education can bring about the right conditions
to prevent crimes against children in armed conflict
zones, both upstream and downstream of the problem.
With
the
growing
number
of
schools
attacked — as we learned from the report — or used
for military purposes, the Safe Schools Declaration is
indispensable. We invite those countries that have not
yet done so to join, as well as the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Among
the major texts, the Paris Principles and the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers establish the
framework that ought to ensure the implementation of
peacekeeping operations and prevent recruitment. The
International Criminal Court, charged with combating
34/90

02/08/2019

impunity, is the body that ensures recourse, if need be,
to restorative justice.
Andorra supports the rights of children in armed
conflict zones as well as the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNICEF.
However, I would not like to conclude without expressing
our gratitude to all the people and organizations on the
ground. Let us help their workers ensure that all girls
and boys grow up fully enjoying their rights.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): First of all, I would like to
thank Poland for convening this very important open
debate early on in its presidency. I would also like to
take this opportunity to thank Ms. Virginia Gamba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, for her hard work and
for her briefing, as well as Executive Director Henrietta
Fore for her briefing and her and the UNICEF team’s
hard work. I am especially grateful to Ms. Kamara and
Mr. Awan for their powerful briefings, based on their
personal experience.
Children are vulnerable in conflict, both mentally
and physically. In conflict, they are deprived of
education. Those children who have suffered are at
greater risk of being drawn into conflict and violence
again later in life, which in turn undermines sustainable
peace and security. The international community and
the Security Council must pay special attention to the
issue of children and armed conflict.
Japan supports the Global Coalition for the
Reintegration of Former Child Soldiers and became a
member of the Group of Friends of Reintegration of Child
Soldiers in February. We praise the efforts of UNICEF
and civil society to meet the extensive, and sometimes
unpredictable, needs on the ground. We expect that the
forthcoming study of the expert Advisory Group of the
Global Coalition for the Reintegration of Former Child
Soldiers will reveal the specific needs and gaps so that
donors can respond more effectively.
Even when child soldiers are returned to their
communities, they may face significant barriers to their
reintegration into society, including social stigma and
economic hardship, which might ultimately lead them
back to armed groups. Japan has been working closely
with UNICEF in African and other regions not only to
support reintegration programmes, but also to provide
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

broader assistance to children in conflict, such as
strengthening national and community capacities for the
prevention of conflicts and violence affecting children.
Japan actively supports the Global Partnership
to End Violence against Children, as a path-finding
country and a board member. As the first responding
donor, Japan contributed $6 million last year to the
Partnership’s fund to support conflict-affected children
in Nigeria and Uganda. We call on other Member States
to support its efforts.
Children’s right to education must be protected
even in conflict. Attacks on schools as non-military
objectives violate international humanitarian law. We
urge all parties to conflict to abide by international
humanitarian law and to respect that right. Hospitals
are also indispensable for children. We once again urge
all parties to conflict to observe resolution 2286 (2016)
to protect hospitals in armed conflict.
In conclusion, Japan would like to make positive
contributions to helping children in armed conflict
with a view to ending violence and preventing
future conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt): (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Madam President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month by wishing you every success. I also join
others in commending you on choosing this topic for
today’s open debate, and I thank the briefers for their
statements, especially Ms. Virginia Gamba.
Today’s briefings and the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/509) on children and armed conflict
contain horrifying statistics reflecting an increase in
grave violations committed against children. The United
Nations confirmed 24,000 such cases in 2018, while
killings have reached a record level. That concerns us
and should lead us to reconsider our response to ensure
that every one assumes responsibility in the protection
of children in armed conflict.
Children suffer twice as much owing to the
consequences of armed conflicts, for which they
bear no responsibility but nevertheless suffer the full
impact. Such suffering not only infringes upon their
right to life and physical integrity, but also affects their
mental health, thereby depriving them of their social,
cultural and educational rights. Armed conflicts have

S/PV. 8591

both medium- and long-term repercussions for children
and deprive them and their countries of a future.
That bitter reality makes it incumbent upon all of
us to safeguard international peace and security. The
erosion of international peace and security and the
outbreak of armed conflicts compel us to shoulder the
responsibility vis-à-vis children and populations not
only with regard to protecting them and safeguarding
their physical and mental integrity, but also giving
them a chance to live new, dignified lives following the
resolution of a conflict.
We agree with the Secretary-General in calling
on warring parties to take the necessary measures
to strengthen the protection of children in armed
conflict. As he underscored so well, it is imperative to
cooperate with the United Nations and its specialized
agencies to that end. There is also added value in
the recommendations in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, in particular those calling on parties to
armed conflict to respect the principles of distinction,
proportionality and military necessity, to allow the
delivery of humanitarian assistance in conflict zones
while ensuring the protection of children and to
strengthen the child-protection capacities of States and
regional and subregional organizations.
Furthermore, we agree with the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation concerning the treatment
of children suspected of having been involved in
terrorist activities, namely, that it is necessary to take
a coordinated approach towards resolving it, as it is the
result of the systemic exploitation of children by terrorist
organizations. There is no one-size-fits-all solution to
resolving that issue, which requires close international
cooperation. Every State must be allowed the necessary
leeway in which to operate to resolve that problem in
line with its circumstances and national legislation.
Such facts remind us that the primary responsibility
for the protection of civilians, including children, lies
with the State concerned, free from foreign interference,
under international legal instruments. We should also
not forget the importance of addressing the root causes
of conflicts, including social exclusion and poverty,
which, as I just said, is incumbent upon the States
concerned. The international community must simply
stand ready to provide assistance and nothing more.
In conclusion, I reiterate my country’s support for the
work being done to ensure the protection of children in
armed conflict. I underscore that Egypt attaches special

19-2435335/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

importance to strengthening the capacities of Africa.
In that regard, we are chairing the African Union this
year. In order to strengthen the protection of civilians
and the implementation of international humanitarian
law, we will be organizing training sessions in Egypt,
while supporting regional cooperation programmes and
hosting other relevant events.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico is grateful to Poland for convening
this open debate on a topic that continues to urgently
require our attention.
Mexico associates itself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of Canada on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
We have an opportunity today to reflect on the
progress that we have made and the challenges we
continue to face 10 years after the unanimous adoption
of resolution 1882 (2009), which Mexico advocated as
Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict during its most recent term as an elected
member of the Security Council. Resolution 1882
(2009) was a fundamental step forward in this area in
providing the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral with new tools to attribute responsibility to
parties to a conflict for rape and other forms of sexual
violence, as well as the killing and maiming of children.
It is unacceptable that such violations of
international humanitarian law continue to occur, and
all the more so — as the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/509) indicates — that they have reached
historic levels since the establishment of the monitoring
and reporting mechanism on grave violations against
children. We deplore the fact that boys and girls are
being used as sex slaves and human shields. However, it
is encouraging that this past year approximately 13,600
children benefited from release and reintegration.
That was largely the result of the effective work of
Ms. Virginia Gamba, who has also placed special
emphasis on the urgent need to fund sustainable and
comprehensive reintegration programmes.
For a child, being recruited or involved in an armed
group will always lead to psychosocial trauma. Let
there be no doubt about it: above all, such children
are victims and deserve proper care. Mexico therefore
categorically rejects policies that tend to re-victimize
36/90

02/08/2019

such children and propagate harmful stereotypes. We
cannot afford losing entire generations of children who
otherwise could be agents of sustainable peace. It is up
to us to ensure that those who took up arms in the past
will build lasting peace and prevent the repetition of
those tragedies in the future.
Fortunately, no Member State affected by this
scourge has to face it alone. We can count on a strong
international framework, based on the Principles and
Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces
or Armed Groups, also known as the Paris Principles,
in complementarity with the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers and the Geneva Conventions,
which remain legally and practically binding.
The work of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism on grave violations against children is
essential to verifying that such a legal framework is
effectively implemented on the ground. We highlight
efforts to document statistics related to the release,
recruitment and reintegration of children, while we
recognize that improvement is needed in the areas of
training, collecting data and statistics.
For Mexico, putting human beings, especially
children, at the centre of its policies is imperative, which
means listening to the needs and aspirations of young
people, who share one demand — education. The right
to education continues to be one of the first casualties
of armed conflict. The United Nations, in particular the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission,
must redouble their efforts to ensure that education is
used as a tool for both prevention and reintegration.
The children and armed conflict agenda, which
has evolved thanks to the joint work of the General
Assembly and the Council, demonstrates that
multilateralism can be achieved when the political
will to address multidimensional threats is present.
Mexico is proud to have contributed and to continue
to contribute proactively to the development of this
agenda to the benefit of children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Penaranda (Philippines): Children embody
the most compelling justification for the existence of
States, that is, to protect their most vulnerable charges
as they would preserve themselves. For what is a State
without children, if not on the brink of extinction? The
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

Philippine Government takes its role as protector of
children seriously. The Constitution requires it to do so.
But in going beyond the demands of the law, Philippine
society has accorded children a hallowed place, as
treasured assets whose survival must be ensured and
whose fullest potential must be fulfilled.
Children do not belong on a battlefield. They have
the right not to know first-hand the horrors of war. But
it is indeed a harsh reality that far too many children
are forced to experience war. In the case of Marawi,
in the southern Philippines, children were recruited by
armed rebels as fighters, couriers, guides or spies. We
are proud that the Government retook Marawi from
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham in a relatively
short time. We denounce with indignation the use of
children by criminal groups, and we lament the loss
of children’s lives. The Government has intensified
reconstruction, rehabilitation and reintegration in
Marawi, including expeditiously clearing locations of
unexploded ordnance to avoid further casualties and
injuries, especially to children.
The establishment of the Bangsamoro Transition
Authority and the ratification of the Bangsamoro
organic law will pave the way for lasting peace in the
region. We note the readiness of the United Nations to
help build its capacity to achieve peace, democratic
governance and respect for human and children’s
rights. The Philippines armed forces has issued
and committed itself to the circular entitled “Child
protection during armed conflict situations”, its policy
guide to preventing grave child’s rights violations. The
circular reaffirms the armed forces’ moral and legal
commitment to ensuring that children affected by
armed conflict are afforded special protection and are
entitled to special respect.
This principle is enshrined in the Philippine
Government’s enactment in January of Republic Act
11188, entitled “Special protection of children in armed
conflict act”. The law reaffirms that children are zones
of peace and cannot be recruited into Government
forces, or be allowed to participate in armed conflict.
They must be treated as victims, not enemies, and
be protected from maiming, torture, abduction,
rape and killing. They must be treated humanely
in all circumstances and should never be objects of
attack. Communities, Government authorities and, if
applicable, religious leaders are required to preserve
the peaceful integrity of children.

S/PV. 8591

Our new law also prohibits attacks on schools,
hospitals, places of worship, child development and
day-care centres, playgrounds and recreational parks.
The Government denounces the use of schools by
rebel groups to foster their ideology of war and make
soldiers out of children. The Government renews
its solemn responsibility to protect those most
vulnerable — children — against those malignant
forces by any means necessary to achieve the defining
purpose of the existence and expense of a State.
The Philippines aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Viet Nam on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
The Philippines congratulates Poland on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council. We will
continue to work with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Gamba, and with United
Nations agencies and other stakeholders in pursuing
our common aspiration that no child will ever again
have to experience the horrors of war.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Favre (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam President, and Poland for organizing
today’s open debate on the issue of children and armed
conflict. I also express my sincere gratitude to all the
speakers for their valuable contributions.
This year we are celebrating the seventieth
anniversary of the four Geneva Conventions of 1949,
which have been universally ratified. In that regard,
Switzerland calls on all Member States that have not
yet done so to ratify the Protocols Additional to the
Geneva Conventions. Those treaties are essential to the
protection of civilians, including children, in armed
conflict. I would like to highlight four points.
First, in order to ensure the effective protection
of children in armed conflict, the credibility of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism established
in accordance with resolution 1612 (2005) must
be guaranteed in all circumstances. Switzerland
therefore requests the Secretary-General to provide a
comprehensive, impartial and accurate list of parties
committing grave violations of children’s rights,
supported by reliable evidence. An evidence-based
approach is critical.
Furthermore, it is of major importance that all
perpetrators of serious violations be listed in sections

19-2435337/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

A or B of the annex to the reports of the SecretaryGeneral according to clear and transparent criteria. It is
also necessary that no party concerned be prematurely
delisted as long as it continues to commit grave
violations against children’s rights. In accordance with
the 2010 annual report of the Secretary-General on
armed conflict and children (S/2010/181), the timely
implementation of an action plan must be the formal
and sole path leading to delisting.
Secondly, in order to implement action plans in a
timely manner and thereby have a genuine impact on the
ground, Switzerland calls on the Secretary-General and
Member States to allocate sufficient human, financial
and technical resources for the protection of children in
armed conflict. It is particularly critical to ensure the
adequate allocation of resources and their effective use
with regard to action plans involving armed non-State
actors. Switzerland supports the deployment and work
of child protection specialists, for example, in Syria,
whose role is essential to achieving the goals of the
action plans.
Thirdly, the Security Council must be more
consistent in its consideration of the children and armed
conflict agenda with regard to all thematic issues and
country situations. We welcome the positive role played
to that end by the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, as illustrated by the recent adoption of
the conclusions on Syria and Myanmar, as well as the
work under way on Yemen.
Fourthly, Switzerland calls on Member States to
take concrete measures to stop attacks on schools and
deter armed forces and non-State armed groups from
using schools as shields. My country calls on Member
States to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration.
In conclusion, Switzerland reiterates its full support
for the mandate and work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and her Office.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of El Salvador.
Mr. Trejo Blanco (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Polish presidency for convening this open
debate. My delegation also takes note of and thanks the
Secretary-General for his latest report (S/2019/509) on
children and armed conflict.
El Salvador reiterates its deep commitment to the
maintenance of international peace and security by
38/90

02/08/2019

addressing the heartbreaking consequences of armed
conflicts and reducing the widespread suffering they
cause against the civilian population, in particular
children and adolescents in conflict areas. We express
our deep concern that this sector of the population
continues to be seriously affected by armed conflicts.
Full compliance with the Convention on the Rights
of the Child is a high priority for El Salvador. My
country’s Government believes that the best interests
of children is of the utmost importance regardless of the
circumstances they find themselves in. We therefore
find it inconceivable that the forced recruitment of
children continues in various regions throughout the
world. The use of children in conflict constitutes a
serious violation of their rights, while separating them
from their families and leading to their tragic maiming,
sexual abuse and, in the worst case scenario, pointless
deaths. We must continue to work for the promotion,
protection and full and effective enjoyment of the rights
of children and adolescents, and establish that goal as a
priority in our work.
We welcome the progress indicated in the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/509) in this
area. We nevertheless regret the significant increase in
the number of confirmed violations of children’s rights,
which is why we demand greater commitment from
the international community and condemn the use and
recruitment of children and adolescents in conflict.
El Salvador suffered the scourge of an armed
conflict that lasted more than 10 years, the aftermath of
which has afforded us with countless lessons learned and
has allowed us to strengthen our normative framework
with the main purpose of not repeating the errors of the
past. Emanating from that, we adopted the law for the
comprehensive protection of children and adolescents,
which established a series of rights, guarantees and
duties with regard to children and adolescents in line
with the international human rights framework. The
law ensures that, in the event of a disaster or situation of
armed conflict, the State must provide all children with
special protection based on their rights. It also provides
for protection from sexual abuse and exploitation and
other forms of exploitation, including the forced and
compulsory recruitment of children and adolescents for
their use in conflict.
We express our gratitude for all the support that
UNICEF has provided at the national and international
levels in advocating for better results in the protection
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

of children in various environments, particularly with
regard to the work that it does in various regions for
their protection in conflict situations. We believe,
however, that it is necessary to step up socioeconomic,
psychological and educational support for children to
prevent them from continuing to suffer violations of
their rights.
At the same time, we believe that it necessary to
strengthen reintegration programmes for children
who have been released from and left military life so
that they can be properly reintegrated through viable
alternatives. That will reduce the chances of children
becoming vulnerable once again to abuse, social stigma
and renewed recruitment.
We believe that it is best to adopt preventive
approaches that ensure that all children and adolescents
are protected and have an opportunity to augment and
strengthen the capacities needed for building their
lives. To that end, El Salvador endorsed the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers in December
2017, as a comprehensive set of measures to end the
recruitment of child soldiers.
The Vancouver Principles, whose measures are
based on the promotion and protection of the rights of
children agenda, constitute an innovative initiative to
encourage the condemnation of all forms of abuse and
serious violations against children in armed conflict.
It is important to implement measures such as those
included in the Vancouver Principles in areas in which
peacekeeping operations are carried out, while taking
into account the impact that conflicts can have on
children and adolescents and how precarious achieving
the goals of the Organization can be should we fail to
take measures to prevent the violation of their rights.
We urge all parties to conflict to respect
international law, in particular human rights law and
international humanitarian law, and continue to take
the necessary measures to end violations of children’s
rights in armed conflict, as well as prevention,
protection and rehabilitation measures as required on a
case-by-case basis.
Lastly, I reaffirm that El Salvador remains convinced
that the protection of all children in armed conflict
must be an important aspect of any conflict resolution
strategy and peacebuilding process. Addressing armed
conflicts from a comprehensive perspective will be the

S/PV. 8591

key to ensuring the maintenance of peace in various
regions throughout the world and its longevity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Stefanile (Italy): We would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate,
and express our appreciation to the briefers for
their contributions.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union, as well as with
the statement made by the representative of Canada on
behalf of the Group of Friends on Children and Armed
Conflict, and would like to add the following remarks
in its national capacity.
Armed conflicts pose a wide range of challenges to
minors, increasing their vulnerability and putting them
at risk of recruitment, neglect, exploitation, trafficking,
sexual violence and abuse, as well as worsening the
risk of harmful practices such as early and forced
marriages. The issue is very high on the agenda of our
country, which attaches the greatest importance to the
protection of the rights of children in armed conflicts.
This was a top priority during our most recent term on
the Security Council, in 2017, and is currently at the
core of our mandate in the Human Rights Council.
Together with Belgium, we organized a seminar on
the protection of children in armed conflicts in Brussels
on 8 July to mark the seventieth anniversary of the
Geneva Conventions and the thirtieth anniversary of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. We endorsed
the Paris Principles on Children Associated with Armed
Forces or Armed Groups and the Vancouver Principles
on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers, being cognizant of the
crucial importance of mainstreaming these principles
into the wider peacekeeping agenda.
We were also among the first signatories to the
Oslo Safe Schools Declaration, as we value the key role
of education in promoting stable and peaceful societies
where children can feel safe to learn and become actors
of positive change. We have been devoting particular
efforts to the protection of schools ever since. In 2018,
we allocated more than 10 per cent of our humanitarian
budget to emergency interventions in the field of
education and school infrastructure.
We commend the relentless commitment of the
Secretariat and of Special Representative Gamba,

19-2435339/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

as well as the initiatives they promote in order to
protect children in conflict, such as the launch of
the Act to Protect campaign with the co-sponsorship
of the African Union and the European Union. We
are convinced that cooperation between regional and
subregional organizations is crucial in addressing this
problem, as recognized in resolution 2427 (2018).
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict (S/2019/509) and the
thorough analysis it provides. Huge efforts have been
carried out in mediation and peacebuilding, prevention
and protection, and for the release and reintegration of
children, including through dedicated child protection
advisers. There is now an important normative
framework in place and legal instruments to enforce
the law.
Yet, as the Secretary-General’s report clearly
highlights, much work remains to be done. More
than 24,000 violations were verified by the United
Nations across 20 countries. Schools and hospitals
continue to be the unfortunate targets of indiscriminate
attacks, while children are arrested and detained upon
alleged association with armed and terrorist groups.
The changing nature of conflicts and their growing
complexity, their length and their urban nature are
disproportionally affecting children. The statistics on
those falling prey to traffickers, terrorist and armed
groups exemplify the need for cohesive and urgent
action by the international community.
Against that backdrop, we must ensure the full
implementation of our political commitments and
strengthen our efforts. We need to continue fostering
the widest adhesion by Member States to the relevant
international instruments, in particular the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflicts,
and promote their effective implementation and
enforcement. Our interventions should aim at providing
a child rights-based response to the problem, bearing
in mind the best interests of the children in all actions
concerning their lives and treating children separated
from armed groups as victims, consistent with
resolution 2427 (2018).
Prevention is key. We must engage in reintegration
programmes, including psychological support for victims
and education and vocational training with special
regard to children with disabilities, as stressed by the
recently adopted resolution 2475 (2019). Accountability
40/90

02/08/2019

at the national and international levels remains
fundamental. It is also important to continue promoting
educational and communicational programmes with a
view to raising public awareness on the centrality of
protecting children in armed conflicts, involving all
governmental and non-governmental actors.
Italy stands ready to face up to this challenge. We
are fully engaged and will continue to be committed,
in cooperation with the United Nations and the other
Member States, to increasing our common efforts
to curb this heinous phenomenon and help children
return to their childhoods within peaceful and
inclusive societies.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Ukraine appreciates the
initiative of Poland to hold this open debate, as well
as your personal participation, Mr. President, in this
meeting. We would also like to wish the delegation of
Poland every success in its presidency and appreciate
the attention it pays to Ukraine.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report on
the issue at hand (S/2019/509), as well as the briefers for
their participation and useful presentations.
Before delivering a statement in my national
capacity, I would like to note that Ukraine aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
Let me start with the quote of a notable Polish
doctor and pedagogue Janusz Korczak:
“Children are not the people of tomorrow, but
are people of today. They have a right to be
taken seriously and to be treated with tenderness
and respect”.
As we mark a number of important dates this year,
namely, the thirtieth anniversary of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1882 (2009), it is regrettable that universal
protection of the rights of the child remains a goal yet to
be achieved. The scale of violations committed against
children, as reflected in the Secretary-General’s report,
is nothing short of staggering. Behind dry statistics
lie the fates of thousands of children who have
lived through horrors and sufferings that few in this
Chamber can imagine. When we factor in the issue of
underreporting, the picture becomes even bleaker.
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

It is obvious, therefore, that the work of the United
Nations in this area is far from complete In fact, this
challenge warrants more attention and effort today than
back in 1989, when the Convention on the Rights of the
Child was adopted, under Poland’s leadership. That is
why the right and urgent thing to do is to scale up our
common actions to ensure that the implementation of
existing ambitious resolutions and conventions does not
just remain on paper.
Impunity for grave violations against children
cannot be tolerated. Military recruitment and the use
of children in armed conflicts must finally come to
an end. It is equally important to develop effective
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes. If we
fail to protect our children — or “people of today”, as
coined by Korczak — how can we protect the future
of humankind?
Thirty years ago, the international community
was united in the understanding that children’s
rights require special protection and a continuous
improvement of the situation of children all over the
world, as well as their development and education in
conditions of peace and security. Unfortunately, as a
result of the ongoing Russian aggression, children in the
Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine are deprived
of an opportunity to enjoy life without fear, violence
and death. They continue to account for numerous
casualties from killing and maiming, the indiscriminate
use of force, landmines and cluster munitions.
UNICEF confirms that every escalation of the
hostilities in Donbas threatens access to water and
sanitation for 3.2 million people, including 500,000
children. According to the latest report on the human
rights situation in Ukraine by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, almost
150 children have lost their lives in Donbas. Thousands
of children have become victims of physical and
psychological violence.
It really pains me to show Council members this
photograph. Just look at this young face full of hope,
energy, life, innocence and optimism. This is 16-yearold Stepan Chubenko, a schoolboy from Kramatorsk,
Donetsk oblast, Ukraine. He was a goalkeeper in the
Ukrainian first league youth football team, an activist
and one of the organizers of a local club called Funny
and Inventive People. Those who knew him recall that
he was all smiles, even taking care of a children’s home
in Kramatorsk. He loved life and life loved him back.

S/PV. 8591

A week ago it was exactly five years since his
horrendous killing in cold blood by Russian proxies
near Donetsk. His three killers first tortured him badly,
then fired three shots into Stepan’s head — one shot
from each of them. Does the Council want to know why?
It was simply because Stepan, my young compatriot,
had a blue and yellow ribbon on his backpack. Blue and
yellow — the colours of the Ukrainian flag. He was
killed for simply being a patriot of his own land. The
identities of his executioners are well known; at least
two of them are hiding from justice in Russia.
The human rights and fundamental freedoms
of all residents, especially children, also living in
Crimea — temporarily occupied by the Russian
Federation — continue to be significantly threatened.
Approximately 170 children have been left without
breadwinners, with their fathers arrested, abducted or
murdered by the occupying Power. That is why I would
like to call on the Secretariat once again to include a
reference to the situation of Ukrainian children living
in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine in
the relevant thematic reports.
On its part, Ukraine, as party to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol and the
Paris Commitments and Paris Principles on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, is
exerting utmost efforts to develop and secure social
protection and reintegration for children who have
been affected by the conflict and displacement. In that
regard, we greatly appreciate longstanding cooperation
with United Nations agencies — with UNICEF at the
top of the list — in order to ensure the protection of
children. We stand ready to remain a reliable United
Nations partner in this crucial area.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Auväärt (Estonia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this very important and timely meeting.
I am delivering this statement on behalf of Latvia,
Lithuania and my own country, Estonia. We would like
to align ourselves with the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union.
First, let me reiterate that we strongly support the
agenda for children and armed conflict and the mandate
of the Special Representative, Ms. Virginia Gamba.
We also highly value the work of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We

19-2435341/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

02/08/2019

welcome the signing of national action plans on children
and armed conflict. However, that should be viewed
only as the first step, as the successful implementation
of the plans is what matters most. We would like to see
progress on the ground.

report of the Secretary-General. We welcome the good
cooperation of the Special Representative with the
European Union, including within the framework of
the Act to Protect campaign, as we encourage stronger
regional cooperation in different parts of the world.

We are pleased and encouraged by the findings of
the recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/509),
which shows that the number of children released
from armed groups and forces was — for the first
time last year — higher than number of children
recruited. We welcome the release of 40 boys by tribal
armed groups in Iraq, as reported by the SecretaryGeneral, and South Sudan’s accession to the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, and
encourage the implementation of its provisions. This
trend should continue.

We strongly support a comprehensive approach to
the children and armed conflict agenda and look forward
to strengthening the capacity of the United Nations in
this field. In that regard, we would like to express our
support for the highly valuable work of child protection
advisers. Monitoring and reporting violations against
children is essential in order to achieve progress and
prevent future crimes. We hope that the presence of child
protection advisers will soon be a common practice, not
an exception, in peacekeeping operations. It is no less
important to stress the need of predeployment training
on children’s rights for peacekeepers in order to ensure
positive and qualified first contact with children
experiencing grave violations against them.

At the same time, we have learned with concern
that verified cases of killing and maiming of children
reached record levels since the creation of the monitoring
and reporting mechanism. We are especially concerned
about the alarming increase in the number of violations
attributed to State actors and international forces as
compared with 2017.
We unequivocally condemn all violations against
children and strongly urge for the cessation of such
violations and putting effective protection measures
in place. We should aim for the full elimination of all
grave violations. On sexual violence, let me stress the
importance of providing timely and effective support
services and gender-sensitive rehabilitation programmes
for child survivors. Prosecuting criminals and holding
them accountable is paramount in delivering justice
and preventing future crimes.
We fully support the inclusive and communitycentred reintegration of children associated with
armed forces or armed groups. Ensuring access to
quality education programmes and providing social
and psychological support to children is fundamental
for putting long-term viable alternatives to military life
in place. Children associated with parties to conflicts
should be treated as victims. Their rehabilitation and
reintegration should be the primary objective.
We welcome the collaboration between the United
Nations and local authorities in the area of Zintan in
Libya on the reintegration of children and engagement
with armed groups to end and prevent the recruitment
and use of children, which was mentioned in the latest
42/90

To conclude, let me express our full appreciation
for the work of grassroots organizations and activists.
We hope that the Security Council can make better
use of their insights and advice in future. In that
regard, we would like to thank today’s civil society
briefers — Ms. Mariatu Kamara and Mr. Majok Peter
Awan — for their powerful statements based on their
own personal stories.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Souza Monteiro (Brazil): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate on an issue
of crucial importance. I would also like to express our
appreciation to the Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba, for her
presentation of the Secretary-General’s annual report
on the issue (S/2019/509). We welcome the briefing by
the Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Henrietta Fore,
and we also express our appreciation to Ms. Mariatu
Kamara and Mr. Majok Peter Awan for sharing their
experiences in relation to this important subject.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General
shows alarming numbers of violations against children
in armed conflicts. This seems to be part of a broader and
worrisome trend in which reports of blatant disrespect
for international humanitarian law are abundant. Brazil
reiterates its strong condemnation of the targeting and
use of children in armed conflict and reiterates the
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

responsibility of all parties to protect them from the
direct consequences of war.
In situations of armed conflict, respect for
international humanitarian law is a precondition to
protect children from violations, including those
outlined in the Secretary-General’s report, namely,
killing, maiming, sexual violence, recruitment and
abduction. The current challenges in this area are not
the result of a lack of norms, but rather from gaps in
implementation. Therefore, our efforts should first and
foremost be aimed at guaranteeing that all States ensure
respect for international humanitarian law on the part
of all parties.
When violations occur, accountability ensues.
As a founder of the International Criminal Court,
Brazil supports its work to promote accountability for
the perpetrators and reparations for the victims. We
believe the Court’s recent decision to condemn Bosco
Ntaganda sent a powerful message to those who commit
crimes against children in armed conflict. Brazil hopes
that the ruling will help to prevent reoccurrence and
contribute to a culture against the involvement of
children in hostilities.
Although the Secretary-Generals’ report correctly
focuses on the six grave violations against children, it
is clear that the negative impact of armed conflict on
children goes beyond that. War affects the well-being
of children as well as their healthy development and
access to education. To quote the recent report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
in Yemen,
“Children did not start the war [in Yemen],
but they are paying the highest price.”
(S/2019/453, para. 68)
That is why conflict prevention should also be at
the forefront of our debate. The damage that armed
conflict causes children might be mitigated, but it has
not been eliminated. In order to protect children, we
need to promote and sustain peace. Brazil endorsed
the Safe Schools Declaration, which represents an
important political commitment to ensuring children’s
education, even during hostilities. Continuing to attend
school may offer a sense of routine and stability, thereby
alleviating the suffering and chaos caused by war. The
Declaration reinforces the idea that schools should be
safe havens not targets for armed attacks or places for
military use.

S/PV. 8591

Brazil commends the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba,
for launching the ACT to Protect campaign. We
underline our support for measures directed not only
at ending violations, but also at preventing them and
providing adequate services for victims. In this regard,
it is always worth recalling that children against whom
these violations are perpetrated are victims and should
be treated primarily as such.
In conclusion, we reiterate Brazil’s steadfast
support for the protection of children in armed conflict
While recognizing that the Council is divided on a
range of issues, we consider that protecting children
from war should be one common denominator capable
of galvanizing political will towards peace and respect
for international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji.
Mr. Prasad (Fiji): First, let me thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to address the
Council on the impact of armed conflict on children.
I congratulate Poland on bringing forward this open
debate so early in its presidency.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/509)
highlights the world’s continuing collective failure to
protect children in armed conflicts. The SecretaryGeneral’s report highlights grave violations of all
international conventions relating to the protection
of children in armed conflict. The Secretary-General
notes over 20,000 grave violations and over 12,000
deaths and incidences of the maiming of children in
2019 alone. Some 140 million children live in highintensity conflict zones today.
At the same time, the number of successfully
reintegrated children has increased as a result of
sustained actions on the ground by UNICEF and
other agencies. This is heart-warming. The scale of
the challenges, however, calls for a step change. Fiji
welcomes the efforts of the United Nations to strengthen
measures to prevent, protect and assist children in
armed conflicts. Armed conflicts are transforming
before our eyes; they are becoming more protracted
and more complex, with the growing prominence of
non-State actors.
Non-state actors operate across national borders,
but they are also increasingly economically strong and
independent. They monopolize trade and transit routes

19-2435343/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

on land and by sea and they capture drug production
and supply routes, as well as minerals, fish and other
commodities. Children are coerced to enter into this
space as forced labour or sexual slaves and in other
roles across these criminalized commodity chains. The
space between children in armed conflict and children
in slavery has therefore become increasingly grey.
Educational and health facilities must remain
designated prohibited areas for all parties involved in
armed conflicts. Keeping armed parties away from
schools is a key step in creating safe spaces for children
in conflict zones. Peacebuilding and post-conflict
development become so much harder when a whole
generation of children are denied education during the
conflict period. Fiji is a signatory to the Safe Schools
Declaration and we urge all Member States that have
not yet signed on to it to do so.
United Nations peacekeeping plays an important role
in protecting children in conflict zones. Peacekeepers
have the reach and capacity to deliver comfort, security
and protection. United Nations peacekeeping operations
also provide highly specialized skills through their
child protection advisers. Since 2001, child protection
advisers have been deployed in United Nations
peacekeeping missions around the world. They are
currently deployed in six United Nations peacekeeping
missions and it is paramount that they continue to be
well resourced. This function needs to be considerably
enhanced and expanded, however. Today, there are
only five child protection specialists in United Nations
peace operations across the world. This suggests that
we are not matching our words with resources.
More women peacekeepers are an important part of
a revamped, peacekeeping toolkit that is fit for purpose
and can better protect children. Women peacekeepers
are far better at identifying sexual violence faced by
children early on. Women in medical support units
help overcome deep barriers that victims — especially
girls — face in accessing medical, psychosocial and
other forms of support.
On the part of the United Nations, in peace
operations there is a need to better prepare missions
for child protection in complex conflicts, including by
increasing the number of women in policing, military,
corrections and all areas of peace operations. Fiji is
committed to strengthening its own capabilities in this
area and in better preparing for peace operations.
44/90

02/08/2019

Fiji has been participating in United Nations
peacekeeping for the past 40 years. We understand that
the soft skills that peacekeepers bring to communities
are paramount. They allow positive rapport to be built
between peacekeepers and local communities. This
increases the chances of peacekeepers identifying
abuse, exploitation and grave violations of the rights of
children early and more systematically. These soft skills
increase the chances of identifying the weaponization
of food, health and other services in conflict zones. The
blunt truth remains that more children will die today
from the deliberate denial of food and health care than
from weapons.
We, as Member States, have given ourselves the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs); the protection
of children cuts across nearly all of them. The SDGs
apply equally to communities and children living in
conflict zones. The SDGs provide a framework and
a lens through which the United Nations system as a
whole can interact cohesively with the authorities in
conflict zones and systematically across all phases of
conflict. As they do so, they will expand opportunities
for development and thereby expand opportunities for
the successful reintegration of children.
When children are coerced through fear and
manipulation to take up arms, we cause irreparable
damage to their lives and to the future of their
communities. We take away their humanity when
they are locked up. Children associated with armed
groups are victims — nothing more and nothing less.
The United Nations system must do much better in
working with highly specialized civil society agencies
in reintegrating children at a considerably increased
speed and scale.
The Security Council may want to call on the
Secretariat to provide fresh proposals to improve
the mechanisms, expand the obligations of parties
and improve the capabilities of the United Nations
peacekeepers and specialized agencies in order to
aggressively reduce the unacceptable levels of grave
violations of the rights of children in conflict zones.
A step change is needed. That is the minimum we
can do to make the Security Council and the United
Nations relevant to the 140 million children living in
high-intensity conflict zones, who look to us with great
hope and with their prayers today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

Mr. Gohar (Pakistan): My delegation would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this debate.
We are very grateful that you, the Foreign Minister of
Poland, are here to chair this meeting. We also thank
the briefers for their insightful briefings today.
Protracted and emerging conflicts, coupled with
changing war dynamics and operational tactics,
continue to unleash unimaginable horrors. Children
continue to be the principal sufferers. They are killed
and maimed, abducted to fight, used as human shields,
enslaved and sexually abused and denied humanitarian
aid. Their rights are violated, dreams crushed and
hopes for a better future vanquished.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/509)
confirms these horrors, as 2018 recorded the highest
number of casualties as a result of killing and maiming,
with the increase in the number of violations being
attributed to international forces. For children
experiencing enduring distress, conflicts continue
to impact their physical and mental health, including
feelings of fear, anxiety and depression.
All parties to armed conflicts have a responsibility
to protect children from violence, and yet all too often
violations and abuses of international law affecting
children are rampant. In conflict zones and occupied
territories, we are witnessing a deeply troubling
breakdown in humanity and a diminishing respect
for human life and dignity. Such practices present
formidable obstacles to the normative frameworks of
humanitarian and human rights laws, in particular the
rights of children.
Although a number of steps have been taken since
the adoption of the children and armed conflict mandate,
and the past 20 years represent significant progress, a
great deal needs to be done. There are still gaps in its
implementation and obstacles to monitoring the steps
already taken. More needs to be done to ensure that the
fight against impunity is effective and that those who
violate the rights of children are held accountable.
This year marks the thirtieth anniversary of the
adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Pakistan, as one of the earliest signatories of the
Convention and its Optional Protocols, remains fully
cognizant of their importance. We have established
the National Commission for Child Welfare and
Development, which coordinates, monitors and
facilitates its implementation.

S/PV. 8591

Let me underscore four specific points that will
help us improve the situation.
First, the goal of the protection of children and
preventing from them being put at risk can best be
achieved by stopping the outbreak of armed conflict.
The most effective way to protect children is by
preventing and resolving conflicts, ending foreign
occupation and working to sustain peace. That must be
the top priority of the Council.
Secondly, international law and standards must be
upheld. Parties to conflict, including non-State groups,
should abide by their commitments under international
laws and ensure mitigation measures, in compliance
with international law, to prevent grave violations
against children.
Thirdly, perpetrators of violence against children
need to be identified and brought to justice through
national judicial systems.
Fourthly, Government interventions are needed
to fund and invest in programmes aimed at rebuilding
shattered lives.
Pakistan supports the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, but we also believe that it should not
become a tool to achieve political gains and objectives.
The legal parameters of that mandate, as provided for
by the relevant Security Council resolutions, must be
respected. We hope that this principle will be kept in
mind in future reports.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Bavdaž Kuret (Slovenia): I wish to join others
in thanking the Polish presidency for organizing this
open debate. The protection of children, especially
those in armed conflicts and post-conflict situations, is
one of Slovenia’s priorities in the field of human rights.
I also wish to align myself with the statement to
be delivered on behalf of the European Union and the
Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, and
wish to add a couple of remarks in my national capacity.
We would like to join others in thanking all the
briefers. They have our support for their endeavours in
the protection of children affected by armed conflicts
throughout the world and in the promotion of their rights.

19-2435345/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

It has been 10 years since the adoption of resolution
1882 (2009), which is focused on the killing and
maiming of children and sexual violence against
children in conflict. This year also marks the twentieth
anniversary since the Security Council adopted
resolution 1261 (1999), its first resolution on children
and armed conflict, on which the protection mechanism
is based.
Slovenia shares the concerns of the SecretaryGeneral, presented in his latest report (S/2019/509). The
report documents the highest number of verified cases
of the killing and maiming of children yet, especially
due to explosive weapons used in populated areas.
We again call on all parties to conflict to take action
to protect children, in accordance with international
humanitarian law and human rights law, respect for
which is not a choice but an obligation. We also call
on all parties to facilitate safe, timely and unimpeded
access of humanitarian aid to children and other
civilians in need.
Slovenia has a good and long tradition of
supporting projects and activities to protect children
from unexploded remnants of conflict and to provide
children affected by armed conflict with psychosocial
and physical rehabilitation. Our ongoing projects
include the following.
First, a mine-risk education programme for Syrian
refugee children is carried out by the Slovenian
organization International Trust Fund for Enhancing
Human Security in northern Jordan.
Secondly, we provide psychosocial well-being
services for children and young people from Ukraine
who have suffered traumatic experiences due to the
armed conflict in the country, and we support the
physical rehabilitation of a Ukrainian teenage girl who
lost her foot in an explosion.
Thirdly, we provide psychosocial rehabilitation to
Syrian refugee children and their mothers in Jordan.
Fourthly, we offer psychosocial assistance to child
victims of armed conflict in Gaza and their parents.
In addition, Slovenia is contributing to the activities
of the International Committee of the Red Cross to
address sexual violence in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and to those of UNICEF on behalf of
children in Yemen.
46/90

02/08/2019

Since the development of the protection of children
agenda began, the tireless efforts of various actors all
over the globe have had tangible results. Efforts such
as the Paris Principles, the Safe Schools Declaration
and the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the
Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers
need our continuous support and implementation. We
reiterate our call on all States that have not yet done so
to also become a party to the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child.
We support the recommendations that the SecretaryGeneral presents in his report. We feel particularly
strongly about the prevention of violence against
children and education both for children and adults,
which would empower children to know their rights
and claim them and adults to fight the abuse, killing
and maiming of and other crimes against children. It
is vital that children grow up to be promoters of peace
and tolerance and participate in the peaceful settlement
of disputes.
In that light, Slovenia will continue to engage in
national projects, such as the human rights education
campaign for children, entitled “Our Rights”, which
is currently being carried out in Morocco and Egypt
and has benefitted more than 200,000 children in 20
countries over the past 12 years. We will also continue
to support school and peer mediation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We further support the SecretaryGeneral’s call on the Council to ensure that provisions
for the protection of children are included in the relevant
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
For the prevention of grave violations against
children in armed conflict and non-recurrence, it is
crucial that perpetrators be held to account. Slovenia
supports the efforts of international criminal justice,
especially the International Criminal Court, and in
that regard welcomes the recent conviction of Bosco
Ntaganda for war crimes and crimes against humanity,
including sexual violence and the recruitment of
children and their use in hostilities.
In order to complement existing international
criminal law, especially much-needed cooperation,
Slovenia has, together with Argentina, the Netherlands,
Belgium, Senegal and Mongolia, proposed the adoption
of a multilateral procedural instrument concerning
mutual legal assistance and extradition for the domestic
prosecution of the most serious international crimes.
We believe that such an initiative would contribute
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

S/PV. 8591

positively to the protection of children in armed conflict
as well.

the Houthis, in flagrant violation of resolutions 2216
(2015), 2231 (2015) and 2140 (2014).

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.

The Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/509) fairly
recognizes the efforts made by the coalition forces
in Yemen to mitigate the injury of children and the
significant decrease in the number of casualties in 2018.
My country’s Government insists that all necessary
procedures to protect children in armed conflict be
taken in Yemen. We work with our sister countries
in the coalition to make the child protection unit,
established with the agreement of the United Nations
and under the coalition’s leadership, a model for
replication worldwide, as well as a centre of excellence
and knowledge to share with neighbouring countries.

Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate the
friendly country of Poland on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of August; we
wish you every success, Sir.
I also thank the Executive Director of UNICEF,
Ms. Henrietta Fore, and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, for their invaluable briefings,
as well as the other speakers. We further thank you,
Mr. President, for presiding over this meeting and
Poland for choosing this very important topic.
I would like to offer the support of my country to
the United Nations in pursuing the noteworthy agenda
of the protection of children and armed conflict by
drawing the attention of the world to the deliberate
abuse of children perpetrated by various States and
armed groups. We completely condemn that and call
for the international community to fight it by all
means necessary.
One example of such deliberate abuse of children,
including killing and maiming, is the ongoing actions
of Israel against children in Gaza and the West Bank,
including in Al-Quds Al-Sharif. Israel continues to
premeditate the killing by gunfire of children who
are armed with no more than stones, not to mention
its practice of arbitrary detention, torture, killing and
injuring of 2,800 Palestinian children in 2018. Another
example of that abuse is the recruitment and use of
children on the battlefield, as well as training them in
barbarous camps, where they chant sectarian slogans.
They are further used as human shields or mine clearers,
then wept over when their limbs are severed or they are
killed in the field.
Yet another example is what Iran is doing in its
support of sectarian militias in Lebanon and Syria,
especially Hizbullah. The Iranian regime indoctrinates
innocent children in military marches and makes them
carry weapons and chant slogans that they do not
understand. It also continuously supports the Houthi
militias, as confirmed in United Nations reports
confirming the smuggling of Iranian weapons to

Allow me to say that so far we find that the
numbers cited in the report on the casualties of children
caused by the coalition forces are overstated. All
those figures were taken from areas controlled by the
Houthis, and some were impossible for United Nations
monitors to verify. Moreover, United Nations bodies
failed to provide the coalition command with complete
information on the casualties, locations, dates and
times. In the absence of accurate data in those areas,
those figures amount to little more than guesswork.
However, in the very few cases where the coalition
forces were provided with sufficient details, those data
were taken seriously, investigations were conducted,
detailed reports were made and steps taken to prosecute
the perpetrators. We are, in fact, fully cooperating with
the United Nations and the Yemeni authorities to take
all the necessary steps to return any recruited children
who might be found to their countries and to help the
Yemeni authorities to rehabilitate those children and
reintegrate them into society. We acknowledge that the
life of each and every child is very dear and that the
natural place for children is in the classroom or on the
playground, not on the battlefield.
I would also like to say that the humanitarian aid
that Saudi Arabia has offered to the Yemeni people
is in the hundreds of millions of dollars, including its
most recent contribution of $40 million to UNICEF for
the protection of children. That support, according to
United Nations officials, has saved tens of thousands of
children from death at the hands of hunger or morbidity.
We hope that the international community will
condemn the rebels who continue to refuse to implement
resolution 2216 (2015) and who continue to defer the
implementation of the Stockholm agreement on the

19-2435347/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

withdrawal from Al-Hudaydah, which is considered
to be the first step towards a comprehensive political
solution to restore security, stability and legitimacy in
Yemen and put an end to the scourge of war and its
impact on the steadfast Yemeni people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Skinner-Klée Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me to commend your delegation,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on a topic
of high relevance in the context of today’s world. We
are grateful for your concept note (S/2019/605, annex),
which provides valuable guidance for this debate. We
further extend our thanks to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and the Executive Director of UNICEF for
their valuable briefings, as well as to the other speakers.
Since 1999, the Security Council has adopted
specific resolutions on children and armed conflict.
Each of those resolutions contains increasingly
stringent provisions on the protection to be accorded to
children. The Security Council has taken a particular
interest in preventing children from suffering the
tragic consequences of armed conflict. It is clear that
comprehensive development cannot be achieved, let
alone peaceful societies, without the comprehensive
protection of children.
Despite the efforts of the international community
to prevent any threat to children, we continue to learn
of serious abuses committed against children by armed
groups, which not only constitute a grave violation of
their human rights, but are also testament to a clear
disregard for human life. We are concerned that we are
currently witnessing an increase in civilian casualties
in armed conflicts, with children falling victim to
atrocious and ruthless violence. The macabre scenes
of indiscriminate attacks on hospitals and schools,
direct attacks on civilians with explosive weapons, air
strikes and the use of chemical weapons, which claim
numerous civilian casualties — including thousands of
children, who are also deprived of their basic rights, if
not subject to death — should be sharply sanctioned by
the Security Council as the despicable acts that they are.
Guatemala therefore reiterates its commitment to
peace and expresses its strong condemnation of the
recruitment of children, who are compelled by armed
groups to serve as soldiers and, worse still, as human
shields in warlike confrontations between parties to
48/90

02/08/2019

conflict, robbing them of their innocence and even
their lives.
It is not enough to be aware of the barbarism
afflicting children; we must take drastic steps to
prevent those terrible vicissitudes. It is imperative to
take additional action to prevent impunity for those who
commit serious crimes against children, especially acts
of sexual violence and servitude, common abuses in
various situations included in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2019/509). We therefore must redouble our
efforts to develop effective protection mechanisms
focused on the defence of children and to implement the
tenets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The devastating consequences of armed conflicts
can destroy the social fabric of a country. That is
why we believe that the approach on prevention must
be reinforced by taking steps to entrench a culture
of peace, respect and tolerance. It is indispensable to
undertake significant efforts to ensure the protection
of children in any broad prevention strategy, including
the rehabilitation and reintegration of children in their
communities, which would foster sustainable peace,
in line with General Assembly resolution 70/272 and
Security Council resolution 2282 (2016).
This is also a timely occasion to recall the
importance of cooperation and assistance among
Member States, as established by the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, which my
country, Guatemala, ratified on 9 May 2002, in order to
coordinate actions and share best practices to prevent,
document and address violations against children in
armed conflict. We must also support the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, in
collaboration with UNICEF and other United Nations
system agencies.
We welcome the Council’s adoption of resolution
2475 (2019), on the protection of persons with
disabilities, including children, which not only
highlights the deep concern about the disproportionate
impact of armed conflict on persons with disabilities,
including the potential for abandonment, violence
and a lack of access to basic services, but which also
addresses the assistance and protection needs of all
affected civilians.
To conclude, my delegation wishes to underscore
our commitment to ensuring and protecting the rights
of every child. In May, Guatemala endorsed the Safe
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

Schools Declaration, joining the 89 countries that
have signed on to that initiative, through which strong
political support is expressed for the protection of every
child and young student, teacher and school buildings.
We call on all the countries that have not yet done so
to join the initiative. Defending children is a moral
and political imperative that sends a message of hope
and a clear sign of our collective will. If we continue
working together, we will be able to fully live up to our
responsibility to protect children — the most cherished
part of our population.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Srivihok (Thailand): At the outset, I would like
to align my statement with that to be delivered by the
representative of Viet Nam on behalf of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations.
Let me also join others in expressing my appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his latest report
(S/2019/509), to Poland for convening this open debate,
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict for her dedication,
and to the briefers for their insightful perspectives.
The Secretary-General’s annual report plays an
important role in guiding Member States on how
to strengthen child protection. For that reason, we
welcome the enhanced engagement between Member
States and the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict in the preparation of the report. We also
welcome further possible regional engagement on that
issue. Allow me to highlight a few elements, drawing
from our experiences that we feel are relevant to the
discussion today.
First, stronger partnership is key. All stakeholders
must work closely to address the evolving tactics used
to recruit children, including through online and social
media platforms. In addition to law enforcement, strong
community advocacy and education can provide the
best defence for children falling prey to recruitment.
Secondly, mainstreaming child protection into
relevant United Nations peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and political missions is vital. In armed conflict
situations, peacekeepers are often at the forefront in
protecting children. We underscore the importance of
having clear mandates and guidelines for their effective
operation. Peacekeepers and peacebuilders also need

S/PV. 8591

specific predeployment and in-mission training on
issues concerning children affected by armed conflict.
On our part, as a standard procedure Thai
peacekeepers are trained to assist the local population
in its efforts to prevent the relapse into armed conflict
and to ensure sustainable development. Those elements
include international law, child protection, genderbased issues, the protection of civilians, conflictrelated sexual violence and cultural sensitivity. We
have also recently endorsed the Vancouver Principles
on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers. Our military personnel — one
trainer and one officer who is going to be deployed in
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan — will
also attend the upcoming United Nations Military
Specialized Training on Child Protection, to be held in
October in Sweden.
We also firmly believe in the importance of
knowledge-sharing and implementing best practices
and lessons learned. We are therefore pleased to
announce that Thailand is working towards becoming
a first-ever regional centre of excellence on the issue of
children and armed conflict, bringing our experiences
and commitments with respect to the country that
will be removed from the report this year, to further
strengthening collaboration on the child protection.
We have been working closely with the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict. In fact, we are pleased to
learn that the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and her team will be travelling to Bangkok at
the end of this month, where we will further enhance our
collaboration, especially on the regional training course
on the issue of children and armed conflict, which is
tentatively to be held in Bangkok early September.
The international community must continue its
work in all possible ways to put an end to the suffering
of children in conflict. Thailand endeavours to do
its part and looks forward to working with others to
amplify our efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): I would like to thank
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict and the Executive Director of UNICEF for
their briefings; but most of all, I would like to thank
Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan for their moving remarks.

19-2435349/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

We, unfortunately, meet here yet again to discuss
the horror of children in armed conflict. Every year,
many of us end our remarks with words of hope for a
better future for the next generation and then reconvene
the next year to find the state of children in the world in
an even more dismal predicament.
As
the
Secretary-General’s
latest
report
(S/2019/509) on that topic unfortunately outlines, 2018
was yet another record year for the number of children
killed and maimed in the context of armed conflict. We
support the focus in this year’s report on highlighting
and condemning the recruitment of children by terrorist
groups, including the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and others. We also welcome recent efforts here
at the United Nations to support the reintegration of
child soldiers and the creation of the Global Coalition
for the Reintegration of Former Child Soldiers to
support such efforts.
In our region, children continue to be plagued
by violence, with 1,854 child casualties reported in
Syria and 1,689 in Yemen. In our immediate vicinity,
we witness the daily exploitation of Palestinian youth
by Hamas and other terrorist groups. Children in
Gaza are manipulated and used as human shields in
violent protests organized and funded by Hamas at the
security fence border in Israel. They are encouraged to
fly incendiary kites that burn the fields that feed the
families of Israeli children. They are educated using
textbooks that incite violence and hatred, rather than
being taught tolerance and co-existence. They hear
their leaders calling for the killing of Jews. That is no
less than child abuse and no less than the most flagrant
violation of international law.
In that vein, we note the Secretary-General’s
recognition of the disturbing phenomenon of the
recruitment of Palestinian children by Hamas and
Palestinian Islamic Jihad. We also note his call
for Palestinian actors to refrain from encouraging
children’s participation in violence. However, we still
feel that more should be said about the way children
are cynically and dangerously used and manipulated
in that context by Hamas and other Palestinian
terrorist organizations.
In the south of Israel, meanwhile, we have witnessed
yet another year with massive school cancellations
due to Hamas’s rocket fire that targets those very
Israeli academic institutions. In recent months, we
have had days in which over 300,000 pupils have
50/90

02/08/2019

missed school due to massive rocket attacks from the
Gaza Strip. As the Secretary-General’s report notes,
we have seen rockets and incendiary devices explode
in or near kindergartens and school playgrounds. We
have witnessed direct rocket attacks on Israeli private
homes, which have left Israeli children — including
teenagers, toddlers and infants — seriously injured. We
have seen a drive-by shooting of a pregnant mother — a
heinous act of violence that was praised by the Hamas
leadership — which led to the premature birth and
eventual death of the newborn infant, Amiad Yisrael
Ish-Ran. We were disappointed that this year’s report
yet again does not include a clear condemnation of the
continued targeting of Israeli civilians by rockets and
mortars, and we hope to see language to that effect in
future reports.
I end my remarks yet again with our sincere
hope and prayers that when we reconvene in 2020
to discuss children and armed conflict, we will have
made significant progress in keeping children safe.
We appreciate the efforts of Member States and
international bodies that are trying to improve the fate
of children globally, but clearly more needs to be done.
We must all adopt a zero-tolerance policy on incitement
to violence and stop the abuse of social media to spread
hatred, particularly among children. We must teach
tolerance and coexistence, not prejudice and hatred,
and we must all condemn the terrorist groups that drive
the conflict and bring about the maiming, injury and
death of children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Verdier (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
congratulate Poland on having assumed the presidency
of the Security Council and organized this debate
on a very topical issue. We are also grateful for the
briefings delivered by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba; the Executive Director of the
UNICEF, Ms. Henrietta Fore; as well as Ms. Mariatu
Kamara and Mr. Majok Peter Awan.
We also extend our appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his latest report (S/2019/509). In that
regard, we share his grave concern at the alarming
increase registered in 2018 in the number of serious
violations of children’s rights committed by State
actors in the context of the intensification of armed
conflicts and their changing dynamics. Moreover, we
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

wish to express our strongest condemnation of the
record levels of murders and maiming of children in
2018, as well as cases of sexual violence and attacks on
schools and hospitals, all of which have had devastating
consequences on children.
Argentina has been an active and strong advocate
of the Oslo Safe Schools Declaration since its inception,
in the understanding that education is fundamental for
the development and full enjoyment of human rights.
Continuous access to safe education constitutes an
essential protection mechanism for children and young
people in armed conflicts, helping them to reach their
potential and contributing to the building of stronger
communities. In that regard, we call on all parties to put
an immediate end to grave violations against children,
encourage the implementation of all necessary
measures aimed at preventing such violations, ensure
due accountability for the perpetrators and provide
children with appropriate humanitarian assistance
to meet their needs, rooted in a human rights-based
approach that recognizes children as victims of these
grave violations.
We also wish to highlight and express our support
for the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Virginia Gamba, and that of
the Global Coalition for the Reintegration of Former
Child Soldiers, for their important initiative, which
provides us with a renewed and broader understanding
of reintegration, not only in terms of the immediate
provision of humanitarian assistance but also as a longterm commitment to ensuring that child reintegration
programmes
are
future-oriented,
involve
all
stakeholders in society and are focused on the specific
needs of children.
It should be noted that persons with disabilities,
especially children, are among the most marginalized
in any community affected by any crisis. In that regard,
in line with resolution 2475 (2019) on the protection of
persons with disabilities in armed conflict, adopted in
June, we endorse the Secretary-General’s call in his
report regarding the importance of reintegration being
focused on the specific needs of children, including
children with disabilities.
To conclude, it is crucial that we consider concrete
actions to fulfil the cross-cutting principle of leaving
no one behind. Argentina reiterates the imperative
need to agree on and implement measures with a
view to increasing the pressure from the international

S/PV. 8591

community on State and non-State actors who commit
violations against children. Such efforts should be
carried out within the framework of absolute respect for
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and refugee law. Only by working towards a
humanitarian approach to development and peace will
we see lasting results in ensuring respect for human
rights and the successful reintegration of all children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke
in Spanish): Our thanks go to Poland for having
convened this important open debate. I also wish to
thank Ms. Virginia Gamba and Ms. Henrietta Fore
for their valuable briefings, as well as the civil society
representatives for their moving testimony.
Uruguay aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
The figures contained in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2019/509) are alarming and overwhelming. In
2018, there were more than 24,000 verified cases of grave
violations perpetrated against children. Cases of murder
and maiming reached unprecedented levels. Attacks on
hospitals and schools multiplied overwhelmingly in
certain regions, including in Syria, Afghanistan and
Yemen. Sexual violence continues to be perpetrated
against children, often under the protection of ominous
silence. Another illustrative fact is that while the
number of violations committed by non-State groups
remained steady, there was an alarming increase in
those attributed to State actors and international forces.
That bears testament to the fact that, sadly, it is States
themselves that have been responsible for the increase
in attacks on the most innocent and vulnerable victims,
which is truly reprehensible.
We must put an end to the suffering that is growing
incessantly year after year and alleviate the critical
situation of children mired in the tragedy of war. To that
end, it is essential to properly harness all instruments
and mechanisms at the international community’s
disposal to protect children and defend their rights, as
well as to monitor, investigate and punish the grave
violations committed against them. Uruguay urges all
States that have not yet done so to become party to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocols — especially that on the involvement of
children in armed conflict — to implement resolution

19-2435351/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

2286 (2016) and to endorse the Paris and Vancouver
Principles and the Safe Schools Declaration.
The increase in the number of child fatalities and
injuries is, to a large extent, a result of the growing
use of explosive weapons, in particular mines and
improvised explosive devices, as well as indiscriminate
air strikes in densely populated areas. It is therefore
necessary that we continue to work tirelessly on the
disarmament agenda and carry out a review on the
production and responsible trading of weapons. States
must shoulder their obligations in that connection.
The economic interests that fuel the manufacture
and sale of weapons should not be allowed to prevail at
the cost of the bloodshed and suffering of defenceless
beings. Uruguay also values ​​
the role played by the
instruments available to the children and armed conflict
agenda. The monitoring and reporting mechanism is a
powerful tool, as is the list annexed to the SecretaryGeneral’s annual report. In order to be effective, that list
must be independent, impartial and rigorous and should
include non-State and State actors alike when there is
evidence that they have committed grave violations
against children. There is no place on that list for half
measures, waivers or exemptions of any kind. In that
sense, the ability of the instrument to respond to and
prevent such violations will not be impaired.
The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral also has a decisive role to play. We recognize
her continued efforts and those of her team, as well
as her valuable initiatives, including the recently
established Global Coalition for the Reintegration of
Former Child Soldiers, and we reiterate our support for
her work. We also commend the tireless work carried
out every day by UNICEF in defence of the rights of
children in conflict zones.
Accountability is also essential to preventing and
combating impunity. The International Criminal Court
must be supported, and the Security Council must
shoulder its responsibility to refer cases to the Court,
when appropriate.
To conclude, I should like to mention a central issue
to the recovery of children affected by conflict, namely
education. Nelson Mandela, a fervent champion of peace
and dignity for all human beings, said, “Education is
the most powerful weapon which you can use to change
the world”. The testimonies delivered by Ms. Mariatu
Kamara and Mr. Majok Peter Awan, who put a face to
the statistics and gave a voice to hundreds of thousands
52/90

02/08/2019

of victims, are proof of that. Together with health care
and psychosocial care, we must invest time, effort and
resources to ensure that education is available to all,
and the international community must collaborate
to that end. Education offers valid alternatives for
victims facing a future that often appears hopeless
and uncertain. Through the transformative power of
education, children and young people will acquire the
skills and economic security necessary to break the
circle of violence, while learning the values ​​of humanity
and coexistence that will allow them to build healthy,
peaceful and sustainable societies.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. López García de Lomana (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): The two previous speakers discussed the issue
of education. Spain also wishes to address that matter.
I should like to begin by reaffirming the widely
shared notion that children, and especially girls, are
the most exposed victims in any armed conflict. They
are vulnerable on account of a twofold defencelessness,
both as members of the civilian population and owing to
their status as minors. This means that crimes against
children are particularly appalling and reprehensible.
The protection of children must therefore always
remain our priority.
As part of Spain’s firm commitment to humanitarian
law and diplomacy, which is widely recognized in the
Council, I wish to address today the important dimension
of education, because an organization without training
is an organization doomed to paralysis. In the same
vein, a country without access to education is a country
without possibilities for development or stability.
In post-conflict situations, education is the
key — and practically the only key — that allows
access to reintegration, economic prosperity and
social reconciliation in coexistence. In the face of
those challenges, the 2015 Safe Schools Declaration
is an effective political commitment that articulates
tangible measures. In May, Spain had the privilege of
organizing the third Safe Schools Conference in Palma
de Mallorca, following on from those that took place in
Oslo in 2015 and Buenos Aires in 2017. Three lines of
action underpinned the Mallorca Conference: gender,
accountability and doctrine.
First, attacks on schools and the military use
of educational facilities have particularly acute
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

consequences on the gender dimension. In wartime,
women and girls are often a specific target — they
suffer rape and abduction, they are victims of human
trafficking, and they suffer greater atrocities and
for longer periods of time, with longer-lasting
consequences. In the field of education, girls are the
first to leave school and the last to return. We should
keep that in mind when we apply the Lucens Guidelines
for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military
Use during Armed Conflict, which is a fundamental
reference point in the Safe Schools Declaration. We
cannot simply remove our gender glasses as they are
essential to identifying those who are most vulnerable.
Secondly, on accountability, Spain will continue to
promote monitoring, reporting and the establishment
of mechanisms to attribute accountability for attacks
against students, teachers and schools. In that regard,
we commend the excellent work of both UNICEF and
the Global Coalition to Protect Education from Attack,
which includes UNESCO.
Thirdly, the incorporation of all of these principles
into the domestic legal systems of States is linked to
the implementation of the Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict. We advocate the incorporation of
these principles into military doctrine manuals, the
design of defence policies and the legislation of States
parties to the Safe Schools Declaration. Our Ministries
of Foreign Affairs and Defence are already working on
organizing a specific seminar on this topic that will
take place in the first half of 2020 and will allow us to
offer assistance to other countries that are a party to the
Declaration that have experienced conflict situations.
The third Safe Schools Conference allowed us to
share lessons learned, articulate practical responses
and reflect on some of the main challenges that remain.
Progress is always the fruit of joint work. The Mallorca
Conference brought together 78 national delegations,
13 international organizations and 23 civil society
entities. Without their support and without our close
collaboration with Norway and Argentina, which we
value greatly, none of that would have been possible.
Ninety-five countries have so far acceded to the Safe
Schools Declaration. We hope to soon surpass the
symbolic figure of 100 States and gain further accessions
to the Declaration, not only because of the landmark
importance of those numbers, but also because it will be
a sign of growing support and momentum and promote
the effective application of our operational principles.

S/PV. 8591

I conclude by thanking Poland for having
convened this debate and especially for its work in the
humanitarian field on the Council, culminating in the
recently adopted resolutions. I wish to underscore the
value of the statements delivered by today’s briefers.
We are especially pleased to have heard today from
Ms. Virginia Gamba and Ms. Henrietta Fore, and we
wish to express our most sincere gratitude to both of
them for their contributions at the Conference in Palma
de Mallorca.
We need to ensure that the Safe Schools Declaration
is progressively consolidated as a framework of
universal validity — as universal as the principles that
support it; as universal as human rights themselves; as
universal as the right to life and childhood education.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): First of all, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on having assumed the
presidency of the Council, and to wish you all the best for
the month ahead. I also want to thank today’s briefers,
in particular Ms. Mariatu Kamara and Mr. Majok Peter
Awan, for having delivered such important and moving
personal testimony to us here today.
The facts revealed in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2019/509) are stark. Children remain at the
front line of armed conflicts across the world. We have
heard this morning that some 13,600 children have
been released and reintegrated, which is undoubtedly
a positive development. However, that is no cause for
celebration, as the same period saw more than 24,000
grave violations against children recorded across
20 countries.
It is evident that in these times of crisis, our
common efforts to protect all children from aggression
and violence fall far short of where we need to be.
Collectively, we must do more. We believe that the
Council has an important role to play. In the past year
we have seen the Security Council unite to address this
issue, including last July with the adoption of resolution
2427 (2018), which states that children recruited by
armed groups should be treated primarily as victims of
violations of international law, and just recently with
the adoption of resolution 2475 (2019), led by Poland
and the United Kingdom, on persons with disabilities.
That resolution contains important language on the
specific needs of children with disabilities affected by

19-2435353/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

02/08/2019

armed conflict. For our part, Ireland was pleased to
co-sponsor both of those resolutions.

of arrest warrants and the provision of adequate
financial support.

Our collective challenge now, as ever, is moving
towards implementation. One way to do that is to deliver
on the ACT to Protect agenda, launched earlier this year
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba.
A key action on that agenda is to deliver services to
children affected by war. Ireland’s international
development policy, launched earlier this year, commits
us to increasing our spending on education, with a
particular focus on emergencies. When violence erupts,
children are frequently denied education, leaving them
open to indoctrination or exploitation. Education is
increasingly being recognized as a vehicle for helping
children to deal with trauma and a means to equip
children with the knowledge and skills necessary to
develop and contribute to rebuilding their communities
and countries. That forms a core part of our third
national action plan on women and peace and security,
which, along with our new development policy, contains
a commitment to delivering on a target of a quarter of
a billion euros to improve global education, especially
for girls in conflict-affected areas.

In conclusion, we must do more to implement the
resolutions of the Council. We must ensure respect
for international humanitarian law and demand
accountability for its violation. We must continue to
listen to testimonies like those of Ms. Kamara and
Mr. Awan and heed their calls for action. Put simply, we
must do more to protect our children. This is a priority
for Ireland, and with the support of our partners here
at the United Nations in the near future, it is a topic on
which we would work actively as an elected member of
the Security Council for the term 2021-2022.

We are also supportive of reintegration programmes,
which are fundamental to realizing the rights of the child,
ending the cycle of violence and ensuring sustainable
peace. This year, Ireland joined the Group of Friends
of Reintegration of Child Soldiers. Such groups help
to shed light on how the legacy of conflict continues
to affect children long after the guns themselves have
been silenced. We also need to do more, as Special
Representative Gamba said here earlier, to reduce the
devastating impact caused by land mines, improvised
explosive devices and unexploded ordnance.
We must work to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law and, importantly, strengthen
accountability for all violations. Ensuring compliance
with international humanitarian law is all the more
important in a context of the increased urbanization
of conflict, in which the risk of violations is greater.
These violations, including the denial of humanitarian
access and attacks against schools, medical facilities
and personnel, are utterly unacceptable. The Security
Council must play its role in ensuring accountability
and referring violations to the International Criminal
Court, and the Council must work to ensure that any
referral is accompanied by ongoing support for the
Court, particularly with respect to the execution
54/90

I thank you again, Mr President, for having
organized this important debate. I can assure you of
my country’s continued commitment to working with
our partners here at the United Nations and globally
to protect children from all forms of aggression
and violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Ham Sang Wook (Republic of Korea): I would
first like to congratulate Poland on having assumed the
presidency of the Security Council, and I assure you,
Mr. President, that Poland can count on the full support
and cooperation of my delegation. I also join previous
speakers in commending your initiative to convene
today’s important meeting, and I thank the briefers for
their inspiring briefings.
Over the past 20-some years, we have endeavoured
to advance the protection of children in armed conflict
and have achieved some progress to date. However, we
cannot deny that there remains a significant gap between
our goals and the harsh realities that we continue to
face. It is simply appalling that, in 2018 alone, more
than 24,000 verified violations were committed against
children globally and that the number of casualties as
a result of the killing and maiming of children reached
record-high levels.
Against this disturbing backdrop, and while
aligning myself with the statement made by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, I would like
to highlight three points of particular importance in
addressing this challenge.
First, I would like to emphasize the strategic
significance of reintegrating children affected by
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

armed conflict. The Republic of Korea, as a member of
the Steering Committee of the Global Coalition for the
Reintegration of Former Child Soldiers, recently hosted
three consultations and side events with the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and UNICEF. We place
a high priority on this issue because we believe that the
better reintegration of former child soldiers will help to
fundamentally break the vicious cycle of violence.
Child reintegration programmes must take
a community-based approach in order to avoid
stigmatization. We must convince communities of the
reasons for which children need to be both accepted and
supported by their communities, and the best way to do
so is to ensure that the communities see and enjoy the
concrete benefits that reintegration programmes bring.
Furthermore, child reintegration — with its inherent
community-based nature, long time frames and broad
range of programmes, which include education,
vocational training, health services and psychosocial
support, inter alia — is the perfect example of where
greater coherence and coordination are called for among
the peace and security, development and humanitarian
pillars of the United Nations.
Secondly, we must do more to address sexual
violence against children. Resolution 1882 (2009)
expressed deep concern about the appalling levels of
sexual violence committed against children in armed
conflicts. Ten years have now passed since the adoption
of that resolution, and it is deeply alarming that the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/509) still documents
more than 900 verified cases of sexual violence against
children. A survivor-centred approach is of the utmost
importance, while timely and comprehensive support
to ensure non-discriminatory and multisectoral
assistance to all survivors of sexual violence, including
the clinical management of rape and the provision of
medical, psychosocial and legal services, is essential.
These were some of the points raised last month
in Seoul as the Republic of Korea hosted the first
International Conference on Action with Women and
Peace. The Conference focused on building a strong
global partnership to combat sexual violence in conflict
and benefited from the active participation of leaders
from Governments, international organizations and
civil society.
Thirdly, we must ensure accountability for all
violations committed against children. Strengthening
accountability and abolishing impunity is the key to

S/PV. 8591

ending gross violations and preventing recurrence.
Those who have committed grave violations against
children must be held accountable through both
national and international justice systems, including
the International Criminal Court. At the same time,
we must support efforts aimed at strengthening State
institutions, centring on truth, reconciliation and justice
with the use of other tools, including, among others,
monitoring and reporting mechanisms established by
the Security Council, the listing of violators in the
Secretary-General’s reports and targeted sanctions to
seek accountability.
The Republic of Korea will continue to work
closely with the international community in our
collective efforts to protect children from the scourge
of armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mrs. Tripathi (India): We wish to congratulate
Poland on its assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month and also wish to thank today’s briefers.
It has been two decades since the Security Council
established the children and armed conflict agenda.
The importance of preventing and ending violations
against children in armed conflicts in order to achieve
sustaining peace is now well-recognized. Given that the
scale and severity of the grave violations perpetrated
against children remain on the rise, it is clear that
there are significant challenges to the effective
implementation of this mandate. We would like to make
four points in that connection.
First, grave violations continue to be perpetrated
by a range of actors in complex situations of armed
conflict. Terrorist networks and other non-State actors
continue to exploit children for their own nefarious
ends. In some situations, the nexus between the State
machinery and the non-State actors pose complex
challenges. The impunity of all such actors must be
ended through resolute action by Governments from
whose territory such entities operate. The international
forces operating in areas of armed conflict must also
ensure full compliance with international humanitarian
law and relevant human rights law in all their responses.
Secondly, there are well-established international
norms to protect children in armed conflicts. Today’s
challenges arise out of the inability to abide by those
established norms. We must focus on consolidating

19-2435355/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

emerging positive trends, such as more parties to
armed conflicts engaging with the United Nations
and releasing and reintegrating children recruited by
different parties. Better integration of child protection
provisions in peace processes and greater accountability
for violations against children are crucial in that
regard. Constructive engagement with the national
Government concerned in the formulation and effective
implementation of child protection action plans is
integral to durable peace. Preventing persistent attacks
on schools, especially girls’ schools, and ensuring heath
care also call for greater attention.
Thirdly, based on our experience of United Nations
peacekeeping over the decades, we understand the
importance of peace operations having sufficient
resources, commensurate with their mandate, and
the requisite number of child protection advisers on
the ground, for the effective implementation of child
protection programmes.
Fourthly, I stress the importance of a credible,
impartial and transparent implementation of the
mandate given to the United Nations system. Despite
the Council’s clear mandate, we are disappointed that
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/509) includes
situations that are not armed conflicts or threats to the
maintenance of international peace and security. That
attempt to selectively expand the mandate to certain
situations only politicizes and instrumentalizes the
agenda, thereby obfuscating and diverting attention
from the real threats to international peace and security.
We are cognizant of the urgency to act now to protect
today’s child victims in order to prevent tomorrow’s
armed conflicts. India remains a committed partner of
the United Nations in that endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of San Marino.
Mr. Beleffi (San Marino): San Marino aligns
itself with the statement delivered previously by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
First of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate, and would like to thank
the briefers for their contributions. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his annual report
(S/2019/509). This year’s report indicates once again
that an enormous number of grave violations persist
across the world. We firmly condemn such violations
56/90

02/08/2019

and continue to support the children and armed
conflict agenda and mandate. We welcome the effective
implementation of existing action plans and the signing
of new ones.
While August marks the 10-year anniversary of
resolution 1882 (2009), it is regrettable that children
in armed conflicts continue to pay a very high
price — they continue to be killed, maimed, raped,
abducted and recruited as soldiers. In addition, more
and more children are living in areas of war. Because
of prolonged conflicts in densely populated areas,
civilians, including children, are under direct attack.
We express our deepest concern for the high number
of boys and girls killed and maimed by indiscriminate
attacks against civilians, and we urge all parties to
uphold their obligations under international law.
Many children have been killed, injured and
traumatized by the use of explosive weapons. The use
of such weapons in urban warfare is also destroying
their homes and vital infrastructure, such as hospitals,
schools and water- and electricity-supply systems.
These attacks cause a disruption of basic services in the
daily lives of civilians. Boys and girls have to flee their
homes. They cannot go to school or receive the medical
attention they need. Furthermore, schools have been
targeted or used by armed forces for military purposes.
As a result, students have been denied their right to
learn and to have a better future. We firmly condemn
such acts, which deprive boys and girls of their right to
an education.
San Marino recently joined the Safe Schools
Declaration, a political commitment to better protect
students, teachers, schools and universities during war,
with the aim of enabling young people to continue their
education. We believe that education is a powerful tool
for peace. As such, it should be supported, respected
and promoted. We therefore urge other countries to join
this instrument.
San Marino believes that the most vulnerable
groups deserve special attention. We therefore
sponsored the recently adopted resolution 2475 (2019),
with its focus on the needs of children with disabilities
in times of conflict.
San Marino also supports the ACT to protect
children affected by conflict campaign, which seeks
to increase awareness about the six grave violations
against boys and girls, including how to stop and
prevent them. It is fundamental to raise awareness,
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

improve the conditions of affected children and prevent
future crimes against them.
Finally, this year San Marino signed on to the
Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the
Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers,
another important instrument for the prevention of the
recruitment of children as soldiers.
We are extremely pleased about the release of more
than 13,000 children from armed forces and armed
groups. We would like to commend the work of the
Office of the Under-Secretary-General for its dedication
and tireless efforts. We need to continue along this path
and raise awareness, free children from recruitment,
stop the horrific violations, support children’s recovery
from conflict-related trauma and work systematically
for their rehabilitation.
Protecting children should be an integral part of
any peace process. We should not forget that we can
make a huge difference in the lives of these boys and
girls. By helping children in conflicts, we are sowing
the seeds for a better and more peaceful world.
The President: I now give the floor to the Chargé
d’affaires ad interim of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Van den Akker: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries the Republic of North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.
I would first like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s debate, as well as to congratulate
Poland on taking up the presidency of the Security
Council. I must also pay particular tribute to our
two civil society briefers, Ms. Mariatu Kamara and
Mr. Majok Peter Awan. I would also like to thank
Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
and Executive Director Henrietta Fore, both for their
briefings today and for their continued leadership.
We thank the Secretary-General for his annual
report (S/2019/509), which identifies some positive
developments. But it is troubling to note that the total
number of grave violations, which was already quite
significant, has further increased. That includes over

S/PV. 8591

12,000 cases of killing and maiming. It is clear that we
must do more to address this particular violation in a
context where the use of indiscriminate and excessive
force, notably in urban areas, is leading to increased
numbers of child casualties. Many of those children
suffer long-term disabilities, and we welcome the
adoption in June of resolution 2475 (2019), co-authored
by Poland and the United Kingdom, which addresses the
specific needs of children with disabilities in situations
of armed conflict.
We also welcome the adoption in April of
resolution 2467 (2019), at the initiative of Germany,
which acknowledges that women and girls are
disproportionately affected by sexual violence in armed
conflicts and includes important new commitments on
the protection of girls and boys from sexual violence, as
well as children born of sexual violence.
The United Nations system is equipped with a range
of tools to protect children in conflict situations. We
salute the work of UNICEF and other United Nations
child-protection staff working in countries affected
by conflict. We are carefully monitoring the so-called
consolidation process of protection functions in peace
operations and would welcome a Secretariat briefing
on it at a later time. We welcome the signing of new
action plans, as well as the Special Representative’s
continued efforts in that regard. Of course, the signing
of an action plan is not an end in itself. We must remain
focused on implementation.
The annual report on children and armed conflict
plays a crucial role by providing us with verified and
impartial information collected through the monitoring
and reporting mechanism, and the lists in its annexes
are an essential tool in holding parties accountable.
It is vital that the integrity and objectivity of both
the monitoring and reporting mechanism and the
listing process be maintained. The EU hopes that
the subdivision into two sections within each of the
annexes will be a basis for maintaining the high level
of requirements for delisting and will create incentives
for listed parties to swiftly take effective measures to
protect children.
The Security Council Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, currently chaired by Belgium,
continues to make a vital contribution. We welcome the
recent adoption of conclusions on Syria and the clear
condemnation of the Syrian regime for its actions, as
well as the adoption of conclusions on Myanmar. The

19-2435357/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

ACT to Protect campaign launched by the Special
Representative in April, should make a valuable
contribution to awareness-raising and strengthening
efforts to end and prevent all six grave violations
against children.
Accountability is an essential element of
prevention, and those responsible for grave violations
must be brought to justice. The EU reiterates its
continued support for the International Criminal Court.
In resolution 2427 (2018), the Security Council stated
that children formerly recruited by armed groups
should be treated primarily as victims of violations
of international law. That includes children formerly
associated with violent extremist groups, whose human
rights must be fully respected in line with international
law. Unfortunately, in some areas of the world, we see
the prosecution of minors and their parents taking place
without the required due process and safeguards. This
is an issue of grave concern for the European Union.
The children and armed conflict agenda remains
a high priority for the European Union. We support
efforts to prevent the recruitment and use of children,
secure their release and ensure their comprehensive
and successful reintegration through long-term
interventions that follow a rights-based approach and
incorporate a gender perspective.
A full version this statement has been submitted to
the Secretariat.

02/08/2019

Representative Gamba’s ACT to Protect initiative, and
we look forward to engaging on this and other initiatives.
NATO recognizes that protecting children from
the effects of armed conflict is both a moral imperative
and an element essential to breaking cycles of violence.
Since the topic of children and armed conflict was first
addressed at the 2012 NATO Summit in Chicago, we
have made great progress in developing practical, fieldoriented measures to address conflict-related violations
against children. From the North Atlantic Council’s
adoption in 2015 of the policy document entitled
“Protection of Children in Armed Conflict — Way
Forward” to the recent reaffirmation of the policy at
the 2018 Brussels Summit, NATO’S commitment
to the protection of children in conflict areas has
become a prominent piece of our overall protection-ofcivilians approach.
However, it is on the ground, at the operational level,
that we get to see our commitments turned into good
practices, and where we have bolstered our protection
mandate, giving specific attention to the protection of
women and children. We are proud of all our efforts
undertaken to elevate the protection of children in
NATO-led missions and operations. Together with the
United Nations, we have these developed practical,
field-oriented measures to address conflict-related
violations, including adopting standard operating
procedures on the six grave violations.

Ms. Hutchinson: On behalf of NATO, I thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to address
the Security Council on the occasion of today’s open
debate on children and armed conflict. I would like
to thank all the briefers this morning for their very
powerful interventions.

In Afghanistan, NATO’s Resolute Support Mission,
a non-combat mission, was established to train,
advise and assist the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces. The Mission continues to be vigilant
in demonstrating its commitment to delivering on the
principles of child protection through training and
capacity-building. And NATO officials continue to use
opportunities to raise the issue of protecting children
in their political and military engagements with senior
Afghan officials.

This year NATO celebrates its seventieth
anniversary, which provides an opportunity to reflect
on its achievements, but also to look to the future,
because NATO’s core values of democracy, individual
liberty and the rule of law underscore our work on
protection of civilians, in particular the protection of
children and armed conflict. We applaud the efforts
taken by the Security Council and by the international
community, especially those who work tirelessly on the
ground to protect children. We also welcome Special

Predeployment training is critical to articulating
principles and translating them into operational effect.
Such training has therefore become mandatory in
NATO for all personnel deployed to our missions and
operations. Our children and armed conflict policies
are also being systematically incorporated into our
military-exercise scenarios, which means that NATO
commanders receive training to respond to situations
where the six grave violations committed against
children are encountered.

The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of North Atlantic Treaty Organization.

58/90

19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

While training alone is not the answer, it does
ensure that personnel recognize that children are among
the different populations affected by conflict, and those
deployed to protect are trained to prevent, recognize
and respond to any and all violations. To support both
training and mainstreaming of the children and armed
conflict agenda, focal points for children and armed
conflict have been appointed throughout the NATO
command structure. NATO focal points work with the
United Nations and other international actors to share
reports and information wherever possible.
While we are proud of what we have achieved,
there is still much more to do. As we look to the future,
we will continue to guarantee that our commitment to
this agenda is steeped in action. This year we aim to
better outline our political commitments and support
extant efforts aimed at monitoring instances of grave
violations committed against children and at enhancing
the training provided to all NATO personnel.
On this tenth anniversary of resolution 1882
(2009), we echo the concerns about rape and other
forms of sexual violence committed against girls
and boys. We will therefore focus on protection from
sexual violence in the new holistic policy approach
that we are currently developing. Of great importance
is the desire to strengthen our coordination with
other international actors to promote children’s
rights, enhance accountability and further adhere to
international law and norms. Working together is the
only way we can achieve this agenda. NATO looks
forward to sharing some of our good practices with
our international colleagues and to identifying areas
of mutual collaboration, including with the United
Nations and the European Union, and especially with
civil society.
It is obvious that challenges remain, obstructing the
full implementation of the children and armed conflict
agenda. Details of violations against children are too
often taken for granted in global reporting on armed
conflict, and action seems dwarfed by increasing
numbers of child casualties. The international
community has a responsibility to guarantee that
children — all children — are protected. It is a
collective responsibility, and one to which NATO is
fully committed. Protecting children today prevents
conflicts in future — and it is to that peaceful future to
which NATO looks forward.

S/PV. 8591

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank His Excellency
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland and commend
the Polish presidency of the Security Council this
month for convening today’s open debate. We express
our warm appreciation to all of today’s briefers for
their comprehensive reports. We commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General’s team,
UNICEF and the Department of Peace Operations
for their coordinated efforts to put an end to grave
violations against children. We also pay tribute to the
non-governmental organization (NGO) community,
which makes a sterling contribution to upholding
children’s rights.
I will begin by expressing deep concern over the
scale, complexity and severity of the grave violations
committed against children in armed conflict in 2018,
especially over the highest-ever number of child
casualties, as outlined in the Secretary-General’s latest
annual report (S/2019/509). At the same time, the
overall reduction in the number of incidents of child
recruitment and attacks on schools, as well as the strong
consensus among Member States on the importance of
this issue, indicates that positive change is achievable.
In that regard, Kazakhstan would like to propose
the following recommendations, aimed at mobilizing
our collective will to safeguard more 400 million
children affected by conflict.
First, we must promote full compliance with
international law and strengthen accountability for
grave violations against children. It is vital that all
Member States ratify and strictly implement the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and other relevant treaties. We also encourage
Governments to endorse the international tools related
to the protection of children in armed conflict, such as
the Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated
with Armed Forces or Armed Groups (Paris Principles),
the Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of
the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, and to
include child-protection provisions in peace processes,
especially with non-State armed groups. I am pleased to
note that my country has ratified all the relevant treaties
and endorsed all international initiatives related to the
protection of children.

19-2435359/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

Secondly, we need to prioritize preventive measures.
It is evident that children’s access to education, health
care and basic services is a key element of conflict
prevention and the building of sustainable societies.
Therefore, investments in development and education,
providing better living conditions and meeting the
socioeconomic needs of children are critical to
preventing the recruitment of and grave violations
against children. Supporting capacity-building at the
local and regional levels and the promotion of tolerance
are equally important in this regard.
Thirdly, we must increase support for reintegration
and rehabilitation programmes for children affected by
armed conflict. Adequate, predictable and sustainable
funding must be provided to ensure the rehabilitation
of children on an immediate basis. Moreover, we must
rethink our approaches to reintegration and establish
long-term programmes that will help children more
effectively reintegrate into society. We therefore
supported the establishment of the Global Coalition
for the Reintegration of Former Child Soldiers.
Together with France and Malta, we are co-chairing
the Coalition’s Group of Friends of Reintegration.
We believe that the new approaches elaborated by our
Coalition will help children more effectively return to
normal life and not only succeed in their communities,
but also become catalysts and agents of change.
Lastly, we support the Secretary-General’s call on
Member States to engage closely with the United Nations
to facilitate the return of children and women who are
actually or allegedly affiliated with terrorist groups,
with the best interests of the child in mind. Kazakhstan
has had the unique experience of bringing home safely
from Syria a total of almost 600 Kazakh citizens
previously involved with the Islamic State, including
more than 156 women and 406 children, during the
Zhusan humanitarian rescue operation. Government
agencies, in cooperation with NGOs, clergy members
and volunteers, took the measures necessary to provide
medical and psychological assistance to the victims and
are continuing their rehabilitation at specially created
regional centres.
I will conclude by reiterating Kazakhstan’s
commitment to all collective and comprehensive
measures to ensure the safety and welfare of children,
our most precious resource and, at the same time, the
most vulnerable group in times of armed conflict.
60/90

02/08/2019

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
Mr. Amayo (Kenya): May I begin by congratulating
Poland on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs for having convened this important meeting.
We believe that this open debate presents an excellent
opportunity to reaffirm our strong support for this
important mandate on children and armed conflict.
Allow me also to commend Ms. Virginia Gamba,
Ms. Henrietta Fore, Ms. Mariatu Kamara and Mr. Peter
Awan for their comprehensive briefings this morning.
My delegation takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2019/509) and acknowledges the many activities
undertaken with the aim of improving the lives of
children in conflict. We believe that action plans,
participation in ceasefire negotiations and démarches
with various countries have contributed to improving
the lives of the innocent children who are made victims
of conflicts and strife. We have no doubt that the
recommendations contained in the report will enhance
the broad and effective protection of children in armed
conflict, including those in schools and hospitals.
Over the past decade, the world has witnessed an
increase in violent extremism and extremist ideology
propagated by terrorist groups to advance their
negative agenda, including the targeting of children for
recruitment into violent extremism.
Kenya decries the recruitment and use of children
as weapons of war. We believe that it underlies larger
and systemic issues that include the breakdown of
a country’s social fabric. As such, child protection
should be part and parcel of any conflict-management
and prevention strategy. In that regard, we appreciate
the progress made through the current monitoring and
reporting mechanism and by the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.
We note with dismay the prevailing challenges
with regard to the protection of children growing up
in situations of conflict. The fact that children are
subjected to reprehensible acts of violence and abuse
must move humankind to reimagine the responsibility
to protect. It is indeed our collective moral imperative,
besides being a legal obligation.
In a number of developing countries, the major
root causes of conflict include extreme poverty;
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

political, social and economic inequality; and high
unemployment. For these reasons, restless young
people, most of whom are still children, are easily
enticed to fight and also fall into radicalization, with
minimum economic incentives.
I therefore would conclude by focusing on three
important points.
Firstly, I stress the importance of the balanced
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development in addressing the economic development
challenges that are at the root of most conflicts. We
believe that the Sustainable Development Goals offer
the most cost-effective and sustainable impact in
alleviating poverty and conflicts and affording all
children the bright future they rightfully deserve.
Secondly, we call on the Security Council not
only to maintain peace but also, as a priority, to use
its mandate to bring peace to areas that are in conflict.
That will require the cooperation of the entire United
Nations system and the international community in
contributing to the pacific settlement of disputes.
The protection of children will be guaranteed
only where there is peace and where national laws
and international humanitarian law are observed and
implemented. This calls for the continued observance
by all nations, big and small, of the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter.
Last but not least, there must be an acknowledgement
of the important role played by regional and subregional
organizations in developing regional policies to guide
their members in developing common national action
plans for child protection during conflict. We can
work together and do more to ensure a world in which
children, those of this generation and generations to
come, can have and enjoy the right to be children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Siddig (Sudan): Let me congratulate you,
Madam President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month and assure you
of our cooperation with you. I would like to extend my
appreciation to Poland for organizing this particular
meeting of the Security Council to deliberate on the
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict (S/2019/509). My delegation is appreciative
of the role played by Mrs. Virginia Gamba and her
efforts to reflect the dreadful situation of children in

S/PV. 8591

armed conflict. The Secretary-General’s report is selfexplanatory. In that regard, my delegation is also highly
appreciative of and thankful to UNICEF, under the
leadership of Executive Director Ms. Henrietta Fore.
We thank UNICEF for the valuable work that its staff
do all over the world for the protection of children. The
testimonies and personal experiences reflected before
us this morning by two young people from Africa stand
witness to the gravity and brutality of internal conflicts
and their impact on children. Their accounts reflect
how young people are subject to killing, maiming and
all kinds of cruel treatment.
Cognizant of our responsibility towards the
welfare of children and abiding by all international
instruments that govern the rights of the child, it is time
to stand together to put an end to the conscription and
recruitment of children in armed conflicts. It is time to
prevent armed groups, rebel movements and State and
non-State actors from exposing children to the scourges
of war.
During the past few years, with the assistance
of UNICEF, the Sudan was able to release child
combatants from some armed groups and hand them
over. Psychosocial assistance was extended to them and
their reintegration into society was conducted in an
acceptable manner. They were able to overcome their
trauma and healed. Ultimately, they were integrated
into their families.
My Government recently extended a unilateral
ceasefire throughout the conflict areas in the Sudan.
Some of the armed groups in Darfur, Blue Nile and
South Kordofan have reciprocated accordingly. That,
of course, is a step in the right direction for the
political settlement of armed conflicts in my country.
In negotiating the political settlement agreements
with arms bearers, the issue of children and their
protection will be highly prominent and reflected in
those agreements.
It is well known that the Sudan played a large role
for the sake of stability and peace in both South Sudan
and the Central African Republic. The Republic of the
Sudan acts with other African States and the African
Union as guarantors to those agreements. In following
the implementation, my Government will endeavour
to guarantee the rights of children in both countries,
perhaps through additional addenda to preclude any
violation of child rights.

19-2435361/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

Peace, stability, political settlements to the strife
of conflict, quelling the sound of guns and creating
job opportunities are among the measures followed
by my Government to safeguard and protect children
from the effects of war. In cooperation with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNICEF,
national and local institutions are in place to implement
the joint plan of action signed with the United Nations
in 2016. The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral has visited the Sudan twice. The Security
Council Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict
has also visited the country.
In our endeavour to protect children in conflict
areas, the Sudan pays special attention to and places
emphasis on three measures: first, the training of
armed forces, particularly those integrated into law
enforcement bodies, on standing operating procedures;
secondly, launching and sustaining awareness-raising
campaigns on the importance of protecting children
from any violations and encouraging the reporting of
any attempts to conscript children into armed forces;
and thirdly, the full and strict scrutiny of age during the
selection of recruits.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the readiness
of my country to cooperate fully with Mrs. Virginia
Gamba, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, and the Security Council Working Group on
Children in Armed Conflict. We also affirm our full
commitment to the international legal framework on
children, to which the Sudan is party.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Mr. Raum (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Allow
me to congratulate Poland on organizing this public
debate on the situation of children in armed conflict,
as well as all speakers for their valuable work and
testimonies. I would also like to thank Belgium for the
work that it is doing at the head of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Luxembourg fully endorses the statements delivered on
behalf of the European Union and the Group of Friends
of Children and Armed Conflict.
The Secretary-General’s annual report (S/2019/509)
on the situation of children in armed conflict begins with
the sad observation that violations were significantly
higher in 2018 than in the previous year. They represent
the unacceptable daily plight of more than 24,000
children living in conflict situations. Thousands of
62/90

02/08/2019

children are held in detention centres for suspected
foreign terrorist fighters in conditions inappropriate
to their age and vulnerability. All children recovering
from a traumatic environment must be considered first
and foremost as victims. Their psychosocial care and
rehabilitation must be a priority.
In two days, we will mark the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1882 (2009), which added the
killing and maiming of children to the serious crimes
recognized by the normative framework on children in
armed conflict. The Secretary-General points out in his
report that more than 12,000 children were killed or
maimed in 2018. The resolution has therefore clearly
not lost any of its relevance.
In a number of modern conflicts, the denial of
access for humanitarian aid to civilian populations is
used as a weapon of war. Children are the first victims.
That is a serious violation of international humanitarian
law. The use and targeting of schools and hospitals for
military purposes expose children to many dangers,
such as bombing, abduction and recruitment by armed
groups. The stalemate in many conflicts means that
generations of children see their access to education
severely curtailed. That is tragic for the individuals and
whole societies are thereby threatened with stagnation.
Schools continue to be the target of deliberate
attacks. School facilities are regularly looted or
diverted from their primary function to be used for
military purposes. We urge all Member States that have
not yet done so to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration.
We call on all States to take the necessary measures
to implement resolution 2143 (2014) and thereby
deter the parties to a conflict from using schools for
military purposes.
In 2018, the Secretary-General documented a very
high number of cases of sexual abuse against girls and
boys in the various ongoing conflicts, knowing that the
recorded figures are certainly much lower than the real
figures given that a large proportion of such crimes
are never reported. Impunity in the face of sexual
violence encourages its recurrence. Where national
justice cannot perform the task, the perpetrators of
and those responsible for such crimes must be tried by
international criminal justice and, ultimately, by the
International Criminal Court.
For the children and armed conflict mandate to
be effective in combating impunity, it is essential
to provide resources that are allotted to establishing
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

reliable mechanisms for data collection, unimpeded
access and security for monitoring staff.
On 20 November, we will mark the thirtieth
anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. It is therefore crucial that we act today to protect
the rights of children and ensure that those rights
are enjoyed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang Dinh Quy (Viet Nam): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of 10 member States of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
namely Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam.
We wish to congratulate Poland on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council this month. We
thank its delegation very much for organizing today’s
debate on this very important subject. We also thank
Ms. Virginia Gamba and the other briefers for their
insightful briefings.
More than two decades have passed since the
first-ever open debate on this topic took place in the
Chamber (see S/PV.3896). ASEAN welcomes positive
developments in the protection of children in armed
conflicts. We are also encouraged by several measures
put forward, such as Youth 2030 and the launch of
a process of proactive engagement with national,
subregional and regional actors. However, as reflected
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/509), we
remain deeply concerned about the highest number of
verified cases of the killing or maiming of children,
the untold suffering of thousands of children forcibly
used or recruited as human shields, suicide bombers
or sexual slaves and the damaging effects of attacks
on schools and hospitals. We also note that protracted
conflicts, devastating tactics of war and disregard for
international law are among the main causes. Against
that background, we believe there is a strong global
consensus to move forward that agenda. We also
believe that a stronger consensus is needed to turn
those commitments into meaningful action.
We appreciate the efforts of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and
the monitoring and reporting mechanism established
by resolution 1612 (2005). We support continued
constructive engagement with member States in the use

S/PV. 8591

of accurate, objective, reliable and verifiable information
in reporting to ensure the integrity and credibility of
the work of the Special Representative. While we also
encourage engagement among the United Nations and
parties to conflicts, we reaffirm the principle of the
primary responsibility and authority of States to protect
their civilians in armed conflicts. We believe that a
comprehensive approach is needed to address the root
causes of the hardship that children bear.
At the regional level, ASEAN continues to be
engaged in protecting the rights of children in armed
conflicts. In October 2018, the ASEAN Dialogue on the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
was held to raise awareness on the implementation of
the rights of the child. ASEAN also closely cooperates
with United Nations agencies. In 2018, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence
against Children held an annual dialogue with the
ASEAN Commission on the Promotion and Protection
of the Rights of Women and Children. As we mark the
tenth anniversary of resolution 1882 (2009), ASEAN
remains strongly committed to combating violations
of the rights of children and shall continue to engage
with all our partners to continue that vital work for the
betterment of our children.
Allow me to speak in our national capacity. As
the Chair of ASEAN in 2020, we will work closely
with other ASEAN countries to promote existing
arrangements and explore other possibilities. We are
of the view that the Security Council, with its primary
responsibility, needs to focus more efforts on conflict
prevention and resolution. Cooperation among the
United Nations and regional organizations could be
enhanced to provide more effective protection for our
children. We are deeply grateful to non-governmental
organizations and individuals who work on the ground
to bring about a profound impact on children’s lives and
inspire others.
As a country growing out of the ashes of wars, we
underline the importance of a comprehensive strategy
to address the root causes of conflict, with high
priority given to ensuring that education continues
during conflict time, as it not only empowers children
but also tackles the root causes of conflicts, by
cultivating and promoting the culture of peace in the
hearts and minds of children. We also share the view
that we need to pay greater attention to address the
issue of explosive remnants of wars and their negative

19-2435363/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

effect on livelihoods, environment, public health and
socioeconomic development.
Viet Nam is proud to be the first in Asia and
the second in the world to ratify the Convention on
the Rights of the Child. During our first tenure in
the Council in 2008 and 2009, we had the valuable
opportunity to work closely with other countries for the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1882 (2009). We are
committed to working closely with the States Members
of the United Nations and other relevant stakeholders
to promote and protect the best interests of children
affected by armed conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, my country would like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Poland, President of the Security
Council this month, for holding today’s constructive
dialogue. We wish Poland every success in presiding
over the Council this month.
We would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Peru for the judicious manner in
which he steered the work of the Council last month.
We would also like to thank Ms. Virginia Gamba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict; Ms. Henrietta Fore,
Executive Director of UNICEF; Ms. Mariatu Kamara
and Mr. Majok Peter Awan for their valuable briefings.
In that regard, allow me to present our observations
on the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/509) of
20 June.
Iraq commends the role of United Nations offices
in my country. However, we also urge international
organizations, independent experts and special
rapporteurs to work within their mandates to provide
accurate information in their reports and to verify
the sources of that information. Unreliable sources
continue to be used to compile reports that reflect
inaccurate information. We also regret the fact that the
Secretary-General’s report does not take into account
the observations and recommendations submitted by
Iraq in note 238 of 10 May.
Furthermore, paragraphs that were added were not
shared with my country’s delegation and their accuracy
was not verified. In paragraph 71, the report notes that
the Iraqi Federal Police recruited five boys to protect
a security checkpoint. We looked into the matter and
64/90

02/08/2019

determined that that information was inaccurate. That
begs the question: Do Iraqi security forces, which
have waged a fierce war against terrorism, need five
children to protect a security checkpoint? At the
time, the Council and many United Nations officials
had commended the professionalism of every rank of
the Iraqi security forces during military operations
against terrorists, while prioritizing safeguarding and
protecting civilians and civilian infrastructure.
Terrorist organizations enjoy both the means and
the ability to wage attacks on civilians everywhere,
including schools and hospitals, which has been
demonstrated by incidents throughout the world. The
content of paragraph 76 of the report of the SecretaryGeneral therefore does not correspond with what took
place on the ground. Furthermore, that information
dates back to 2016 and 2017, and we do not see the need
to mention it in a report covering 2018.
We are deeply concerned about the report’s
description of what transpired in Iraq as issues between
parties to the conflict. On many occasions, Iraq has
demonstrated that what happened in our country was
not a conflict between parties. It was a war waged by
the State against a terrorist organization that had little
regard for humankind and territorial sovereignty. It
perpetrated the most heinous crimes against the Iraqi
people, as corroborated in dozens of Security Council
resolutions and reports.
The Iraqi judiciary exercises its independence in
rendering its judgments, and the justice system in Iraq
conforms to international norms. The Government
in Iraq is clearly making an effort to ensure just and
transparent trials, while guaranteeing the rights of all.
We are making the necessary adjustments to rectify
the legal status of children as victims of terrorism.
Our delegation reaffirms our full support for all
United Nations efforts to provide a safe environment
for children.
We urge the relevant United Nations Offices to
verify the accuracy of the information contained in
their reports, to provide evidence and to cooperate with
the Iraqi Government. The Iraqi Government will spare
no effort to hold accountable those who violate the law.
The approach used in the annual report of the SecretaryGeneral to ascertain information, however, is nothing
other than an additional burden on a country trying to
recover from the fierce attack waged against it.
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

In conclusion, we are commemorating today
Saddam Hussein’s invasion of the friendly country
of Kuwait, which was a crime and has no relevance
whatsoever to the morals of the Iraqi people. Since the
fall of that dictatorship, Iraq has been working hard
to build good-neighbourly and mutually beneficial
relations with Kuwait, based on mutual respect.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Hau Do Suan (Myanmar): My delegation
congratulates you, Madam President, on Poland’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
We are confident in your wisdom and able leadership.
I can assure you of our full support and cooperation.
My delegation also thanks Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Gamba and the other briefers for
their briefings today.
Myanmar is committed to ending and preventing
violations and abuses against children. We have taken
important steps, such as establishing domestic preventive
mechanisms and cooperating with international
partners, especially with the United Nations and the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict.
Recently, on July 24, the Union Parliament enacted
the much-anticipated child rights law. The new law is
the most comprehensive child law in Myanmar with
extensive provisions concerning the rights of children
and the prevention of all forms of violence against
children, including the six grave violations.
The Inter-Ministerial Committee for the Prevention
of the Six Grave Violations during Armed Conflict was
established on 7 January 2019. Consultations are now
under way to develop an action plan for the prevention
of killing and maiming of and sexual violence against
children. Since the signing of the joint action plan with
the United Nations in 2012, almost 1,000 minors have
been released and reintegrated into the community.
Most important, verified cases of new recruitment have
dramatically decreased over the years to only a few
dozen at present.
The Government has conducted training
workshops in cooperation with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. As recently as
June 2019, a total of more than 14,000 persons, including
more than 7,500 military personnel, were provided with
legal training workshops on the Geneva Conventions

S/PV. 8591

and the six grave violations. Moreover, nationwide
the public awareness campaign to end and prevent the
recruitment and use of children by the Tatmadaw has
been in place since it was launched since 2013.
Myanmar is now in the process of ratifying the
Optional Protocol of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. Moreover, the Myanmar youth policy, adopted in
2017, specifically identifies former child soldiers as one
of the 11 categories of vulnerable youth and children
who require special attention and protection. Myanmar
is also cooperating with the International Labour
Organization to end forced labour and established a
complaint mechanism for reporting the recruitment of
underage persons for military service.
The Government of Myanmar has never condoned
human rights violations, especially crimes against
the most vulnerable people, including women and
children. Perpetrators have been tried and prosecuted
in accordance with the law. Actions have also been
taken against military personnel who were involved in
unlawful recruitment activities and violations.
We believe that achieving lasting peace is
indispensable to ending the suffering of innocent
civilians, particularly women and children in armed
conflict. Bearing that in mind, the Government of
Myanmar has reconvened the 21st-Century Panglong
Union Peace Conference to deliberate and strive for
achieving lasting peace and building a democratic
federal union. During its third session held in July
2018, the Conference adopted the elimination of the six
grave violations against children and the protection of
children’s rights as social-sector basic principles.
I would like to express my Government’s
appreciations to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Gamba and her Office for their constructive
engagement. We also thank UNICEF and the United
Nations country team for their important contribution
to the implementation of the joint action plan. We
believe that the protection of children in armed conflict
rests primarily with the Government concerned.
At the same time, the United Nations and the
international community can play a vital role by
providing assistance to Governments in building
their capacity and strengthening their ability to
protect children. It is also important to acknowledge
and encourage positive developments. Only through
constructive engagement and cooperation, will we be

19-2435365/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

able to achieve our ultimate aim to end the suffering of
children in armed conflict.
I can assure the Council that we shall continue
to work hand in hand with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict and other
international partners to end grave violations against
children and build a better future for our children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
Poland on its accession to the presidency of the Council
this month and commend it for convening today’s
important debate. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba, for her briefing
at the beginning of the meeting. I take this opportunity
to reiterate the deep appreciation of the United Arab
Emirates for her important mandate. Finally, we thank
the representative of UNICEF and the other briefers for
their presentations today.
My country takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/509), introduced by the
Special Representative on the current status of children
and armed conflict. We are deeply concerned about the
gravity and scale of the threats faced by children in
the Middle East — from the ever-increasing violations
committed in Syria, to the killing and detention of
Palestinian children by Israeli forces, to the recruitment
of children in Yemen by Houthis and in Iraq and Somalia
by terrorist groups, such as Da’esh and Al-Shabaab.
The United Arab Emirates adds its voice to that
of the international community and reiterates its full
commitment to alleviating the suffering of children
through the provision of humanitarian assistance.
The United Arab Emirates has demonstrated the great
importance it attaches to the needs of children by
providing more than $5 billion to Yemen and its people
over the past four years, including, most recently,
through our joint pledge with Saudi Arabia of an
additional $240 million in funding for the operations of
the World Food Programme (WFP).
Our humanitarian efforts are also directed towards
the long-term interests of children threatened by
conflict, such as their education. The United Arab
Emirates firmly believes that education is not only
66/90

02/08/2019

the right of every child, but also an essential tool for
uplifting entire communities in order to mitigate
conflicts and the exploitation of children therein. To
that end, we have provided educational assistance for
more than 270,000 students through the WFP, built the
equivalent of 150 classrooms as temporary education
spaces and provided UNICEF with $35 million to pay
teachers’ salaries.
Given our emphasis on the importance of education,
we are deeply concerned by the Houthis’ exploitation
of children, schools and educational centres in Yemen
and the damage and destruction they have wrought
on facilities. In particular, we deplore the Houthi
militias’ use of schools as centres for storing arms and
for recruiting, training and detaining children. Such
actions demonstrate total disregard of their obligations
under international law. In that connection, we urge the
Security Council to hold the Houthis accountable for
their grave violations.
The United Arab Emirates, as a member of the
coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen, formed at
the request of the legitimate Government of Yemen,
takes this opportunity to once again reaffirm our
commitment to complying with our obligations under
international humanitarian law. The coalition takes its
responsibility to protect all civilians in armed conflict,
particularly children, very seriously. The coalition also
continues to work closely with the United Nations and
other international partners to enhance the protection
of children in Yemen, as reflected in the memorandum
of understanding the coalition signed in March with the
Office of the Special Representative.
We believe that the coalition’s efforts contributed
significantly to the decrease, in the last quarter of
2018, in incidents reported by the Secretary-General.
Ultimately, however, the best way to protect Yemeni
children is through peace and stability. In that regard, the
United Arab Emirates supports the full implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement and the United Nationsled political process.
We all must do more to ensure that children in
conflict areas receive the special protection to which
they are entitled under international law. Accordingly,
we call on Member States to utilize the relevant
platforms to discuss evolving challenges and shortand long-term needs for reintegration, and to generate
recommendations to address funding gaps.
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

In conclusion, we urge both the Council and the
States Members of the United Nations to study and
adopt innovative responses to sexual and genderbased violence in armed conflict, including by
strengthening engagement with local women and girls
as active partners in the design and implementation of
humanitarian action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Let me first join my
colleagues in congratulating Poland on assuming the
presidency of the Council for this month. I thank the
Polish presidency for convening this timely debate. I
also want to thank all the briefers. Their briefings were
heart-breaking and some of the stories were not easy to
listen to, but we thank them. That information is very
much needed and appreciated.
My country, Georgia, aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union. Let
me add the following remarks in my national capacity.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
landmark resolution 1882 (2009), but regrettably, 10
years later, boys and girls around the world continue
to live with the horrors of grave violations of their
rights — killing and maiming, recruitment and
exploitation, rape and other forms of sexual violence.
Children are the most vulnerable group and make up the
highest percentage of casualties of war, which last year
reached a staggering, record number of over 12,000.
The Secretary General’s latest report on children and
armed conflict (S/2019/509), which takes note of those
figures, is absolutely appalling.
While we deplore those grave violations in
the strongest terms, it is also apparent that we, as
Member States, need to redouble our engagement
and do much more to support and strengthen child
protection mechanisms. In that sense, we welcome the
steps outlined in the report to improve the situation
of conflict-affected children globally, and appreciate
the significant efforts of United Nations agencies and
partners, including child protection actors working on
the ground.
Children and young people are exposed to even
greater risk of abuse when educational facilities become
the targets of attack during conflicts. That is in addition
to being deprived of their right to education and thus
of the realization of their hopes for the future. In that

S/PV. 8591

context, let me underline the importance of the Safe
Schools Declaration, which is a significant instrument
for taking concrete actions towards safe schools for all
and thereby strengthening, in practice, the protection of
children and youth in armed conflict.
When it comes to the prevention of forced
recruitment and the use of children as soldiers,
strengthening adherence to the relevant international
legal instruments is of key importance. As a party
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its
Optional Protocol on the Involvement of Children
in Armed Conflict, as well as the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols of 1977,
Georgia is committed to upholding the norms for the
prohibition of recruitment and use of child soldiers. In
that connection, let me also mention that we recently
endorsed the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping
and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of
Child Soldiers.
While the Government of Georgia spares no effort
to protect children, their fundamental rights in Georgia’s
occupied regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South
Ossetia continue to be violated by the occupying Power.
The prohibition of educating ethnic Georgians in both
regions in their native language remains a matter of
the greatest concern. In 2015, the Georgian language
was banned as a language of first-grade instruction at
the remaining Georgian schools in the Gali district,
gradually resulting in the total ban of native-language
education in the Abkhazia region. Teachers are subject
to immense pressure, with frequent raids at schools and
kindergartens, with the aim of uncovering evidence of
the use of the Georgian language, followed by frequent
repercussions. Since September 2017, education in their
native language has been banned in Georgian schools
in the Tskhinvali region as well.
Multifaceted restrictions on freedom of movement
further impede access to education, as children who
cross the occupation line to attend classes in Georgian
schools located in the vicinity of the Georgiancontrolled territory fall victim to Russian occupying
forces and must endure the forced inspection of their
schoolbags. If Georgian books are found, they are
detained for hours and suffer other forms of harassment
as well. The closure of the only remaining so-called
crossing point in the Abkhazia region in July has further
exacerbated the situation by preventing schoolchildren
from participating in exams for enrolment in the
universities located in the territory controlled by the

19-2435367/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

central Government. The arbitrary closure of the
crossing points causes additional problems for children,
such as access to health care, thereby making the
grave humanitarian conditions in the occupied regions
even worse.
In an attempt to address the issue of protection of
children and their rights in the occupied territories,
the Georgian Government’s peace initiative, entitled
A Step to a Better Future, also seeks to improve the
humanitarian, social and economic conditions of the
population, including children and young people,
residing in the regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali by,
inter alia, enhancing their educational opportunities.
Despite the difficult context, I reaffirm Georgia’s
strong and unwavering commitment to the protection of
the fundamental rights of the child. In that context, let
me also underline the importance of the international
community taking a consistent and firm stance on
safeguarding children’s rights in conflict-affected
areas everywhere in the world, including the occupied
regions of Georgia, so no one is left behind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to the
United Nations.
Father Charters: I would like to thank the Polish
presidency for convening today’s open debate on
children and armed conflict.
The theme of our discussion today should cause us
to stop and reflect. The juxtaposition of children and
armed conflict is deeply incongruous yet, as we are
hearing once more in this Chamber, it is the sad reality
for so many boys and girls in our world that young lives
are interrupted tragically by violent conflict. Children,
who should be free to learn and to play, as they grow
in knowledge of themselves and of the world around
them, are instead the victims of grave violations that
not only rob them of the unique and irreplaceable joys
of childhood, but also run the risk of causing longterm physical, emotional, psychological and social
damage, with its obvious impacts on their families and
wider community.
As the latest report of the Secretary-General
dramatically shows,
“In times of armed conflict, throughout the world,
millions of people, children foremost among them,
have inadequate access to or have been denied
68/90

02/08/2019

assistance that is essential for their survival and
well-being” (S/2019/509, para. 11).
One has only to consider the scramble for minerals and
other precious resources in parts of Africa, where so
many children and young people give up their education
to work in mines. It is worse still when children are
forced to fight in wars not of their making or recruited
under the guise of being able to provide for their
impoverished families.
There is a need to examine the root causes
of this situation, particularly how socioeconomic
disadvantages and lack of prospects too often make
armed conflict an alternative for our young people. It is
also deeply worrisome that in some cases radicalization
and extremist ideologies have motivated the decision of
young people to embrace nefarious causes, and thereby
become themselves the cause of destruction and despair
in the lives of so many others. Education towards
peace in the family and in schools and the crucial role
of women as teachers of peace are indispensable to
confronting these root causes.
Long and protracted conflicts, often fought in
urban settings, mean that schools, medical centres and
shelters often come under fire, leading to the partial
or complete destruction of buildings essential for the
health, instruction and well-being of children. Such
indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks are in
contravention of international law and international
humanitarian law and must stop. In that regard, Pope
Francis recently expressed his deep concern for the
lives of children caught up in bombings in the Idlib
province in Syria.
The Holy See takes note of the evolution of United
Nations peacekeeping operations to include provisions
for child protection and outreach to armed groups,
inform and educate the wider population and create
a culture of peace. There are also new initiatives
manifesting the will of Member States to end and prevent
the grave violations committed against children living
in armed conflict. It is particularly encouraging that
such initiatives include working towards the universal
ratification and implementation of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
Today’s open debate must contribute to awakening
the collective conscience of the international
community so as to ensure that these children, who are
often invisible, are not forgotten, that increased efforts
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

be made for the release of child soldiers and that the
young victims of other grave violations are given the
support they need for reintegration. Such support must
include the most vulnerable, including those children
conceived and brought into the world as a result of
conflict-related sexual violence. Children in those
circumstances have no less dignity, and similarly must
be protected from violence and death.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Maldives.
Ms. Zahir (Maldives): My delegation wishes to
congratulate Poland on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council and thank it for its efforts aimed
at peacefully resolving some of the long-standing
conflicts around the world. Let me also extend our
appreciation to all the delegations involved in bringing
the issue of children and armed conflict — and the
severity of the crisis in war-torn areas — to the forefront
of our attention. I also wish to thank the briefers for
their updates to the Council.
The Maldives is deeply concerned to learn that
over 24,000 violations were committed against children
across 20 countries, as documented in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2019/509). Furthermore,
attacks on schools and other educational facilities
severely hamper access to education and restrict the
development of children in affected areas. We concur
with the findings and the recommendations of the
Secretary-General’s report and urge all Member States
to consider them recommendations carefully.
My country is committed to ensuring that the
rights of the child are protected and that every action
taken is in the best interests of the child. The Maldives
ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child in
1991, and its Optional Protocol on the involvement of
children in armed conflicts in 2004. We did so in the
belief that an international instrument to address the
grave issue of children in armed conflicts could be
holistically addressed through the various mechanisms,
responses and assistance programmes. However, it
is clear that more needs to be done, especially at the
international level.
While the Maldives has worked towards the
incorporation of the Convention into its own domestic
legislative framework, work remains ongoing to further
improve and amend the existing legislation to reflect
our human rights obligations with respect to the rights
of the child. The Maldives will strive to improve

S/PV. 8591

stakeholder coordination in strengthening the childprotection system. Despite much effort, we continue to
face mounting challenges on human-resources capacity,
technical expertise and childcare services. As we work
to promote and protect the rights of our children, we are
also committed to protecting the rights of children all
over the world. The dreams of a child in the Maldives
are the same of those of a child in Syria, Afghanistan,
Palestine or anywhere else in the world.
We as the international community must collectively
ensure that children caught up in the horrors of war are
not swept aside due to indifference, or allowed to be
caught up in diplomatic bureaucracy. We must decry
each and every abuse — of any magnitude — loudly
and clearly for all ears to hear and for all hearts to bleed
in sympathy. Sexual violence against children can never
be tolerated, and we need every country to implement
protection laws at the national level. The United Nations
must also keep enforcing its zero-tolerance policies.
We call for the full implementation of resolution
2427 (2018) and for assurances that accurate and
timely reports will be collected and promptly reported
to national, regional, subregional and international
governing bodies and institutions to protect
children’s welfare. We must further accelerate our
efforts on providing resources and support to those
already victimized. Complex challenges such as the
denial of humanitarian aid as a tactic of war are exposing
millions of children to hunger, disease, homelessness
and sexual exploitation, leaving their dreams shattered.
Strength in the battle against evil can be achieved only
through the consolidation of our efforts.
The Council must ensure the implementation of
the agenda on children and armed conflict through
the appointment of dedicated child-protection advisers
in every peacekeeping mission and must engage in
conflict-resolution negotiations as a priority for the
protection of children in the process.
As outlined in resolution 1882 (2009), Member
States must protect and provide support for children
in armed conflict, including children with disabilities.
There is a worrisome tendency to overlook children
with disabilities, whose natural brilliance may be
less evident to our superficial sensitivities. Yet they
require a gentle hand to pull them away from malign
environments that may cause them permanent harm.
Member States must also provide children with
disabilities with the resources necessary to ensure their

19-2435369/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

health and safety while also providing a normative
lifestyle among their peers.
Let me conclude by expressing the full support
of the Maldives for the Secretary-General’s efforts
in addressing this grave situation. We remain deeply
saddened by the reports of children caught up in wartorn areas, in detention facilities and in other vulnerable
situations where they may be open to exploitation, sale
or prostitution. The Maldives will always defend the
innocence of the children of the world and the future
that they hold in their hands.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Mr. Fernandez De Soto Valderrama (Colombia)
(spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank you, Madam
President, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs for
having convened this open debate, which is of great
importance for the Organization in the process of
endeavouring to extricate children from situations
of conflict. I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Virginia Gamba, and the
Executive Director of UNICEF for their briefings today
and for all the work that they have been doing in the
context of this important task. We also wish to convey
our gratitude to the other briefers for their reports.
As stated in the concept note convening this debate
(S/2019/605, annex), it is vital that we understand
that protecting and caring for children affected by
armed conflict is key to achieving sustainable peace.
Successful reintegration is critical to any peace process,
especially when it comes to the reintegration of boys
and girls who, from a very tender age, have known
nothing other than the tragic effects of violence.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/509)
refers to the situation in Colombia, highlighting the
various serious violations of the rights of children
perpetrated by illegal armed groups. The main outcome
presented in the report makes it clear that the Colombian
State has striven to fully guarantee the human rights of
children, boys and girls alike. Those efforts include the
issuance of decree 1434 of 2018, which substantively
strengthened public-policy guidelines for preventing
the recruitment, use, sexual exploitation of and sexual
violence against boys, girls and adolescents. The
adoption of that decree represents the conclusion of
more than 10 years of work to fight, in a coordinated
manner, the recruitment of and other serious violations
against children perpetrated by illegal armed groups.
70/90

02/08/2019

In 2007, we also established an intersectoral
commission for the prevention of the recruitment of
children and other grave violations of the rights of the
child, which will continue to serve as the main body
tasked with devising strategies aimed at eradicating
the problem.
Unfortunately, despite the tremendous efforts and
strong commitment of the Colombian State to eradicate
this painful situation, that example has not been
replicated by all the organized armed groups, which
continue to recruit and to use boys and girls in violation
of the international human rights law and international
humanitarian law.
In particular, the self-styled National Liberation
Army, which is still included on the list of parties
committing grave violations of the rights of children,
has continued to recruit and use children as part of
its illegal activities against the State. For instance, on
4 July that illegal armed group showed on social media
a series of videos showing boys, girls and adolescents
engaging in propaganda activities for the group, in
clear contravention of the provisions of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
By the same token, the use of anti-personnel mines
by that group not only affects children’s right to life
and to personal integrity, but also, in areas where the
National Liberation Army has a presence, prevents
children from realizing their right to education and
health care without putting their lives in danger. The
National Liberation Army has systematically refused
to take measures aimed at enhancing the protection of
children; instead, the group has sought to ratchet up the
intensity of the hostilities against Colombian society,
including terrorist attacks such as the one perpetrated
against the General Santander Police Academy, which
took the lives of 22 young Colombians and which was
condemned in the strongest terms by the Security
Council on 18 January.
The Government of President Duque has placed
special emphasis on the importance of the transition
to civilian life for the hundreds of children who
had been recruited by the former Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo.
We are aware that despite the strenuous efforts of the
Colombian State, challenges remain in relation to this
issue, which is why our institutions will continue to
work to strengthen prevention strategies, in line with
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the
Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers.
Finally, Colombia takes good note of the various
concerns and challenges that persist in the country in
this respect. We are committed to preventing boys and
girls from being used to wage war and will continue to
work and to do ever more to comprehensively address
the issue of their integration and education.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liberia.
Mr. Kemayah (Liberia): We thank the Security
Council, under the presidency of Poland, for having
organized this open debate on children and armed
conflict. We express our thanks to UNICEF and to the
other briefers for their inspiring reports earlier today.
We take note of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/509) and its findings. The uncomfortable truth
remains that the scale and severity of the violations
being committed against children continue unabated in
several regions of the world, with wanton disregard for
international law as well as international norms. It is
also regrettable that incidents involving the abduction,
killing and maiming of children have reached a record
level globally, as have attacks on schools and hospitals
and the denial of humanitarian access to children, while
the future of millions of children living in countries
affected by armed conflict remains at risk. The situation
deserves the utmost attention.
As we observe the tenth anniversary of resolution
1882 (2009), we call on the Council to reinforce its
provision that all parties to armed conflicts adhere to the
obligations applicable to them under international law.
There is a dire need to address the gap in funding
for the rehabilitation and reintegration of children
affected by armed conflict, especially child soldiers.
Adequate funding will support Governments and
regional and subregional organizations in building
child and social protection capacity and in formulating
prevention strategies. We therefore urge that priority be
placed on addressing the root causes of conflict so as to
ensure prevention.
The traumatic and excruciating impact of
armed conflict, particularly on children, cannot
be overemphasized.
Within the ambit of our national flagship
development plan, the Pro-Poor Agenda for Prosperity

S/PV. 8591

and Development, the Government of Liberia, under
the astute leadership of His Excellency Mr. George
Manneh Weah, espouses the promotion of democracy,
good governance, respect for human rights, justice and
the rule of law.
Hence, having transitioned from conflict to peace
and given that young people, who constitute 63 per
cent of our population, are the building blocks for
the sustainability of peace, security, democracy and
development in our country, the Government of Liberia
has at the core of its Pro-Poor Agenda for Prosperity
and Development programmes to strengthen child and
social protection.
We commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
for advancing the mandate of this very important
Office. We particularly laud the initiative launched in
April of this year under the ACT to Protect Children
Affected by Armed Conflict campaign. The initiative
seeks to generate greater awareness and action in
order to improve the protection of children affected by
armed conflict.
Finally, on behalf of Mr. George Manneh Weah,
President of the Republic of Liberia, the Government
and the people of Liberia, I wish to express our
unwavering support for the commendable campaign
ACT to Protect Children Affected by Armed Conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bulgaria.
Ms. Stoeva (Bulgaria): At the outset, allow me to
extend our appreciation to Poland for convening today’s
open debate and to the Secretary-General for the annual
report on children and armed conflict (S/2019/509).
I would also like to thank the briefers, especially
Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan for their remarkable work
and for their dedication and determination to improve
the well-being of children.
Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the observer of the European Union. I would
like to highlight a few aspects of significance to
my country.
The fact that this year’s report registers a spike
in a number of the categories of grave violations that
are subject to monitoring and recording is highly
alarming and testifies yet again of the horrific impact
and disproportionate effect that armed conflicts have
on children. There were more cases of verified killings

19-2435371/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

and maiming in 2018 than in any previous year. Sexual
violations have also reached an all-time high of 933
verified cases. We need to ask ourselves what we have
done to address the situation and what else we can do.
The international community has taken some
important steps in that direction. Resolution 2467
(2019), adopted earlier this year, has a strong focus on
the protection of children from sexual violence and
addresses children born of sexual violence.
Children are indisputably among the most
vulnerable groups during conflicts, which is even more
valid for young persons with disabilities. Resolution
2475 (2019), adopted last month at the initiative of
Poland and the United Kingdom, which Bulgaria also
co-sponsored, highlights that children with disabilities
require sustainable, timely, appropriate, inclusive and
accessible assistance. Furthermore, Bulgaria shares the
view that mental health, reintegration, rehabilitation
and psychosocial support are a conditio sine qua non for
the development of a child suffering the consequences
of a conflict, and we welcome the work by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mrs. Virginia
Gamba and UNICEF in that regard.
The objective of today’s debate is to find measures
to remedy the challenges related to children and armed
conflict. Bulgaria is convinced that prevention is
key. Therefore, child protection and sexual violence
training for civilian and military personnel is crucial
before embarking on a mission. Bulgaria has endorsed
the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the
Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers, which are an instrument to operationalize
child protection within United Nations peacekeeping.
We are deeply concerned that very often children
allegedly associated with armed forces or groups are
being treated as perpetrators or a security threat, not as
victims. Detentions are not yet considered as a measure
of last resort. Therefore, the monitoring of and reporting
on the detention of children for being associated with
armed forces or groups need to continue and finding
alternatives to detention should be a priority.
Despite all the initiatives that have been put in
place, we need to improve efficiency and admit that
children’s human rights are still being systematically
violated and abused. Furthermore, even with the
significant decrease in cases, humanitarian access is
still being denied to many children. Therefore, we urge
all conflicting parties to stop the violations and take
72/90

02/08/2019

action to prevent them from occurring in the future. We
also call on all States to become a party to the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, the
Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles.
Bulgaria is convinced that fighting impunity for such
grave crimes is an international concern. We continue
to see the role of the International Criminal Court as
essential in that regard.
To conclude, we need to do a great deal more to
ensure that children are protected, and we need to do
it consistently. Our main focus should be on prevention
and on ensuring that those already affected have a
chance to live in dignity and to flourish.
Mr. Al Omoush (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to thank Poland for having
organized this open debate on children and armed
conflict. We also commend the efforts of Peru at the
helm of the Council last month. We wish you, Madam
President, every success for your presidency this
month. We also thank the various briefers whom we
heard this morning.
It has been 10 years since the adoption of
resolution 1888 (2009). We continue to see increased
numbers of violations being committed systematically
against children in armed conflict. The first victim
is humankind. The report of the Secretary General
(S/2019/509) cites a series of record numbers of
violations committed as a result of conflicts around
the world. According to the report, there were 24,000
cases involve children and 12,000 cases of killing and
maiming in 2018.
In a number of resolutions, in particular resolution
2472 (2018), the Security Council has stressed the
need to protect civilians in regions affected by armed
conflict, especially the most vulnerable, namely,
women, children and persons with disabilities. We also
have resolution 2475 (2019), but major impediments
still exist to noble efforts to uphold justice and peace
throughout the world. We must therefore work tirelessly
to end the wars by addressing their root causes and the
negative impacts of such crimes.
We are convinced that there is a need to promote
legislative and legal reforms and develop policies that
will allow us to address violence against children during
armed conflict. We also believe in the importance of
accountability and of ending impunity in order to stop
such crimes and deter perpetrators, and in the need to
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

S/PV. 8591

establish protection and reintegration mechanisms for
child victims of violations of all kinds. Like all other
peace-loving countries, Jordan has endorsed a number
of international instruments on the rights of the child,
such as the Vancouver Principles and the Safe Schools
Declaration. Those texts reaffirm that our priority is
protecting children and upholding relevant principles
in United Nations peacekeeping operations, while also
seeking to end the recruitment of children and to protect
children during wars and conflicts.

to review progress in the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Sustainable Development Goals. We hope that it will
be an opportunity to redouble our efforts to achieve our
objective of open, modern societies with adequate and
effective institutions, anchored by international and
regional partnerships, that empower women, protect
children, assist young people, build on the principles
of peace and reject radicalization, hate speech and
terrorism in all its forms.

When participating in peacekeeping operations,
my country is committed to protecting the most
vulnerable, in particular children — boys and girls
alike. It is also committed to helping them reintegrate
into society. The role of a peacekeeping operation is no
longer merely to stabilize the situation in conflict areas,
but now also includes protection and reintegration,
as well as psychosocial and health-care services,
provided through various educational programmes and
income-generating activities that protect children from
recruitment and exploitation.

We must reinforce relevant international
instruments that protect children and ban their
recruitment by armed forces or armed groups. They
must be reintegrated into civilian life so that they are
immune to the forces of evil in the world. In that regard,
I applaud the ACT to Protect campaign launched by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, which will enable us
to focus on ending the violations perpetrated against
children in armed conflict.

My country hosts approximately 1.3 million
refugees from Syria; of those, 226,000 are children
between the ages of 5 and 17. In spite of the challenges
related to refugee flows and the negative impact of the
situation on our national economy and infrastructure
due to the scarcity of natural and economic resources,
we in the Kingdom of Jordan have been able to turn that
challenge into an opportunity thanks to collaboration
among State institutions, on the one hand, and through
international and regional partnerships, on the other. It is
all part of a plan to respond to the Syrian refugee crisis.
My country has established and strengthened
mechanisms and measures to accommodate the refugees,
while also ensuring that they can live in dignity by
assuring them shelter and basic services, such as health
care and education. We also have mechanisms offering
support and protection for women and children, in
particular girls. My country has also launched various
training and rehabilitation programmes in cooperation
with our regional and international partners, United
Nations agencies and civil society organizations to
ensure that refugees can pursue their education, build
on their skills and integrate into society.
The key to our organization is its vision, which
is translated into several initiatives. A summit will
be convened next month, on the sidelines of the
seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly,

This year we commemorate the thirtieth anniversary
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Bloody
conflicts continue to claim child victims in Syria,
Palestine and elsewhere, in various regions affected by
war and conflict. We must invest in their little bodies.
We hope that children’s hands will be used to build up,
never to tear down. As has been said, we, as individuals
and Governments, should prioritize humankind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Naeemi (Afghanistan): Before delivering
my brief statement, I would like to highlight a couple
of points because we are cited in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/509).
At the national level, in the ongoing armed conflict
in Afghanistan, children are the primary victims.
The Taliban and illegal armed groups use and target
children in their operations. The Government of
Afghanistan follows a zero-tolerance policy regarding
the recruitment of children to its security forces. Sadly,
we must report to the Chamber today that although more
than 1 million children are eligible to go to school, they
are unable to attend.
I would like to congratulate Poland on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of August and for taking the initiative to convene
this timely debate on the topic of children and armed

19-2435373/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

conflict. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
report and commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, and her capable team for their
sustained efforts and commitment in supporting
children in conflict-affected countries. I also thank the
other briefers for their insightful remarks.
In the ongoing armed conflict in Afghanistan,
children are the primary victims. As reported by
the Secretary-General, in 2018 children constituted
one-third of the 3,062 verified civilian casualties.
In addition, 1,207 child casualties — 327 dead and
880 injured — were reported by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in the first half of
2019. Many victims of the recent suicide attacks in
Kabul, Logar, Kandahar and Nangarhar were children.
Although Government efforts focus on their protection,
the Taliban and other illegal armed groups continue
using and targeting children as part of their operations.
They lure, brainwash and force them to partake in the
conflict as soldiers and suicide-bombers.
The Afghan Government is fully committed to
the protection of children in conflict and strongly
condemns and opposes all forms of violations against
children, including recruitment, killing and maiming,
rape and other kinds of sexual violence, abduction,
attacks on schools or hospitals and the denial of access
to humanitarian assistance. To that end, the Government
has taken concrete and decisive steps to address the
situation and ensure the protection of our children.
With regard to recruitment, the Government
follows a zero-tolerance policy on child recruitment
in the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces.
Strict regulations were established following the
endorsement of the road map for the implementation of
the joint action plan in 2014 and the new penal code of
Afghanistan, which has been in force since 2018. The
results of those efforts have been reflected in official
reports from the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces, which indicate no recruits in 2018.
One thousand and nine underage children were
also prevented from enlisting in the Afghan National
Army, as well as 300 applicants in the Afghan national
police forces, through the implementation of the age
assessment guidelines for the prevention of child
recruitment in the military forces and the establishment
of child protection units at the police headquarters of
all 34 provinces.
74/90

02/08/2019

As we celebrate the tenth anniversary of resolution
1882 (2009), in addition to taking stock of past
achievements, it is fitting to reflect on how we can
enhance efforts to address the six grave violations
against children more effectively. In that regard, my
Government is working in close cooperation with the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations country-level task
forces on monitoring and reporting to the United
Nations country team to implement the action plan and
delist the Afghanistan national and local police from
the shame list, based on the noticeable progress made
to end underage recruitment. We also continue to report
on the implementation of the action plan, with the
seventh annual report having been presented in April.
In conclusion, allow me once again to reiterate
the commitment of my Government to continuing to
protect our children from conflict, as well as our work
with the United Nations in fully implementing the joint
national action plan to prevent child recruitment.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Denktaş (Turkey): I wish to start by thanking
your country’s presidency, Madam, for organizing this
very important open debate and the valuable and, in
the case of Ms. Kamara, touching contributions by
the briefers.
I will go straight to our point. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/509) paints a grim picture.
The situation of children continues to be adversely
and disproportionately affected by armed conflicts
around the world. Daunting violations of the six
defined categories — the six serious violations against
children — continue to impose an immense impact on
children. We are deeply troubled, particularly by the
statistics provided for 2018. It is impossible to ignore
the suffering and hopelessness in the eyes of Syrian,
Palestinian, Rohingya and other children around the
world. With regard to Syria, obviously, the crisis in
that country has waged its highest toll on children. The
statistics in the Secretary General’s report, as well as
images coming from Idlib, bear witness to the gravity
of the situation.
In addition to the crimes of Al-Assad’s brutal
regime in the form of indiscriminate air strikes, barrel
bombs, chemical weapons and artillery shelling,
and the recently repeated deliberate targeting of
civilians and civilian infrastructure in Idlib, there
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

are other menaces facing children in Syria. Those
include the well-documented crimes of the terrorist
organization the Kurdish Workers Party (PKK) and its
Syrian brand — the Democratic Union Party (PYD)
and the Kurdish People’s Protection Units (YPG/
YPJ) — against young girls and boys over the years.
We must make no mistake. The PYD and the YPG/YPJ
employ the same tactics as other terrorist organizations
operating in Syria, such as Da’esh, Al-Qaida, Al-Nusra
and other affiliated groups. As such, they deserve no
less condemnation than any of those groups.
The Secretary-General’s latest report provides
damning insights into the horrific treatment of children
at the hands of the PKK in areas under its control. As
highlighted in the report, the YPG/YPJ recruited the
highest number of children in Syria last year. It also
topped the list in the deprivation of children of their
liberty. Our national estimates put the number of
children kidnapped and forcefully separated from their
families by the PKK at 700. The majority of them are
either of Kurdish origin or from other groups, such
as Arameans, as pointed out by the World Council
of Arameans.
Intimidating dissidents, demographic engineering,
forced conscription, the oppression of local populations
and looting and the confiscation of property in areas
under its de facto control are some of the other crimes
committed by the PYD and the YPG/YPJ. They
target schools, convert them into ammunition depots
and deprive children of their fundamental right to
education. Everyone will see, or must have seen, in
the Secretary General’s report that more than half the
schools listed for military use in Syria are used by the
YPG/YPJ. Those numbers speak for themselves. Other
reports of the Secretary-General and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs underline
that the so-called Kurdish self-Administration in Syria
banned Arabic in more than 250 schools. Approximately
60,000 students are prevented from attending school in
the areas controlled by the YPG/YPJ.
While we appreciate the documentation of the
PKK,PYD and YPG/YPJ crimes that are relevant to the
subject matter of this open debate, we must stress the
need to demonstrate a unified front against terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations. We will not condone
any act that could be exploited by terrorists in their
search for recognition and legitimacy. That is why we
condemned the signing of an action plan with a well-

S/PV. 8591

known PKK terrorist, for whom INTERPOL issued a
red notice.
Cherry-picking is simply not an option. The PYDYPG/YPJ-PKK is a terrorist organization with the blood
of more than 40,000 of my fellow citizens on its hands.
It should be treated as such. Its existence and its actions
cannot and should not be given any legitimization for
any reason.
Furthermore, concerning some of the statements
made earlier today, I should underline that we do
not accept and cannot remain idle with regard to a
terrorist organization being praised for committing
to limit its level of criminality. That approach and
the method of strategic communication need to be
urgently reconsidered.
My Government fully shares and supports the
agenda of the United Nations in addressing the situation
of children in armed conflict. To that end, we show
the utmost care and take all the precautions required
under international humanitarian law. We will continue
to work closely and in complete transparency with
the Special Representative’s Office in support of her
efforts and to make sure all the information they collect
is correct and complete. We also do everything within
our means to alleviate the suffering of children running
from armed conflict.
Of the 2.6 million Syrians that fled to Turkey for
obvious reasons, 1.7 million are children under the
age of 18. More than 444.000 Syrian babies have been
born in Turkey since the conflict began eight years ago.
We have mobilized our resources to provide proper
and dignified living conditions for Syrian children
who are under temporary protection in Turkey, from
education — as it is important given the fact that
they will be the ones to eventually rebuild their own
country — to free health care.
The best way of keeping children from harm’s way
is prevention in the first place. With that understanding,
we will also continue to support the Secretary-General’s
focus on prevention and the protection of children. We
commend the Polish presidency for convening this
important open debate, and the Secretary-General for
his report. My country will continue to do everything
it can to prevent and end all violations against children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.

19-2435375/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

Mr. Al-Maawda (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, and your friendly country on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
thank you for holding this important meeting.
I would also like to thank Ms. Virginia Gamba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, for her valuable briefing.
I further thank all the briefers, who have enriched this
debate with their valuable expertise and perspective on
this sensitive humanitarian issue.
We associate ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
Preventing violence against children in armed
conflict is extremely important for the international
community. It is the central pillar of building and
maintaining peace, as well as respecting human rights
and international law. We must therefore protect and
guarantee the rights of children and provide them
with what they need for their upbringing so that they
can contribute to building stable and prosperous
communities in the future.
However, the picture painted by the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2019/509) on the situation of children
and armed conflict is cause for concern and regret. It is
a serious humanitarian challenge. We must address this
matter in the light of the gravity of the situation and its
implications for international peace and security. The
report highlights the severity and frequency of harm
inflicted through grave abuses perpetrated against
children as fighting continues among conflicting
parties all over the world. This constitutes a blatant
violation of international law.
We commend all efforts to report those violations
and to hold the perpetrators accountable. The responsible
parties should be identified in the Secretary-General’s
annual reports. We believe that accountability is
critical to ensuring justice for the victims, enforcing
international law and putting an end to the commission
of such crimes, which humankind has rejected. In
that respect, we join other countries in calling for an
accurate list of perpetrators of violations to be included
in future annual reports, which in turn must be based
on impartial, factual and evidence-based information.
We believe in the importance of protecting the
right to education. This is no less a right during armed
76/90

02/08/2019

conflict. We therefore make great efforts to guarantee
education for children in emergencies, especially
those in situations of armed conflict, as demonstrated
by the initiatives and programmes backed by the
Qatar Foundation, first and foremost, in cooperation
with international organizations. The Foundation has
provided quality education to millions of children around
the world. Given the gravity of risks and challenges
children face in armed conflict and the fact that they
are deprived of the most basic means of subsistence,
including the right to education — as reaffirmed in
reports issued by the United Nations, international
organizations and right-based organizations — we call
on States parties to conflicts to refrain from targeting
schools and universities and to avoid using educational
institutions for military purposes. We also take this
opportunity to urge Member States to join the Safe
Schools Declaration, to which the State of Qatar has
acceded, alongside 94 other Member States.
We reaffirm the need to consider children linked to
armed groups first and foremost as victims. Countries
must provide them with programmes for their longterm integration. In that regard, we commend the
important role played by the Global Coalition for the
Reintegration of Former Child Soldiers, established
and co-chaired by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and UNICEF. The Coalition is helping to return
children to their families and to make sure that they are
given back their childhood and provided with a suitable
environment for their upbringing.
The Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict is
carrying out the important role of protecting children
and reintegrating them into their communities. In that
connection, we commend the proactive efforts of the
Special Representative in working with national and
regional actors to create initiatives to prevent grave
violations from being committed against children
affected by armed conflict.
The State of Qatar believes in the importance of
strengthening human rights and protecting children.
We will therefore spare no effort in supporting the
Office of the Special Representative and enabling it to
fully implement its mandate. I am pleased to inform
the Council that in September 2018, the State of Qatar
signed a partnership agreement with the Office of the
Special Representative, which includes funding the
New York Office and the establishment of a centre for
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

children and armed conflict in Doha. The centre will be
active in preparing research, analysis and evaluation,
and will hold workshops, spread awareness and build
capacities on issues related to the protection of children
in armed conflict. We look forward to the launch of the
centre before the end of the year so that it can begin its
humanitarian work.
In conclusion, I reiterate the commitment of the
State of Qatar to protecting human rights. We will
continue to support international efforts to protect
children in armed conflict, to ensure respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law and to
prevent the commission of violations against children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Aidid (Malaysia): At the outset, Malaysia
wishes to align itself with the statement delivered by
Viet Nam on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations.
My delegation wishes to congratulate Poland on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of August and on convening this open debate. We
would also like to thank Special Representative Virginia
Gamba for her remarks this morning and for presenting,
on behalf of the Secretary-General, the annual report
(S/2019/509) on children and armed conflict.
We would also like to extend our sincere
appreciation to Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director
of UNICEF, for her valuable insights. My delegation
thanks Mr. Majok Peter Awan, from South Sudan, for
sharing his experiences as a former child soldier and for
his testimony on the effects of child abduction.
Malaysia shares the deep concern expressed by
the Secretary-General on the scale and severity of
the grave violations committed against children in
2018. These continued violations against children
shock our collective conscience, which demands a
concerted and collective response. A vital component
of a comprehensive approach to child protection
is accountability. In that respect, Malaysia urges
that affirmative action be taken under national or
international justice mechanisms, where appropriate,
against parties that commit violations and abuses
against children. That has become more relevant
this year as we celebrate the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1882 (2009).

S/PV. 8591

The Security Council has developed various
tools to ensure the accountability and compliance
of conflicting parties, including through the listing
mechanism contained in the annual report. Malaysia
wishes to reiterate the importance of integrity and
impartiality in the listing of all perpetrators of grave
violations of children’s rights. We believe that facts
should be the determining factor that guides our actions
under this mechanism.
Malaysia supports the call of the SecretaryGeneral on Member States to allow safe, timely and
unimpeded access for humanitarian assistance and the
protection of humanitarian personnel and assets, in line
with resolution 2417 (2018). Believing that the United
Nations would gain by it, Malaysia would suggest
that the Organization develop practical guidance for
data collection on the denial of humanitarian access.
Such an effort would help to standardize and support
the work of country task forces on monitoring and
reporting of the monitoring and reporting mechanism.
Further, Malaysia believes that United Nations peace
operations and political missions should maintain
dedicated child-protection capacity to ensure that
child-protection concerns are prioritized even in the
context of the downsizing, consolidation or transition
of such operations.
With regard to reintegration, Malaysia believes that
the process of reintegration is a long-term effort that
requires the shared responsibility of all stakeholders. In
this regard, we call on Member States, United Nations
entities and other parties concerned to integrate
child-protection provisions in the community-based
reintegration programmes that foster a spirit of unity
and reconciliation among communities ravaged by war.
To further support the children and armed conflict
agenda, my delegation encourages all Member States to
consider endorsing the Safe Schools Declaration, which
would deter the military use of educational facilities
in armed conflict and preserve schools as mainstays
of learning, in line with the Vancouver Principles that
further operationalize child protection within United
Nations peacekeeping, with a focus on preventing the
recruitment and use of child soldiers.
Malaysia reaffirms its commitments to ensuring
that children around the world affected by armed
conflict are given the greatest consideration and
attention, which is what they truly deserve.

19-2435377/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Observer State of Palestine..
Ms. Rasheed (Palestine): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate Poland on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and acknowledge its able leadership.
I also wish to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs
for convening today’s important debate on children
and armed conflict. This matter continues to be of the
highest priority and urgency for the State of Palestine.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General
Guterres for his report (S/2019/509). We are grateful
to the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict and the Executive Director of UNICEF for their
important briefings to the Council and their tireless
advocacy for the protection and well-being of children.
Their efforts and those of all relevant international
civil servants and civil society to this end deserve our
full support.
The Secretary-General’s annual report on children
and armed conflict reflects in painful detail how
children in situations of armed conflict continue to
be subjected to the most appalling violations of their
human rights. We regret the fact that 2018 was marked
by the highest recorded number of children killed or
maimed in armed conflict since the United Nations
began monitoring and reporting this grave violation.
The numbers are shocking and beyond unacceptable.
Collectively we must do more. As this month
marks ten years since resolution 1882 (2009) and as we
approach the thirtieth anniversary of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, the international community
must mobilize to resolve the conflicts and remedy the
situations that continue to cause child casualties. We
must act in ways that are consistent with the principles
and commitments affirmed in this important resolution
and in line with our collective obligations under
international law.
Such action cannot exclude efforts to address the
continuing plight of Palestinian children. Denied their
inalienable rights, the Palestinian people in occupied
Palestine, including East Jerusalem, have endured over
a half-century of foreign occupation, with generations
of children suffering grave breaches and human rights
violations, as Israel, the occupying Power, persists
with absolute impunity in its systematic perpetration
of violations, including those considered among the
six grave violations against children in armed conflict.
This situation has been repeatedly attested to by United
78/90

02/08/2019

Nations agencies and international human rights
organizations. Yet, despite constant appeals and calls
for protection, Palestinian children have been left
unprotected, defenceless and vulnerable.
In the reporting period, the United Nations verified
the highest number of Palestinian children killed by
Israeli occupying forces and settlers since the 2014 war
on the Gaza Strip. This number includes babies as young
as 18 months old. Moreover, over 2,700 Palestinian
children were injured in 2018, including many
permanently maimed and disabled, and the number of
casualties has continued to rise in 2019, including as
a result of intentional targeting of peaceful protesters
by the occupying forces. Settler violence and terror
also continues to severely impact Palestinian children,
including harassment and attacks on schoolchildren,
all under the watch of the Israeli occupying forces
and in grave breach of Israel’s obligations as the
occupying Power.
Palestinian children, some as young as 12 years
old, also continue to be arrested, brutally interrogated,
detained and imprisoned by Israel, with several held
under administrative detention for months and some
for up to a year without charge. Since 2000, at least
10,000 Palestinian children have been arrested and
prosecuted in an Israeli military detention system
notorious for its systematic ill-treatment and torture of
Palestinian children. Reports document that three out
of four children experience physical violence during
arrest, transfer or interrogation, with physical and
psychological trauma that can only haunt them for the
rest of their lives. Perhaps that is exactly the point of
such policies by the occupying Power, as it attempts to
damage and impair one generation after another with its
unlawful, unethical and immoral policies and practices.
Israel’s illegal and depraved colonization of the
Palestinian land and ethnic cleansing of the Palestinian
people also continue to gravely impact our children.
Its systematic and punitive demolition of homes has
rendered thousands homeless and forcibly displaced
hundreds of children and their families, among them
Palestine refugees living the trauma of dispossession
and displacement once again. Thousands more children
and their families remain at risk of losing their homes
and life belongings, deepening their fear, anxieties
and hopelessness.
Israeli raids and attacks on schools and closures
of Palestinian educational institutions also continue.
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

Moreover, humanitarian assistance to address protection
needs continues to be impeded as a result of access and
movement restrictions and other collective-punishment
measures imposed by the occupation, most severely via
its inhumane illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip, now in
its thirteenth year and the cause of immense deprivation,
suffering and isolation of Palestinian children.
The foregoing is just a snapshot of the massive
violations that continue to be perpetrated against
Palestinian children by this belligerent, illegal
occupation. There must be accountability for all
these crimes.
The State of Palestine reiterates that, according to
the established criteria and the thorough documentation
available to the Security Council, including as reflected
in its own consecutive reports, the perpetration of such
violations and crimes warrants that Israel, its army
and its settlers be put on the list of parties that commit
grave violations against children. The absence of such
inclusion continues to undermine the credibility of this
list, exposing it to the criticism of politicization, and
continues to be a missed opportunity to hold Israel
accountable and to save the lives of Palestinian children.
Moreover, we call on the Special Representative to
ensure that the report’s section on Israel and the State of
Palestine be placed in the prevailing context of military
occupation, in order to ensure an accurate examination
of the situation of our children, including ensuring
that measures constituting collective punishment, in
particular the Israeli blockade of Gaza, are not omitted
in enumeration of the long list of violations against the
children of Palestine.
We will remain vigilant in calling upon the
international community to uphold its obligations in
that regard. We appeal to the Security Council and all
States to shore up the political will and courage to act
immediately and without selectivity to protect the lives
of Palestinian children under Israeli occupation. This
protection is essential for safeguarding their rights
and promoting their well-being until an end is brought
to this illegal occupation and the rights, freedoms,
security and dignity of the Palestinian people are
realized, beginning with our children.

S/PV. 8591

armed conflict. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2019/509). At the same time,
my delegation is saddened by the report’s findings
on the extent to which in 2018, children in more than
20 countries around the world suffered as a result of
conflict and related violence.
I am honoured to participate in this debate from
the perspective of Sierra Leone and its experience of
the horrendous impact of a prolonged — 11-year, to be
exact — armed conflict on our children.
This morning the Security Council heard from
Ms. Mariatu Kamara, an innocent victim of that
bitter and senseless rebel war. Her appearance and
contribution here today could be described as a chapter
in the record of atrocities perpetrated against innocent
civilians, including children.
Coincidentally, three weeks ago marked the
twentieth anniversary of the signing of the historic
Lomé Peace Agreement between the Government of
Sierra Leone and the Revolutionary United Front. At
the signing ceremony, the late President Ahmad Tejan
Kabbah brought a young child named Memunatu, lifted
her high up and dedicated the Agreement to the children
of Sierra Leone. This underlines the importance of
peace and reconciliation as a prerequisite for addressing
the needs of children in armed conflict.
Thankfully, that sad chapter in my country’s
history was closed some 17 years ago. Given our
experience with conflict and its horrendous impact on
children, we were quick to appreciate our responsibility
to protect our children and to come to the realization
that sustainable development cannot be achieved in
post-conflict settings if prompt action is not taken to
prevent such heinous crimes.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone.

As we commemorate the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1882 (2009), we would like to share some of
our experiences on this issue, including the challenges
we had to surmount to ensure that our traumatized
children could enjoy their inalienable right to live
in a peaceful, congenial environment, their right to
education and to adequate food and shelter, as well as
their right to be heard and be protected from all forms
of violence and abuse, be it in time of war or in time of
peace.

Mrs. Sulimani (Sierra Leone): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for your initiative in convening this
open debate of the Security Council on children and

On the measures taken to prevent, reintegrate and
stop the cycles of violence, the Government of Sierra
Leone, in its bid to end the hostilities, signed the

19-2435379/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

aforementioned Lomé Peace Agreement, which laid out
a path to peace and provided for the protection of children
affected by the conflict. Disarmament, demobilization
and the reintegration of all ex-combatants, including all
children associated with the war, into their communities
through a National Committee on Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration programme soon
followed. To combat impunity and enhance transitional
justice, a Truth and Reconciliation Commission was
established to look into, among other things, allegations
of sexual violence.
Additionally, a hybrid international court, the
Special Court for Sierra Leone, was established to bring
to book all those who bore the greatest responsibility
for war crimes, crimes against humanity and other
serious violations. The Special Court rendered the
first conviction by an international tribunal for the
recruitment and use of child soldiers in armed conflict,
and the Court’s landmark decision on sexual slavery
and forced marriage was an acknowledgement of the
proscribed conduct as new crimes in international
criminal jurisprudence.
On social reintegration, we enacted an Education
Act that led to the reform of the education sector
and are currently implementing a policy of free
quality education for all children in Government
and Government-assisted primary and secondary
schools nationwide.
As we seek ways to improve efforts to protect and
support children in armed conflict, we should note that
the ongoing reforms at the United Nations, including
budget cuts to peacekeeping and efforts to incorporate
protection mandates, threaten the Organization’s ability
to deliver on the Security Council’s children and armed
conflict mandate, particularly as a result of diminished
child-protection capacity in peacekeeping missions as a
result of those budget cuts.
As we commemorate the thirtieth anniversary of
the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child in November this year, my delegation wishes
to remind and urge Member States to treat children
associated with armed conflict as victims entitled to
the full protection of their rights, and, where they may
have allegedly committed illegal acts, to treat them in
accordance with juvenile justice standards as prescribed
by international law.
Sierra Leone believes that Member States and
the Security Council can do better by strengthening
80/90

02/08/2019

accountability for perpetrators and holding them
accountable for child-rights violations, including those
who attack schools and hospitals, deny humanitarian
access and perpetrate sexual violence against children
in situations of armed conflict.
We further believe that Member States can also
better support actions by the United Nations in support
of child victims and survivors by providing adequate
and predictable funding for reintegration programmes
in order to enable such victims and survivors, as well
as children recruited and used by parties to conflict, to
benefit from the support necessary to resume their lives
and to be smoothly reintegrated into their respective
communities. While we agree that children can become
positive agents of change, those affected by conflict
should access the reintegration programmes required to
recover their lives in order to enable them to contribute
to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
Sierra Leone cannot choose to remain silent simply
because the war ended in my country 17 years ago. Here
we wish to pay tribute to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, UNICEF and the many dedicated childprotection activists around the world for their support
through the mobilization of international cooperation
and the provision of financial resources to enhance
national efforts to protect children affected by war. We
stand ready to share our views on this issue whenever
the need arises.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Montenegro.
Mrs. Pejanović Đurišić (Montenegro): At the outset,
let me thank the Polish presidency for having organized
an open debate on this important issue of children
and armed conflict. I would also like to thank today’s
briefers for their valuable presentations and essential
work in protecting children in conflict situations.
Although Montenegro fully aligns itself with
the statement made by the observer of the European
Union, I would like to make some remarks in my
national capacity.
Once again the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on children and armed conflict (S/2019/509)
has shown that millions of children are caught up in
conflicts in which they are not merely bystanders
but constitute an alarming percentage of the overall
number of the casualties of war. Children continue
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

to face an unacceptable risk of recruitment and use,
killing and maiming, all forms of sexual violence and
abduction, and they continue to suffer as the result
of attacks on schools and hospitals and the denial of
humanitarian access.
The annual report highlights the devastating impact
of new conflict dynamics and operational tactics,
combined with widespread disregard for international
law, on children, in 2018. There were more than 24,000
verified grave violations that year, the highest number
of verified cases of the killing and maiming of children
since the establishment of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism. We condemn in the strongest terms the
continued violations against children and urge all
parties to conflict to respect international humanitarian
law and related laws and practices, refrain from
attacking schools and hospitals, and protect those most
vulnerable, particularly children.
Despite the increasing level of grave violations
committed against children, certain improvements in
the situation of children affected by armed conflict
have been made in the past year. We have witnessed
the tireless efforts of the relevant stakeholders,
particularly United Nations staff and civil-society
partners, including child-protection advisers, to ensure
the release and support the integration of more than
10,000 children. We strongly support these efforts, as
the prevention of violence against children, the release
of child soldiers and their reintegration represent
crucial elements in ensuring children’s well-being and
the prevention of future conflicts. In that regard, we
welcome the establishment of the Global Coalition for
the Reintegration of Former Child Soldiers.
This year we will mark the thirtieth anniversary of
the entry into force of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and next year the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of its two Optional Protocols, on the sale of
children, child prostitution and child pornography and
on the involvement of children in armed conflict. It is
a crucial time to centre our efforts around ensuring the
universal ratification of those instruments, particularly
the Optional Protocol on the involvement of children
in armed conflict. Therefore, we encourage States to
strengthen the legal foundation on children and armed
conflict by ratifying the Optional Protocol.
Apart from ratifying treaties that lay the foundation
for the safeguard of children’s rights and their protection
from all forms of violence, Montenegro is one of the

S/PV. 8591

pathfinding countries of the Global Partnership to End
Violence against Children. In addition, we endorsed the
Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with
Armed Forces or Armed Groups, as well as the Safe
Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and
Use of Child Soldiers. As peace operations plays crucial
role in sustaining peace and preventing human rights
violations, in particular against children, international
child protection provisions, including the prevention
of the recruitment and use of child soldiers, as well as
child protection capacities, should be incorporated in
peacekeeping mandates.
Conflict escalations also cause significant
disruptions to children’s education and health care, as
education and health-care facilities are often partially
or completely destroyed. We believe it is crucial
to ensure that children continue to have access to
education, which is an indispensable aspect of children’s
socialization and reintegration. Child protection issues
should feature in the overall peace process, while the
perpetrators of violations against children must be
held accountable. In that regard, we encourage further
national and international efforts in bringing the culture
of impunity to an end.
As we mark the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1882 (2009), we must redouble our efforts
at all levels in order to effectively protect children from
violence, abuse and exploitation and ensure that their
human rights are well respected. Only by doing so will
we ensure the well-being of entire generations, thereby
building stable and peaceful societies for the future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): Armenia would like to
thank the Polish presidency for organizing today’s open
debate. The participation of His Excellency Foreign
Minister Jacek Czaputowicz earlier in today’s meeting
demonstrates the high relevance and importance of
this humanitarian and human rights issue. We also
thank Mrs. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Henrietta Fore,
Executive Director of UNICEF, and the other briefers
for outlining the complexity of the challenges related to
the protection of children in armed conflict.
The annual report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2019/509) reveals the
disturbing increase in violence against children. The

19-2435381/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

focus areas of the report, such as the recruitment and
use of children, abductions, sexual violence and attacks
on schools and hospitals are a stark reminder of the
gravity of the situation and the urgent need to address
it. Children living in conflict areas are particularly
vulnerable due to the lack of humanitarian access.
Attempts to isolate people living in conflict areas from
the outer world and denying their inalienable human
rights should be identified and effectively addressed.
We support the efforts of the Special Representative
to create synergies among the United Nations agencies,
regional organizations and international human rights
bodies. The mandate of the Special Representative
provides for a key role in streamlining and integrating
the activities of the international community around
the noble goal of protecting children.
This year marks the thirtieth anniversary of the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child,
one of the most widely endorsed and fundamental
treaties for the protection and promotion of universal
human rights. Armenia continues to prioritize the
protection of children’s rights, as reflected in our
national policies as well as in the framework of our
international cooperation.
We work closely with the International Committee
of the Red Cross in creating shelters and safe rooms
in schools and kindergartens, located in the border
regions, and also undertake steps to ensure the safety
of schools in line with Armenia’s commitments under
the Safe Schools Declaration. Armenia’s endorsement
of the Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the
Paris Commitments and the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers is yet another reflection of
our commitment to promote the safety of children.
We are also a signatory to the Optional Protocol on
the involvement of children in armed conflict and we
encourage Member States that have not yet done so to
join those important instruments.
Regrettably, in our region too we have witnessed
violence against children in conflict situations. The
deliberate, indiscriminate targeting by Azerbaijan of
the civilian population and infrastructures of Nagorno
Karabakh and the bordering regions of Armenia,
including schools, kindergartens and hospitals,
has resulted in deaths and injuries among civilians
and schoolchildren.
82/90

02/08/2019

Refusing the creation of an investigative mechanism
to identify the ceasefire violations, as agreed within
the framework of the internationally mandated format
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe Minsk Group co-chairmanship, which
would contribute to reducing the number of incidents
affecting civilians, including children, is beyond any
reasonable justification.
We have been observing an appalling practice
of involving children in State-led hate propaganda,
including through school curricula, in our neighbouring
country. Such a malicious practice of negative
stereotyping, fuelling hatred on the basis of national
identity among children and young people, is not only
reprehensible and incompatible with the international
humanitarian and human rights law, but it further
undermines efforts to create an environment conducive
to peace and reconciliation.
The effective protection of children in situations
of armed conflict requires strengthened commitment
to the implementation of the relevant international
instruments and necessitates early warning and early
action. Supporting free and unimpeded humanitarian
access is crucial to preventing and alleviating the
suffering of children caught in conflict. Today’s open
debate once again reminds us that the imperative
of protecting children and ensuring their right to
life should prevail over political manipulations and
distorted narratives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): Armed conflicts are one of the
basest acts of the human condition. Their extreme
brutality and degradation affect first and foremost the
innocent who do not carry weapons, that is to say, the
civilian population, who are victims of the cruelty of
war. It is therefore inevitably the elderly, women and
children, innocent social groups in conflicts, who suffer
the most from violence. Armed conflicts are among the
worst tragedies that can befall a nation and any act used
as a justification for the narrative of violence must be
denounced and condemned.
Today we have come to demand that the Security
Council act immediately to prevent the disaster of
imminent military action against Venezuela, already
announced by one of its permanent members, the
Government of the United States, in complete violation
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

of its responsibilities within the Council and of its
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations and
international law.
On other occasions, we have denounced before the
Council, members of the most important organ in the
world, who are responsible for maintaining international
peace and security, the plan systematically implemented
by President Trump’s Government to suffocate our
nation’s economy with its coercive measures, which
are in violation of the United Nations Charter and the
human rights of our people by serving as a collective
punishment against the civilian population, particularly
the most vulnerable sectors, such as the elderly, women
and children.
We also denounce how extortion measures have the
effect of stealing and plundering our national wealth
by illegally appropriating refineries, gold currency and
other financial instruments, amounting to more than
$30 billion, which are essential for meeting the basic
needs of our people.
The economic blockade and colossal robbery
bear the hallmarks of monstrous cruelty, unique to
war crimes, by criminalizing the purchase of basic
foodstuffs for the sustenance of more than 6 million
families receiving vital assistance through special
programmes run by our Government. We are here
today to denounce the United States Government for
trying to fabricate a famine in Venezuela to appropriate
our natural resources and recolonize our nation. That is
a crime against humanity.
Economic terrorism was compounded by political
aggression and the violation of Venezuelan sovereignty
on the border with Colombia on 23 February. A coup
d’état was also funded and organized on 30 April, but
it was thwarted by the swift action of Venezuelan State
institutions. The clandestine operations of political
aggression — subsequently shamelessly acknowledged
by officials of the Trump Government — have failed,
but their arrogance does not allow them to admit
their mistakes.
Desperation makes for a poor adviser. President
Trump, beleaguered by all the internal accusations
against his Government, is awakening the demons of
racism, internal conflict and international war. It is a
flight forward, and we are now entering an even more
dangerous phase that involves the militarization of
politics towards Venezuela, with a plan that seeks an
excuse for invasion in the very short term. The United

S/PV. 8591

States Southern Command, Mr. Trump’s branch of the
armed forces in South America and the Caribbean, has
this year conducted more than 55 spy plane incursions
into Venezuela’s flight information region, without
prior warning or without providing a reason, thereby
endangering air safety in the region. Overflights
have occurred daily over the past two weeks,
thereby increasing in frequency and accompanied
by provocative and threatening statements about the
ability of the United States to immediately attack
Venezuela, if ordered to do so by President Trump. A
reciprocal military assistance treaty among countries
of the region, which has never been applied in the past
70 years and which Venezuela denounced six years ago,
is now being invoked as a legal excuse for invasion.
We are also here to denounce the fact that President
Trump yesterday announced to the media that he is
considering imposing a naval blockade and quarantine
against Venezuela. According to Article 41 of the
Charter of the United Nations, such measures involve
the use of armed force, which, due to their gravity and
devastating effects on civilians, can be applied only
with the authorization of the Security Council, in cases
of threat to the peace, breach of the peace or acts of
aggression. We therefore ask, when did the Council
approve such force? When did the Council determine
that Venezuela is a threat to the peace, or that it breached
the peace, or that it committed acts of aggression? It
is clear that none of the assumptions for such serious
action exists and that none of the legal requirements has
been met. Every threat and action by the United States
against Venezuela is illegal and criminal and could lead
to disaster for the civilian population.
President Trump’s threats and aggression are in
line with the comments made here in the Chamber by
the representative of the United States a few days ago.
According to the official, international law and Security
Council resolutions, which are binding on all States and
are part of international law, are not references for the
decisions of the United States.
The world that President Trump offers is a world
without the rule of law; where children, women and
the elderly are the primary victims of the calamities
of war; and where humankind lives in constant fear
of the abuses of an unpredictable Government, guided
by a supremacist ideology that offers only hatred and
violence. It is a world without the United Nations.
Therefore, we can conclude only that Government

19-2435383/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

of President Trump is a threat to international peace
and security.
We in Venezuela reject the nightmare of perpetual
war proposed by Mr. Trump. We urgently demand
that the Security Council enforce the United Nations
Charter, uphold international law, maintain peace, halt
the imminent disaster of a world Power that behaves like
an outlaw State and, using its authority, stop Trump’s
war. In sum, we ask that Trump’s war be stopped.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Seifi Pargou (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
thank you, Madam President, for organizing today’s
open debate. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2019/509) and the briefers for their input.
Armed conflicts have serious irreparable impacts
on children. Protecting them from the scourge of
conflict is not an option; it is an obligation. Saving
children means saving the future, future generations
and their peace and prosperity. However, the question
is one of how that noble objective can be achieved.
There are different ways to fulfil it. However, none of
them can be as effective as putting an end to current
conflicts and preventing their re-emergence, as well as
the emergence of new conflicts.
For example, so long as the occupation of Palestine
continues, each and every year more and more children
will be killed, injured, arrested and detained by Israeli
forces. As reflected in the Secretary-General’s report,
some of the Palestinian children killed by Israel were
as young as 18 months old. Similarly, most of them
were shot by live ammunition to the upper body, while
reportedly posing no imminent threat to Israeli forces.
The deliberate mass killing and injuring of Palestinian
children by Israel is, no doubt, a clear manifestation of war
crimes and crimes against humanity. However, despite
that fact, Israeli forces have never been blacklisted in
the reports of the Secretary-General, which seriously
undermines their accuracy, credibility and impartiality.
The sense of impunity has only emboldened Israel to
kill more children, with more brutality.
A similar pattern of double standards is evident when
the report considers the situation of children in Yemen,
where most of the child casualties were attributed to
air strikes by the coalition. But, in reality, there is no
coalition. It is only Saudi Arabia that continues killing
Yemeni children. It proves that deleting Saudi Arabia
84/90

02/08/2019

from the top of the list of violators of the rights of
children in the Secretary-General’s report has resulted
only in the killing of more Yemeni children by Saudis.
Is it not time to end that approach? A glance at the
practices of the Israelis, the Saudis and Da’esh forces
in Syria and Iraq reveals that there is a real race taking
place among the child killers as to who can kill more
children. We strongly condemn all such inhumane acts,
which are gross violations of international law.
At a time when the situation of children in armed
conflict is alarming, we need to redouble our efforts
to prevent the trend and all violations of children’s
rights. That is a common responsibility that should be
pursued responsibly by all. Together, we can and need
to save the lives of our children in armed conflicts and,
thereby, contribute to peace in our time and prosperity
for generations to come.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Angola.
Ms. Ferreira (Angola): Allow me, at the outset,
to join my colleagues in congratulating you, Madam
President, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August and wishing you
a successful and productive term. Allow me also to
commend you for holding this important and timely
open debate on such a critical issue, as well as to
thank the briefers for the very important information
they provided.
The problem of children in armed conflict is
very close to our hearts. Eliminating the inhumane
treatment of children trapped in armed conflict is of
paramount importance and something we can all agree
on, no matter our policy positions or how entrenched
our disagreements might be. Although steady progress
in reducing the number of child soldiers in the world
has been achieved through the development of a
monitoring and reporting system, an increase in the
implementation of action plans and refocusing on the
fundamental principles of international humanitarian
law, resulting in a safer world for children, several
challenges still exist.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/509) is a stark reminder of how the challenges
posed by the evolving nature of ongoing armed
conflict — through the deliberate targeting and
military use of schools, the indoctrination of children to
commit crimes, using them to carry explosive devices
and their abduction, sexual abuse, forced recruitment,
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

rape and deliberate maiming and killing — aggravate
the violence and abuse committed by extremists.
Excellent work has been done to address this matter,
with effective cooperation among the United Nations,
States and non-State actors, but parties to conflict and
the international community must do more to protect
children and young people affected by armed conflict.
As such, we must prevent conflicts from breaking
out in the first place by increasing efforts aimed at
conflict prevention; ensuring that children associated
with armed groups are reintegrated, not punished,
and provided with quality education and health-care
services; including young people in conflict resolution,
sustaining peace and development processes; and
stopping all forms of violence against children. We must
assist Governments listed in the annexes to the report
to adopt and implement the action plans suggested by
the Council.
On a positive note, we would like to underline the
progress made by the Children, Not Soldiers campaign
and the commitments of the Governments involved.
We also encourage the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, UNICEF and others to continue
implementing their agenda on children and their
engagement with non-State armed groups, which often
results in the surrender of child soldiers who belong
to armed groups and gives them opportunities for a
second life.
Angola remains committed to strengthening the
protection and empowerment of children affected
on the ground. We support the Secretary-General’s
recommendations in his report in that regard, while
calling on the Security Council to reinforce its actions
and recognize the valuable contribution that regional
and subregional organizations and arrangements make
to ensuring the protection of children affected by armed
conflict
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate Poland on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council and commend its initiative to
convene today’s important open debate on children
and armed conflict. I would also like to thank today’s
briefers for the insightful information they shared
with us.

S/PV. 8591

The Republic of Azerbaijan is a party to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocol on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, as well as to the 1949 Geneva Conventions
relative to the protection of war victims. My Government
has strongly and consistently supported international
efforts aimed at ensuring more effective protection for
the rights of children and improving the situation of
children affected by armed conflict.
Despite some progress made at the international,
regional and national levels in preventing and
responding to grave violations committed against
children, serious challenges remain. According to the
report of the Secretary-General,
“[v]erified cases of the killing and maiming
of children reached record levels globally since
the creation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism on children and armed conf lict
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612
(2005)”. (S/2019/509, para. 6)
Effective protection efforts must be free of
selectivity and address all situations of armed conflict
without distinction, including those of a protracted
nature and having a prolonged impact on civilians and
children in particular. The wrongs of the recent past,
including attacks on schools and hospitals, the killing
and maiming of children, forced displacements and the
abduction of children, must not be neglected.
During the continued aggression by the Republic
of Armenia against my country, serious violations of
international humanitarian law have been committed,
amounting to war crimes, crimes against humanity and
acts of genocide. A scorched-earth policy implemented
by the Armenian side has involved the ethnic
cleansing of the seized territories of all Azerbaijanis
and the brutal killing and wounding of thousands of
civilians, including children. Over more than 30 years,
Azerbaijan has hosted one of the highest numbers of
refugees and displaced persons in the world, many of
whom are children.
In February 1992, the largest massacre during the
conflict was committed against the civilians of the
town of Khojaly in the Nagorno Karabakh region of
the Republic of Azerbaijan. As a result of the attack
and capture of the town by the Armenian armed forces,
hundreds of Azerbaijanis, including women, children
and the elderly, were killed, wounded or taken hostage,
while the town was razed to the ground.

19-2435385/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

As a result of the war waged against my country,
3,888 citizens of Azerbaijan were registered missing,
including 718 civilians, of whom 71 are children. Those
reported missing disappeared in circumstances that
raise serious concern as to their well-being, particularly
given the atrocious methods of warfare widely practiced
by the Armenian side during the conflict. Yerevan
refuses to account for the missing persons within its
control, as well as to conduct a prompt and effective
investigation into their fate.
Despite the formal ceasefire, the Armenian armed
forces have repeatedly targeted civilians and civilian
objects in Azerbaijan situated along or further behind
the frontline. Therefore, as a result of the heavy shelling
in April 2016, many schools in the Goranboy, Tartar,
Aghdam and Agjabadi districts of Azerbaijan were
damaged. That was verified in the assessment report
of 15 May 2016 released by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees following its
mission to the affected areas of my country.
Under international law, intentionally directing
attacks on buildings dedicated to education is a war
crime. It should also be noted that attacks on schools
and hospitals constitute one of the grave violations that
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict is mandated to monitor
and report on.
In conclusion, I would like to say that, in order
to break the cycles of violence and aid prevention
efforts, respect for international humanitarian law is
imperative and impunity must end. Being an inevitable
consequence of the offences committed, accountability
is an important prerequisite on the path leading to peace
and long-lasting reconciliation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): Let me begin by
congratulating Poland on having assumed the
presidency of the Security Council. We also extend
our appreciation to Foreign Minister Czaputowicz
for presiding over the debate earlier today, and thank
Poland for having convened this important debate as
the first order of business during its presidency. We
also wish to express our appreciation to Belgium for its
commitment as Chair of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. We thank Ms. Virginia Gamba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
86/90

02/08/2019

Children and Armed Conflict, for her presentation, and
we thank all the briefers.
It is encouraging to hear that close to 14,000 children
have been released from different forms of captivity
and reintegrated into society worldwide. However, it is
disappointing to learn from in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2019/509) about the disturbing levels of
serious violations — 24,000 violations against children
in armed conflict in just one year is distressing. That is,
I believe, more than the size of the population of many
towns around the world.
We are seriously concerned about the continued
impact of armed conflict on children, causing their
forced displacement and giving rise to serious protection
challenges. The activities of terrorist groups such as
Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram, including recruiting
and abducting children to use in asymmetric warfare
and, worse still, deploying them as suicide bombers,
continue unabated. Their violent acts mean that the
sisterly countries of Somalia and Nigeria remain
among the most affected in terms of the recruitment
and use of children for crime. That situation continues
to pose real protection challenges for United Nations
peacekeeping missions, as well as African-led peace
support operations. In that context, I would like to
underscore that Ethiopia attaches great importance
to the protection of civilians, including the protection
of children in armed conflict. The Government of
Ethiopia is committed to the full implementation of
obligations under international human rights law and
international humanitarian law. We are also committed
to the full implementation of resolution 1379 (2001) and
subsequent resolutions on children and armed conflict.
As a major troop-contributing country to United
Nations peace operations and African Union-led peace
support operations, Ethiopia places great emphasis on
deploying troops who have been adequately trained,
vetted, equipped and instructed. We ensure that our
peacekeepers in various operations, including the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), respect
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. Ethiopian peacekeepers fully
understand that disciplinary and judiciary powers will
be exercised over them in the case of any violation.
They operate within and abide by the broader principles
of international humanitarian law and the principles of
distinction and proportionality in all their operations.
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

Let me re-emphasize that our troops are guided
by the rules of engagement elaborated within the
framework of our obligations under international
humanitarian law, including the Geneva Conventions
and their Additional Protocols I and II. We have also
put in place a mechanism to ensure accountability in
order to address any violations by troops deployed to
any mission. Such a framework has, over the years,
enabled us to properly and effectively address any
protection challenges. I also wish to add that, as one
of the largest refugee-hosting countries, Ethiopia
continues to provide international protection to refugee
children, including unaccompanied minors who have
been forcibly displaced as a result of grave violations
by parties to armed conflicts.
Ethiopia is also ready to take corrective measures
and learn from shortfalls by conducting in-depth
investigations of any allegations against its forces
serving in peacekeeping missions and to take action
where appropriate. However, it is important that alleged
incidents involving any peacekeepers be substantiated
by complete investigations. Similar allegations have
been investigated by AMISOM in the past, and the
investigators concluded that,
“There are reasonable grounds to doubt that the
alleged incidents took place unless any additional
and convincing evidence comes forward”.
Conclusions like that strongly underline the need
to base investigations on concrete evidence and for
relevant United Nations agencies to work closely with
peacekeeping missions and the troop-contributing
countries concerned before publishing allegations.
We strongly believe that such investigations must be
consistent with the objectivity, accuracy and reliability
criteria established by resolution 1612 (2005).
It is our conviction that children must be protected
from indiscriminate attacks as well as the impact of
crossfire incidents during fighting in densely populated
rural areas and urban centres. In that regard, Ethiopia
subscribes without any exception to the principle of
primary consideration for the protection of children
and their interests. We take the importance of children’s
right to protection very seriously. Criminalizing the
recruitment and use of children is part of our national
legal system as well as our African conventions, not to
mention our international obligations. We give utmost
priority to providing support and treatment to victims of
incidents, and we are entirely opposed to any impunity.

S/PV. 8591

I note that we have made some positive gains in our
region. The signing in September 2018 of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan has had a considerable impact.
The subsequent decrease in hostilities is contributing to
improved humanitarian access, particularly to children
and women. It is in that context that we would like to
encourage the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to explore mechanisms to further strengthen
the cooperation of her Office with the African Union
Peace and Security Council, including consultative
meetings aimed at ensuring the full implementation of
plans of action signed with parties to an armed conflict.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our support
for the Secretary-General’s call on Member States
to ensure that mitigation measures are put in place
to prevent the six grave violations reported. We also
support all measures that strengthen the accountability
of perpetrators of crimes against children. I reaffirm
Ethiopia’s fullest commitment to continuing its work
with relevant actors, both here in the United Nations and
in the African Union, in order to extend and streamline
the protection of children in armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we should like to thank His Excellency
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Poland, Mr. Jacek Czaputowicz, and the entire Polish
delegation for having organized this very important
debate on children and armed conflict in the light of
the increasing threats they face throughout the world.
We also wish to thank all of today’s briefers for their
enlightening briefings.
This year, we are commemorating the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1261
(1999) — a resolution that we voted in favour of during
our membership of the Council and that places the
issue of children and armed conflict at the heart of
the Council’s agenda. Conflicts persist in a number of
regions around the world, with appalling crimes being
committed by militias and terrorist groups. Children
are the first victims of crime in times of conflict. They
are recruited, exploited, kidnapped and trafficked; they
suffer sexual violence and are killed and maimed. They
also suffer the indirect effects of war. They are robbed
of their fundamental rights, depriving them of a decent
life in peace and security, without education, food or

19-2435387/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

health care. Based on the conviction that it is essential
to protect children, in 1992 the Kingdom of Bahrain
acceded to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
its Optional Protocols on the Involvement of Children
in Armed Conflict and on the Sale of Children, Child
Prostitution and Child Pornography.
The coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen
also attaches special importance to promoting the
protection of children, as evidenced by the signing
of a memorandum of understanding between the
coalition and the United Nations that provides the
legislative framework for establishing a plan of action
to strengthen the protection of children in Yemen, in
cooperation with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
In that context, we condemn the violations committed
against children and their recruitment by Iran-backed
Houthi militias.
The violence that children witness in areas of
armed conflict and unrest — often involving losing
family members and loved ones — has permanent
psychological effects. We must address this issue in
order to avoid losing an entire generation to warfare,
particularly with regard to children living in those
countries most affected by war and conflict. We should
focus on developing national, regional and international
action plans aimed at preventing these violations before
they take place, in line with resolution 2427 (2018).
In the event that such violations do occur, it is vital
that we ensure the rehabilitation of children and their
reintegration into society.
In conclusion, we underscore the important role
that the international community should play in
combating all inhuman practices carried out against
children and in effectively responding to all matters
that threaten international peace and security, in full
compliance with international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, in order to provide
effective protection to children and guarantee their
legitimate rights.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Let me begin
by congratulating Poland on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of August and on having organized this open debate
on children and armed conflict. I would also like to
thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland, His
88/90

02/08/2019

Excellency Mr. Jacek Czaputowicz, for presiding over
this important meeting. I would also like to thank Peru
for its effective presidency in the month of July.
I take this opportunity to welcome the new
Permanent Representative of China to the United
Nations, Ambassador Zhang Jun.
Please also allow me to express my sincere thanks
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba,
for presenting the Secretary-General’s annual report
(S/2019/509). I also wish to express my appreciation
to Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of UNICEF;
Ms. Mariatu Kamara, UNICEF Canada Ambassador;
and Mr. Majok Peter Awan, a former child soldier, for
their detailed briefings this morning.
My delegation wishes to express its appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his annual report, which
covers the period from January to December 2018, and
for providing information on the six grave violations
against children in situations of armed conflict, such
as their recruitment and use; killing and maiming;
abductions; rape and other forms of sexual violence;
attacks on schools and hospitals; and the denial of
humanitarian access.
We are appalled to see the rise in violations against
children, with more than 24,000 grave violations
against children documented in 20 country situations.
It is not at all encouraging to hear that, even 10 years
after the adoption of resolution 1882 (2009) — which
mandated the Secretary-General to list parties to armed
conflict engaging in patterns of killing and maiming
children and/or committing rape and other sexual
violence against children — the number of cases of the
killing and maiming of children in 2018 was the highest
recorded, at more than 12,000, since a mechanism to
monitor and report on violations was set up in 2005.
The number of cases of sexual violence is also rising.
We hope that resolution 2467 (2019), which was adopted
by the Council this year, will act to provide an effective
means of preventing any further rise.
The initiatives undertaken by the SecretaryGeneral have yielded significant and tangible successes.
As reflected in the Secretary-General’s report last year,
too (see S/2018/465), several listed parties to armed
conflict signed agreements to adopt action plans to
end their recruitment or use of child soldiers. The
United Nations system-wide response has also been
laudable. We are happy to learn that some positive
19-24353

02/08/2019

Children and armed conflict

developments took place in 2018, including the release
and reintegration of 13,600 former child soldiers.
However, we agree with Special Representative Gamba
that more focus is needed on that issue. We are happy to
note that this year, no new entity is listed in the annexes
of the annual report. While the Special Representative
and her team deserve our commendation, we also
commend the Security Council for its continued
efforts. In this connection, I take this opportunity to
thank UNICEF for its leadership role in the monitoring
and reporting mechanism.
The use of children by non-State armed groups does
not take place in a vacuum. Conditions that might make
children in those settings vulnerable to recruitment
include poverty, discrimination, inequality, exclusion,
a culture of political violence, tensions over issues
of religion and identity and a history of the use of
child soldiers. Achieving success in ending children’s
involvement in armed conflict therefore depends
largely on addressing the root causes of motivation
and desperation and on building societies in which
children’s rights and dignity and the hope for a better
future for all children are upheld. In our view, the
parties responsible for the unfortunate situation facing
children should be held accountable for their actions.
Children are our future and they bear the torch of
the culture of peace. We believe in their rights and the
realization of their full potential. It is our solemn duty
to protect their physical safety and their right to live
on planet Earth with their minds free of fear and filled
with hopes and dreams. In that conviction, Bangladesh
signed the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
its Optional Protocols at the very first opportunity.
Bangladesh committed itself to protecting, promoting
and defending children’s rights. Under the direction
of our honourable Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina,
Bangladesh is undertaking all efforts to invest in
children’s education, health care and skills-development
opportunities in order to enable them to take part in our
nation-building activities in due course.
In this connection, let me report once again that over
500,000 Rohingya children have fled to Bangladesh
since the start of the huge influx of Rohingya in August
2017 as a result of the extreme violence in Myanmar’s
Rakhine state. During the exodus, they experienced
immense suffering and trauma that will require time to
heal. They now face a bleak future, despite the efforts
of our Government and the international community,
with few opportunities and no clear idea of when they

S/PV. 8591

might return home. If we do not make sure of their
return in a safe and dignified manner, there will be
a real danger of seeing a lost generation of Rohingya
children — children who lack the skills they would
need to deal with their future.
As international efforts are under way to prevent
the Rohingya from falling prey to despair, some are
apprehending that about half a million able-bodied
Rohingya children could potentially become entangled
in activities that might endanger their future and the
communities in which they live. I would therefore like
to reiterate our call on Myanmar to ensure conducive
conditions in Rakhine state for their safe, voluntary and
dignified return. I urge the international community,
and particularly the Security Council, to provide the
guidance and necessary custodianship for the peaceful
resolution of this crisis.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Al Khalil (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): The Syrian Arab Republic regrets the
continued tendency of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/509) to give primacy to political considerations
over human rights issues, thereby failing to provide an
objective perspective on the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic. The recent developments on the ground cited
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict in her latest briefing
are characterized by several fallacies, most notably the
erroneous legal perspective that the counter-terrorism
operations being carried out by the Syrian Arab Army
and its allies — which constitute a legitimate right under
international law — are on an equal footing with the
Turkish aggression and occupation of Syrian territory,
which represent a clear violation of international law,
particularly in terms of the allegations of recruitment,
detention and sexual violence.
The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral has once again sought to indict the Syrian
Government in the face of those violations. We wish
to recall that on several occasions, we have asked the
Special Representative to inform us in advance of the
cases, names and details in the report so as to enable
us to validate them and conduct our own investigations
to verify whether they were true. However, she has
ignored our request and insisted on her own perspective.
We wish to remind the Special Representative that all
relevant Syrian legislation is based on the principle of

19-2435389/90

S/PV.8591

Children and armed conflict

providing special protection to children, in line with
the Syrian Constitution. That is also something we have
repeatedly pointed out in response to her reports.
With regard to the implementation of our legislative
framework, Law No. 11/2013 allowed us to establish
measures in line with our national efforts to help
children recruited by armed terrorist groups with a view
to saving them from exploitation by those groups and
in order to ensure their rehabilitation and reintegration
into society. Children are also covered under our
Juvenile Act No. 18/1974, which is based primarily on
corrective measures and includes procedural rules and
special courts that treat children as victims, regardless
of their actions. Our laws prioritize the best interests
of children in terms of physical and psychological care
as well as their rehabilitation and reintegration into
society. All forms of physical abuse and sexual violence
are punishable by severe penalties under criminal law.
Moreover, with regard to the management of military
operations, we wish to reaffirm the commitment of
the Syrian Arab Army to the rules of international
humanitarian law in the context of our counterterrorism efforts, particularly with regard to the
principle of proportionality, the distinction between
civilian and military targets, precaution and the non-use
of prohibited weapons.
In the light of the fabricated allegations made by
the representative of the Turkish regime, my delegation
wishes to reiterate that the Turkish Government is a key
partner of the armed terrorist groups currently deployed
in Idlib. Despite the Turkish regime being one of the
guarantors of the Astana process, Syria does not believe
that it is earnestly implementing the agreements, which

90/90

02/08/2019

were designed to ensure the removal of terrorist groups,
together with heavy and mid-sized weapons, from the
region. On the contrary, the number of terrorists in Idlib,
especially foreigner terrorist fighters, has increased.
The Turkish regime is not only financing and providing
weapons to terrorist groups, such as the Al-Nusra Front
and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, it is even carrying out direct
military aggression exercises against Syria, with 10,655
soldiers and officers deployed on Syrian territory, as
well as 166 tanks, 278 armoured vehicles, 18 rocket
launchers, 73 mortars, 73 vehicles equipped with heavy
machine guns and 41 anti-tank missile launchers.
Other violations being committed by the Turkish
regime are no less dangerous than its military
deployment. The Government of the Justice and
Development Party of Turkey has appointed a Turkish
governor to Afrin, and the Minister of the Interior of
Turkey has appointed officials to the cities of Azaz,
Jarabulus and Marea. The Turkish language has also
been imposed on schools and educational curricula.
Telecommunications towers have been built in Idlib.
Syrian agricultural products such as olives are being
stolen and sold by the Turkish regime at international
markets around the world. Terrorists who support the
Turkish regime are stealing artefacts from Ain Dara
and other areas such as Afrin and its suburbs before
being transported to Turkey.
In the light of everything I have just mentioned,
Syria considers the Turkish regime to be a partner
to the terrorists against Syria and an aggressor. We
believe that we have a right to take all necessary actions
to defend our sovereignty.
The meeting rose at 7 p.m.

19-24353
