A /72/PV.91

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

91st plenary meeting

Thursday, 31 May 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.,
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: I invite the attention of the
General Assembly to draft resolution A/72/L.52,
circulated under sub-item (a) of agenda item 24,
entitled “Operational activities for development of the
United Nations system”. Members will recall that at
its second plenary meeting, on 15 September 2017, the
General Assembly decided to allocate sub-item (a) of
agenda item 24 to the Second Committee. To enable the
General Assembly to take action expeditiously on draft
resolution A/72/L.52, may I take it that the Assembly
wishes to consider sub-item (a) of agenda item 24
directly in plenary meeting and to proceed immediately
to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 24 (continued)
Operational activities for development
(a) Operational activities for development of the
United Nations system
Draft resolution (A/72/L.52)
The President: As we meet here to consider draft
resolution A/72/L.52, on the repositioning of the United
Nations development system, allow me to make four
very brief points.

First, I would like to express my thanks to our
co-facilitators, Ambassador Sabri Boukadoum of
Algeria and Ambassador Ib Petersen of Denmark.
They took on that role knowing it would not be easy.
They have spent many hours in negotiations, listening,
facilitating, responding and analysing. They have spent
many outside them, too, looking for middle ground.
The fact that we are here today, considering the draft
resolution, means that they have done a terrific job. We
all owe them a great debt.
Secondly, the process to get here has belonged to the
Member States. They were in the driving seat from start
to finish, and it is their work that has brought us all here.
They came to the table day after day. They asked for
clarifications, requested more information, suggested
counterproposals and worked to find common ground.
I therefore thank them all.
Thirdly, I would like to acknowledge something, on
which I will be very clear. The draft resolution is not
viewed by everyone as the perfect document, but it is a
legitimate outcome of a multilateral process. It shows
what we are capable of. We can achieve compromise.
We can come together to find new opportunities
and ways ahead, and we can take steps to move the
Organization forward.
Fourthly and finally, I would like to say that our
work does not end today. There is a lot left to do.
That will mean considering the Secretary-General’s
implementation plan, which is due before the end of
the session. It will also mean turning our attention to
funding arrangements and coming together to mobilize

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-16544 (E)

*1816544*

A/72/PV.91

badly needed resources. We cannot see our actions
today in a vacuum. We must create forward momentum
into the ongoing Economic and Social Council review
and alignment process, into our discussions on the two
other pillars of reform — management and peace and
security — and, lastly, into our daily work.

31/05/2018

to the finalization of the implementation plan, as the
operationalization of the funding arrangements requires
consultations with the United Nations development
system entities, as indicated in paragraph 13 of the
draft resolution.

Before I conclude, I want to again thank our
esteemed and overworked co-facilitators, Ambassador
Boukadoum and Ambassador Petersen; our committed
Secretary-General and Deputy Secretary-General;
and all of those present as they followed up on the
commitments we made in adopting the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, drove the process forward
and showed what we are capable of when we use our
multilateral system and work together.

Should the General Assembly adopt draft resolution
A/72/L.52, in accordance with the established
procedures, the requirements relating to the Secretariat’s
share of the UNDG cost-sharing arrangement will
be submitted to the General Assembly for approval
at its seventy-third session as revised estimates for
the programme budget for the biennium 2018-2019,
in relation to the repositioning of the United Nations
development system in the context of the quadrennial
comprehensive policy review.

We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/72/L.52.

The President: I call on the representative of
Algeria in his capacity as first co-facilitator.

In connection with draft resolution A/72/L.52, I now
give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.

Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): In my capacity as
first co-facilitator, allow me to sincerely thank all
Member States, from the Permanent Representatives
to the committed representatives who so firmly and
constructively stood in support of an ambitious outcome
of our consultations. I am grateful for their resolve to
pursue ambitious change and their spirit of compromise
to find ways to reach consensus. I am also heartened
by their support to Ambassador Petersen and myself as
co-facilitators throughout that very complex process.

Ms. Pollard (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): This statement is made
in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly.
In order to implement the provisions of draft
resolution A/72/L.52, requirements amounting to
approximately $255 million would be needed on an
annual basis, as communicated in paragraph 80 of the
report of the Secretary-General (A/72/684) entitled
“Repositioning the United Nations development
system to deliver on the 2030 Agenda: our promise for
dignity, prosperity and peace on a healthy planet”. The
major portion of those requirements would necessitate
extrabudgetary resources.
As requested in paragraph 11 of the draft resolution,
the Secretariat hopes that front-loaded voluntary
contributions will be received in 2018 in order to expedite
the inception of the reinvigorated resident coordinator
system as of 1 January 2019. Under the provisions of
paragraph 10 of the draft resolution, relating to funding
through the United Nations Development Group
(UNDG) cost-sharing arrangement, the Secretariat’s
share would be assessed to the programme budget. It
is estimated that the Secretariat’s share of the UNDG
cost-sharing arrangement relating to 2019 would be
in the range of from $13 million to $16 million. The
Secretariat is not in a position to provide a detailed
statement of programme budget implications prior
2/24

Allow me also to thank Secretary-General António
Guterres and Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed for their vision and unwavering support
along the way. Together with their teams, they have
been instrumental in helping Member States to chart
the best way towards change. They have been able to
translate the calls of the Member States for a more
strategic, effective, efficient and accountable United
Nations development system into ideas and options for
the consideration of Member States. I commend their
leadership, and I am truly grateful for their continuing
commitment to serving the Governments and peoples
of the world.
I also take the opportunity to express special
thanks to the President of the General Assembly for
being a crucial ally and supporter in that process. Your
commitment to ensuring a successful outcome and your
engagement in brokering consensus, Mr. President,
enabled us to agree on the final draft resolution,
A/72/L.52.
18-16544

31/05/2018

The draft resolution marks the beginning of a new
era — a new generation of United Nations country
teams, a reinvigorated resident coordinator system
and revamped regional support in line with needs at
the country level and changes at the global level, for
a more integrated and accountable United Nations
development system and for Member States to better
support that system in its efforts. The draft resolution
is a first step in making bold new decisions that
require collective work for a smooth transition. We
look forward to a regular exchange of ideas throughout
the implementation process, refining it as we move
ahead, particularly with regard to the implementation
plan for the reinvigorated resident-coordinator system,
including its funding arrangements.
The technical note provided by the Secretariat
explaining parts of the draft resolution will be a key
contribution to the implementation plan. We are
encouraged by the fact that the whole United Nations
development system, through the United Nations
Development Group, will be fully and constructively
engaged in this implementation process. The reviews
of the reinvigorated resident-coordinator system during
the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly will
also be a milestone on the way to building a strong,
impartial and empowered system supported by adequate
and sustainable funding.
With your permission, Mr. President, I would like
to express my warmest gratitude to my co-facilitator,
Ambassador Petersen of Denmark, and his team for the
excellent and constructive cooperation we have enjoyed
during the past month. I also wish him a full recovery.
The President: I call on the representative of
Denmark in his capacity as second co-facilitator.
Mr. Petersen (Denmark): I thank Mr. Boukadoum
for his kind words. I fully share his view of our excellent
cooperation, so I offer my most sincere thanks to him
and his team for a a very productive collaboration.
This is also not an explanation of vote, but I too
would like to reiterate our profound gratitude to all
States members of the General Assembly for the active
engagement and construction spirit they showed during
our recent consultations. I also wish to thank President
Lajčák for entrusting us with the task of co-facilitating
these negotiations and for his tireless support. We also
thank the Secretary-General and the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, along with their teams, whose tireless efforts
to adapt the United Nations development system to

A/72/PV.91

today’s needs and challenges in line with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development have been truly
admirable. This has been a unique opportunity, and
we feel lucky to have had it. I believe everyone rose to
occasion presented.
If not a historic day, today is indeed a very
important step forward on the long journey towards
2030, which started with our agreement on the
Sustainable Development Goals. The draft quadrennial
comprehensive policy review resolution before us
(A/72/L.52) is another important step on that path. The
ambition for change that we adopt today matches the
ambition of the new development agenda. We must
join forces now to support the implementation of the
new draft resolution, in order to ensure that the United
Nations development system reaches its full potential
so as to provide the best possible support for Member
States in their implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
The system we need must be collaborative, coherent,
responsive, effective, efficient and accountable.
As we know, the clock is ticking. We are already
three years into the implementation of the 2030
Agenda. Through this draft resolution, Member States
are calling on the United Nations development system
to act on the provisions of the draft resolution as soon
as possible. We are confident that with the strong
commitment of the Secretary-General and the Deputy
Secretary-General’s leadership of the United Nations
Development Group, and with the resolve of all entities
of the United Nations development system, we will be
able to live up to the challenges ahead of us.
I therefore believe that I speak on behalf of all
delegations in committing to supporting the United
Nations development system in its efforts. As President
Lajčák mentioned, multilateral cooperation is always
a balance between optimal efficiency and optimal or
maximum legitimacy. While there may be different
opinions on the efficiency of these recommendations, I
believe we can say that they do indeed have maximum
legitimacy because they are supported by all Member
States. That gives us the best platform for forging
ahead. I also join my co-facilitator in underlining
the importance in this process of using the technical
notes as guidance in the implementation of the plan
for the reinvigorated resident-coordinator system
in the context of the reform as a whole, and we look
forward to actively participating in those endeavours
with all Member States. Let us join forces in making

18-165443/24

A/72/PV.91

the great ambitions of the 2030 Agenda and of this draft
resolution a reality.
The President: I shall now call on those delegations
wishing to speak in explanation of position before the
adoption. May I remind delegations that explanations of
position are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
Over the past year, one of the United States
Government’s highest priorities has been to shine
a light on the United Nations and let the American
people decide for themselves about the value of the
Organization. I know many participants in this Hall
feel the same way. Whether their country contributes
$1 or 22 per cent of the United Nations budget, we all
have to show our citizens that their investment in the
United Nations yields results.
This is especially true for the United Nations
development system, in which the United States is
the world’s largest investor. Every year, we contribute
$1.7 billion to everything from improving education
to empowering women and girls to promoting human
rights and the rule of law. The American people do this
because we want to work with the United Nations to
help make the world a more stable and prosperous place
for all of us.
Today we are taking an important step towards
achieving that goal through the development of a
more effective, accountable, responsive and efficient
United Nations platform that is fit for purpose.
The draft resolution before us (A/72/L.52) changes
the way the United Nations organizes and runs its
development activities. Member States are giving the
Secretary-General new and important responsibilities
for overseeing and coordinating the United Nations
development work around the world. It now will fall
to the Secretary-General to ensure accountability for a
more effective and more efficient development system.
The United States expects that the reforms we
adopt today will lead to less bureaucracy, less overhead,
better performance and improved flexibility on the part
of United Nations agencies so that they can act quickly
when necessary. Implementing these changes will not
be easy, especially when we are talking about dozens
of United Nations entities with different structures,
mandates and funding sources. Moving forward,
United Nations agencies will need to focus on their
core mandates and comparative advantages and make
4/24

31/05/2018

tough choices about low-priority activities. Completing
these reforms will require a commitment on the part of
Member States and United Nations staff to seeing this
process through to completion. If we are successful,
though, we will not just save money; we will create
a system that is more responsive to those who need it
the most.
Today’s draft resolution limits increases in assessed
contributions for States Members of the United Nations.
This is critical, since it enables us to avoid a more than
$200 million increase in the Organization’s regular
budget compared to what was first on the table. In
Government it is often easy to think that more money
is the way to fix a problem, especially when we create
something new to solve it, but when we looked closer
and got creative, we found that there were other ways
to fund the work of the United Nations rather than by
asking our taxpayers to shoulder more of the burden.
The fact that we came together to adopt this
draft resolution by consensus sends a strong positive
signal. For that I must take a moment to express our
deep gratitude to our co-facilitators, Ambassadors
Sabri Boukadoum and Ib Petersen. Together we have
committed to empowering the Secretary-General
to make important changes. Getting development
reform right is a goal that should unite us. The
United States appreciates the work of the SecretaryGeneral, the Deputy Secretary-General, their staffs,
the co-facilitators and all the Member States whose
constructive efforts have brought us this far. We
look forward to continuing to work closely with the
Secretary-General and his team and other Member
States to fully realize the value of these changes.
Mr. Lal (India): Today we are going to adopt a
landmark draft resolution (A/72/L.52) that has the
potential to significantly enhance the efficiency and
efficacy of the United Nations system’s development
outreach efforts. As a developing country and a founding
member of the Group of 77, India has long engaged in
pursuing the development agenda at the United Nations,
including through South-South cooperation. We
therefore have a keen interest in ensuring the success of
those efforts. The United Nations development system
reform is the first of the three sets of reform proposals
put forward by the Secretary-General in his first year in
office, which began last year. We thank the SecretaryGeneral for presenting the reform proposals, and we
also thank the Deputy Secretary-General and her team
for their tireless efforts to build consensus.
18-16544

31/05/2018

On the one hand, the United Nations development
system reform proposals flow from our collective desire
to strengthen the United Nations system’s capability to
improve its delivery, especially in the context of the
much more comprehensive understanding of the global
challenges we face, as reflected in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. On the other hand, those
proposals have come at a time when the United Nations
is staring at a scenario of severe resource constraints.
That stark contradiction in required resources versus
potentially available resources has been a major fault
line in the debate leading up to today.
From the start, we have strongly supported the
Secretary-General’s proposal to reform the United
Nations development system. His proposals for
delegating authority and increasing accountability
within the United Nations system in line with national
priorities were intended to be supported by much
enhanced, non-earmarked funding. However, draft
resolution A/72/L.52 had to be substantially modified,
despite enjoying strong support from an overwhelming
majority of the membership of the Assembly.
The modalities of the funding envisaged in the
current text are very different from the SecretaryGeneral’s original proposal. We are also conscious
that the volume of funding and the timetable for its
availability remain unclear and uncertain at this stage.
The proposed enhancement of cost-sharing by various
agencies, levies on earmarked funding and voluntary
contributions are all likely to involve considerable
uncertainty and possible shortfalls.
In that context, we welcome the assurances made on
the record by the co-facilitators just now with respect
to the technical note that was provided earlier by the
Secretariat and forwarded by the co-facilitators in
their letter dated 30 April 2018, with a view to serving
as a basis for the amended modalities of the funding
envisaged in the draft resolution to back the changes
in the United Nations development system structure.
We have also noted the explanation provided by the
United Nations Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management just a short while ago.
We support the draft resolution and look forward
to the implementation report to be presented by
the Secretary-General in that regard. We also note
that a comprehensive review of the United Nations
development system reform will be presented during
the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly. We

A/72/PV.91

remain committed to constructive engagement with the
Secretariat and all our partners in order to see those
reforms move ahead.
Sustainable development remains the key to
collective peace and prosperity in a globalized world,
and we hope that the entire membership and the
Secretariat will work together to make the United
Nations development system stronger so as to assist
developing countries in achieving the entire range of
the Sustainable Development Goals.
The President: We shall now take a decision on
the draft resolution entitled “Repositioning of the
United Nations development system in the context
of the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of
operational activities for development of the United
Nations system”. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.52?
Draft resolution A/72/L.52
(resolution 72/279).

was

adopted

The President: I now give the floor to the
Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: I have just arrived from
Mali, but I wanted to be here personally to thank
everyone here for their leadership, engagement and
constructive spirit as representatives of all the States
Members of the United Nations. I would like to pay a
special tribute to the co-facilitators, Ambassador Sabri
Boukadoum, Permanent Representative of Algeria, and
Ambassador Ib Petersen, Permanent Representative
of Denmark. Their tireless efforts were absolutely
essential to the shared success of the Member States in
this intergovernmental process.
The adoption today of resolution 72/279 ushers in
the most ambitious and comprehensive transformation
of the United Nations development system in decades.
It sets the foundations for repositioning sustainable
development at the heart of the United Nations, and
it gives practical meaning to our collective promise
to advance the Sustainable Development Goals for
everyone, everywhere, with poverty eradication as its
first goal, leaving, as we always say, no one behind.
That is what this is really about. In the end, reform is
about putting in place the mechanisms to make a real
difference in the lives of people.
The General Assembly has been clear in its mandates
to establish a new generation of United Nations country
teams and strengthen our investments in our peoples and

18-165445/24

A/72/PV.91

our planet, in peace and prosperity. National ownership
and a strong focus on accountability and results will
guide the system every step of the way. Our teams
on the ground will now be better able to tailor their
presence, capacities, skill sets and overall responses
to the priorities of the membership. We will reach out
and build stronger partnerships with Governments,
but we will also engage with civil society, academia,
the private sector and beyond in order to take actions
to scale.
Our joint planning instruments in countries, the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework,
will better reflect country priorities and needs. Members
will be able to count on impartial and empowered
resident coordinators with development as their DNA,
fully devoted to the needs that must be met to fulfil the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development by drawing
on experience, skills and knowledge across the system.
I am extremely proud of the 129 resident
coordinators working hard around the world in 165
countries and, in some cases, against all odds. Being
a resident coordinator is one of the most challenging
jobs in the United Nations, but the structures we have
today at the country level are excessively reliant on
personalities and goodwill across a system that does
not always reward cooperation. We can now resolve
a historic deficit in our coordination function and
institutionalize what works, across the board.
I count on the support of Member States to
adequately and predictably fund the reinvigorated
nationally driven, people-centred resident-coordinator
system. As representatives know, my preference would
have been to fund the resident-coordinator system
through the regular budget of the United Nations
so as to ensure predictability, sustainability and the
ownership of all Member States. The hybrid funding
solution put forward by the co-facilitators is the best
possible alternative. By combining different sources, it
diversifies the funding base and enhances the prospect
of adequate and predictable funding. I am very grateful
for their work on that.
Members can count on the Secretariat and my
personal commitment to doing our utmost to ensure
the successful implementation of that model. But let
us also bear in mind that success will rely heavily on
Members’ generosity and sustained commitment. I
therefore appeal to them for their immediate support so
that we can hit the ground running on 1 January 2019.
6/24

31/05/2018

I am aware that now we need to work on the modalities
by which the reinvigorated resident-coordinator
system will be operationalized, including its funding
arrangements. Before the end of the current session, I
will present an implementation plan addressing those
questions. We will consult closely with the membership
as we develop the implementation plan and move to the
transition phase.
We will soon enter the fourth year of the 2030
Agenda. We do not have a moment to lose. We are
committed to fast-tracking transformation and working
closely with the Assembly, and for its members, on
behalf of people. Change is never easy, but it can be wellmanaged and inclusive to ensure smooth transitions
and tangible outcomes. That is our commitment. Those
present can rely on my leadership and the United Nations
development system to step up to meet their ambition.
I ask delegations to carry forward their resolve by
supporting change through the governing bodies of
agencies, funds and programmes, and through their
capitals, in their bilateral relationship with each entity. I
will move immediately to put in place a transition team,
under the leadership of the Deputy Secretary-General,
to implement their decisions. The team will work in
the same open, transparent and inclusive way we have
conducted this process thus far and ensure the inclusion
of our funds, programmes and specialized agencies.
I thank representatives for their determination and
resolve. They have shown that consensus and ambition
can go hand in hand. They have done so because a
stronger United Nations development system is in our
common interest. It means more results for people, and
more value for money. Let us build on that achievement.
Let us see our efforts through for all those who look to
us with hope to better their lives in our increasingly
complex world.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
Before giving the floor for explanations of position,
may I remind delegations that explanations are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt): I thank and welcome the
Secretary-General, the Deputy Secretary-General and
the Under-Secretary-General.
I have the pleasure of delivering this statement on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China (G-77).
18-16544

31/05/2018

The reform of the United Nations development
system has now become a matter of necessity that can
no longer be delayed. For it to succeed, however, an
equally important process of changing the mindset of
the working culture within the United Nations system
must be initiated. For in order to attain system-wide
coherence, we have to build system-wide confidence and
mutual trust together. At a time when the international
community is facing profound collective challenges,
the centrality of development ought to be emphasized.
In December 2016, the General Assembly adopted
its landmark resolution 71/243 on the quadrennial
comprehensive policy review of operational activities
for development of the United Nations system. The
resolution outlined a road map for Member States to
improve the United Nations development system so that
it is more strategic, accountable, transparent, effective,
efficient and coherent, thereby making it better positioned
to support countries in their efforts to implement the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
In that regard, the Secretary-General presented his
vision and concrete proposals in his July and December
reports (A/72/124 and A/72/684) on the repositioning of
the United Nations development system. The President
of the General Assembly subsequently appointed two
co-facilitators, Mr. Sabri Boukadoum, Permanent
Representative of Algeria, and Mr. Ib Petersen,
Permanent Representative of Denmark, to lead the
intergovernmental consultations. We would like to
take this opportunity to thank the co-facilitators for
their strenuous efforts to steer the general membership
towards a consensus text.
During the course of the past few weeks, the
G-77 and China engaged actively and constructively
in these negotiations in order to ensure that the draft
resolution reflected the best spirit of the quadrennial
comprehensive policy review. In that regard, it is
important to note that the review is the guiding
framework for the implementation of resolution 72/279,
including with regard to those issues that have not
been explicitly addressed in it. The Group is satisfied
with the outcome of these negotiations, as many of our
concerns have been incorporated into the text. The
resolution retains of the resident-coordinator system’s
development focus and the eradication of poverty,
in all its forms and dimensions, as its overarching
objective. It further guarantees that the purpose of the
resident coordinators is the effective and coordinated
implementation of the United Nations Development

A/72/PV.91

Assistance Framework
ownership.

(UNDAF)

under

national

In that regard, we would like to note that the
resolution explicitly states that the UNDAFs should
be prepared and finalized in full consultation and
agreement with national Governments through open
and inclusive dialogue between host Governments
and the United Nations development system, and
in accordance with national development policies,
plans, priorities and country needs. It requests the
Secretary-General to work through the United Nations
Sustainable Development Group and in consultation
with the Member States concerned to determine
appropriate criteria for the presence and composition of
the United Nations country teams, based on countries’
development priorities and long-term needs. In that
regard, we would like to note that the criteria to be
developed at Headquarters must inform and support,
not jeopardize, the essence of the Secretary-General’s
proposal, which is to establish a needs-based system. It
also states that resident coordinators should report to
the Secretary-General and the host Governments on the
implementation of the UNDAFs, thereby guaranteeing
accountability to national Governments, ensuring
national ownership and leadership of development
processes, and supporting developing countries in
pursuing development paths suited to their own
national conditions.
Yet it is also important to take this opportunity
to raise some of the Group’s concerns. We all have a
vested interest in the successful implementation of
the resolution, and it is our view that flagging these
concerns now and reaching a common understanding
on what they entail would facilitate the proper and
timely translation of the resolution into actionable
commitments for all the governing bodies across the
United Nations development system. We note that
the States members of the Group will bear the brunt
of the costs if the resolution is poorly implemented,
with those costs especially felt by the smallest and
most vulnerable countries. Throughout this difficult
process, we have lived up to our responsibilities. That is
our duty. In times to come, we will be emphasizing the
need for guaranteeing reciprocal accountability. That
is our right. Please allow me to highlight some of our
concerns about the implementation of the resolution.
First, we must guarantee transparency and
inclusiveness when formulating the implementation
plan for the inception of the reinvigorated resident-

18-165447/24

A/72/PV.91

coordinator system. In that regard, the Secretary-General
should undertake periodic consultations and provide
regular briefings to Member States when formulating
the plan, respecting the ideas and thoughts of Member
States, especially developing countries. Member States
must also have access to the implementation plan and
give their input to the Secretary-General.
Secondly, we must ensure accountability to
Member States. In that regard, the G-77 and China
requests the Secretary-General to closely monitor
the plan’s implementation on the ground and report
back to Member States with regular updates on the
progress made.
Thirdly, the implementation of the plan should be
data-driven. Data needs to be presented to Member
States by the Secretariat at every stage of the process.
Fourthly, the Fifth Committee procedures must
not be bypassed and must be respected at all times.
The cost-sharing arrangement envisages that the
contributions of the Secretariat will come from the
United Nations regular budget. That component of
the cost-sharing arrangement must be thoroughly
considered in the context of the Fifth Committee within
the established rules.
Fifthly, the resubmission of the strategic document
must be done in alignment with the original mandate of
the quadrennial comprehensive policy review.
Finally, the Group believes that the technical note
circulated to Member States pertaining to the funding
of the reinvigorated resident-coordinator system
constitutes an integral part of the understanding
achieved relating to the adoption of the resolution.
In that regard, the technical note should guide the
implementation process. The implementation plan
must retain the exclusions of the levy on South-South
cooperation and local Government contributions, and
should not overestimate the potential role of efficiency
gains as a source of funding.
In conclusion, we would like to note that today’s
adoption of resolution 72/279 is the beginning of our
collective work on the quadrennial comprehensive
policy review process this year. We need the active
engagement of all delegations so that we can guarantee
the successful implementation of both the review and
the resolution to ensure that the United Nations system
is better positioned to meet the development needs of
us all. We are well aware that the arduous journey that
8/24

31/05/2018

we have embarked on to reposition the United Nations
development system is an ongoing reform process, one
that requires close cooperation between the Group of 77
and China, along with our partners and the Secretariat.
With the adoption of resolution 72/279, we have
shown our solidarity in support of enhancing the
capacity of the United Nation development system to
implement the 2030 Agenda, and we believe that the
Secretariat will act according to the letter and spirit
of the resolution in supporting developing countries
in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals
while fully respecting their national ownership and
leadership. Now is the time to deliver on promises.
After having delivered that statement on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China, I should like to make a
brief note that is neither a group position nor a national
statement. It is simply a personal remark. Today is
31 May. By fortunate or unfortunate coincidence,
I was born on this day, 31 May. The successful
implementation of this resolution would be a most
precious and appreciated gift.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): At the outset, I would like
to wish Ambassador Edrees a happy birthday.
The Group of African States wishes to align its
statement with that just delivered by the representative
of Egypt on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
The African Group would like to commend the
remarkable efforts of the co-facilitators, Mr. Sabri
Boukadoum, Permanent Representative of Algeria,
and Mr. Ib Petersen, Permanent Representative of
Denmark, who led the intergovernmental consultations
on resolution 72/279, on the repositioning of the United
Nations development system in the context of the
quadrennial comprehensive policy review. The Group
also acknowledges the unflinching commitment of the
Secretary-General and the Deputy Secretary-General to
ensuring that the process of reform begins. The African
Group also wishes to congratulate all parties, Member
States and the Secretary-General and his team on the
conclusion of the resolution after constant engagement
and dialogue.
The African Group believes that there is no better
time for the reform of the United Nations development
system than now, especially in relation to the successful
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We believe that if any development
agenda is to succeed in the United Nations, the
18-16544

31/05/2018

entire United Nations development system must be
overhauled. We are grateful that to a great extent the
resolution has captured the beginning of that change.
The African Group recognizes that the resolution is only
the first step in the reform process, with the next and
most crucial stage being implementation of the reform,
which will require further engagement, coordination
and commitment. In this regard, the Group calls on
Member States to cooperate fully to ensure its smooth
implementation.
Since Ethiopia is one of the countries that
urgently require the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals, I wish to underscore that the
African Group would like to see an improved, efficient,
effective, transparent and needs-based United Nations
presence in our countries, with the full cooperation of
and in consultation with the national authorities. We
acknowledge that it is difficult to separate the issues
of development from the current global crises of
terrorism, political unrest, migration, climate change
and the poverty that is ravaging developing countries.
However, we can no longer afford to lag behind in the
implementation of the development agenda. We believe
that the time is right for this reform. We will take these
issues on board carefully and we will address them.
I must say that we have made it clear since the
beginning of the process that the reform of the United
Nations development system is highly important to the
African Group, and it was in this regard that, during
the negotiations on today’s resolution, the African
Group engaged constructively and exercised maximum
flexibility throughout the process, both formally
and informally, in order to ensure that the resolution
embodied the interests and garnered the consensus
of all. The Group therefore welcomes the outcome of
the negotiations.
The resolution underscores that development should
remain the focus of the resident-coordinator system, with
the eradication of poverty as its central objective. We are
pleased that it also guarantees that resident coordinators
must serve the purpose of the implementation of the
United Nation Development Assistance Framework
(UNDAF) under national leadership and ownership,
noting also that the quadrennial comprehensive policy
review is the guiding framework for the implementation
of the resolution, including with regard to those issues
that it does not explicitly address. In this regard, we
would like to reiterate that the resolution explicitly
states that the United Nations Development Assistance

A/72/PV.91

Framework should be prepared and finalized in full
consultation and agreement with national Governments
through open and inclusive dialogue between the host
Government and the United Nations development
system and in accordance with national development
policies, priorities, and country needs.
To ensure accountability to national Governments
and guarantee national ownership and leadership of the
development process, the resolution also highlights that
resident coordinators should report to the SecretaryGeneral and to host Governments on UNDAF
implementation. We believe that this will ensure a more
effective United Nations development system.
Finally, I reiterate that the African Group is
committed to this reform process and will work in
close cooperation with the Secretariat to ensure its
full implementation.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I have the privilege
of delivering this statement on behalf of the least
developed countries (LDCs).
We align ourselves with the statement just delivered
by the representative of Egypt as Chair of the Group of
77 and China. We also wish him a happy birthday.
We congratulate all Member States on the
successful conclusion of the complex and arduous
exercise related to the repositioning of the United
Nations development system. We thank the SecretaryGeneral and his team, spearheaded by the Deputy
Secretary-General, for their constant engagement with
the Member States for an action-oriented and forwardlooking resolution with collective ownership. Our
co-facilitators deserve special commendation for their
tenacity and perseverance, which led to the successful
outcome of the negotiations.
We are happy to note that resolution 72/279
captures many key priorities of the least developed
countries and offers various important provisions that
could be leveraged to ensure focused and targeted
support to LDCs from the United Nations development
system. Now that it is adopted, the resolution will enter
the implementation phase. We would like to reiterate
that the resolution on the quadrennial comprehensive
policy review must be the guiding force during the
implementation phase of this resolution.
With regard to the LDCs, I want to refer in particular
to the relevant paragraphs of the resolution recognizing
the need for prioritized allocations for LDCs and

18-165449/24

A/72/PV.91

support for a predictable graduation process from the
United Nations development system. These are crucially
important for the LDCs and should be consistently
pursued by the United Nations development system.
The preparation of a revitalized, strategic, flexible
and results- and action-oriented United Nations
development system framework in each country, in
support of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, is vitally important to
LDCs. However, the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework in LDCs should fully integrate
the Istanbul Programme of Action in a coordinated
and synergistic manner. We hope that this will be
explicitly elaborated in the implementation plan that the
Secretary-General is requested to present to the General
Assembly before the end of the seventy-second session.
We also expect the resident coordinators and the
other senior country representatives in LDCs to have
sufficient experience and skills related to the particular
challenges and priorities of such countries, as well as
the various aspects of the Programme of Action. We
would also like to stress that a strong and broader
country presence of the United Nations development
system is vitally important to LDCs. A reinvigorated,
integrated and accountable United Nations development
system will go a long way in the implementation of the
Programme of Action. The LDCs would not support any
reduction in the United Nations development system
country presence in their territories. At the same time,
the proposal for 50 per cent common premises by
2021 should not mean that LDCs incur any additional
financial burdens.
As mentioned in the report of the SecretaryGeneral entitled “Repositioning the United Nations
development system to deliver on the 2030 Agenda: our
promise for dignity, prosperity and peace on a healthy
planet” (A/72/684), the under-resourced Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) are crucial to accelerating
the pace of development in LDCs. We would like to see
the implementation of resolution 72/279 according due
importance to that particular aspect and making efforts
to address it.
The United Nations Sustainable Development
Group wanted to see adequate, predictable and
sustainable funding of the resident-coordinator system
by making the necessary funds available through
assessed contributions. Unfortunately, we could
not reach consensus in that regard in the resolution.
10/24

31/05/2018

However, we are asking the Secretary-General and his
team, particularly the agency heads, to play a major
role in mobilizing adequate resources for the residentcoordinator system in order to ensure its effective and
impartial role at the country level. The proposals of the
Secretary-General, such as those for increasing core
resources to the level of at least 30 per cent of total
contributions in the next five years and doubling both
inter-agency pooled funds to a total of $3.4 billion and
entity-specific thematic funds to a total of $800 million
by 2023, have been duly noted in the resolution. Those
quantifiable targets must be regularly followed up,
particularly in the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations development system, with a view to
ensuring their implementation.
Finally, we request that the Secretary-General
ensure that the annual report on system-wide support
for the SDGs provides disaggregated data and
information on LDCs in every chapter and contains a
separate section on LDCs that highlights the progress
and challenges in such countries. We hope that the
efforts made in that process will reach further fruition
by ensuring that the reforms that occur in other crucial
parts of the system, such as the Economic and Social
Council, are aligned such that the system moves and
functions as one for the development of all. We look
forward to a United Nations development system
that effectively complements our own efforts to take
development forward in our countries to a new height.
Mr. Panayotov (Bulgaria): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States.
I would first like to congratulate Ambassador
Mohamed Edrees of Egypt on his birthday and to wish
him success, good health and personal happiness.
We are truly pleased that the General Assembly
has decided to adopt by consensus resolution 72/279,
on repositioning of the United Nations development
system in the context of the quadrennial comprehensive
policy review of operational activities for development
of the United Nations system. We see the adoption as
a significant initial stage of a long process of change
making the United Nations development system more
relevant and results-oriented.
We would like to warmly thank and congratulate
Ambassador Boukadoum of Algeria and Ambassador
Petersen of Denmark, as well as their respective teams,
on their leadership throughout the complex negotiation
18-16544

31/05/2018

process. Without the dedication of the co-facilitators,
we would not have been able to achieve this outcome.
We would also like to recognize the continuous
engagement and leadership of the Secretary-General
and the Deputy Secretary-General. We hope that the
newly adopted resolution will facilitate the realization of
their broader reform agenda, as we see the three strands
as inextricably intertwined and mutually reinforcing.
Their main purpose is to make the United Nations
more efficient, more relevant and more responsive
to emerging challenges and needs in line with the
requirements of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. All those strands are vital to achieving
the Secretary-General’s vision for a prevention-focused
United Nations.
We are convinced that the United Nations
development system that will emerge as a result of
the implementation of the resolution will be more fit
for purpose in terms of supporting Member States in
their efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals. We fully support the measures foreseen in the
resolution aimed at strengthening the function of the
resident coordinator and establishing a new generation
of United Nations country teams. We cannot emphasize
enough the importance of increased coordination,
coherence, collaboration, value for money, transparency
and accountability. Providing a better independent
evaluation of results will be vital if the United Nations
is to make a more attractive case to potential and
current investors.
We stand ready to continue the reform process by
engaging actively in the funding dialogue that is to take
place this year and in the discussion on the regional
dimension of the United Nations development system in
2019. We see the reform of the Department of Economic
and Social Affairs as an aspect inseparable from that
of the United Nations development system and eagerly
await an early update on the issue. We also hope for a
successful and ambitious outcome of the discussion on
the review of resolution 68/1 on the so-called reform of
the Economic and Social Council in order to fully align
its work with the 2030 Agenda.
Despite the fact that the process leading to the
adoption of the resolution before us was not easy,
the truly challenging part — the implementation
phase — only begins now. The entities that make up
the United Nations development system, including the
specialized agencies, will play a leading role. We expect
them to actively and swiftly engage in that process in

A/72/PV.91

support of the reform agenda of the Secretary-General.
That is a sine qua non for achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals. It must be a whole-of-United
Nations effort across all agencies and at all levels.
We encourage the entities of the United Nations
development system to contribute by making full use of
their expertise and comparative advantages in line with
their diverse structures and mandates.
We also recognize the responsibilities of the States
Members of the United Nations. We will consider
not only how we fund the system but also how we
engage the system. It is in everyone’s interest that
the governance of the entities of the United Nations
development system ensures that all Member States
have sufficient information on the system-wide and
entity-level delivery.
We look forward to receiving the updates
mandated by the resolution, including, but not limited
to, an implementation plan for the inception of a
reinvigorated resident-coordinator system, as well
as an improved version of the system-wide strategic
document that clearly indicates the comparative and
collaborative advantages of such parts. It is essential
that the implementation of the reforms start as soon as
possible and that the Secretary-General and the Deputy
Secretary-General initiate the transformation of the
resident coordinator system in accordance with the
provisions of the resolution. We have full confidence in
the proposed process ahead.
The General Assembly, the Secretary-General,
the Deputy Secretary-General and the United Nations
development system as a whole can count on the
continuous support and engagement of the EU and its
member States in the way forward.
Ms. Zahir (Maldives): I am honoured to speak on
behalf of the States members of the Alliance of Small
Island States. We align ourselves with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
At the outset, we would like to thank the
co-facilitators, Ambassadors Ib Petersen and Sabri
Boukadoum, Permanent Representatives of Denmark
and Algeria, respectively, for their dedication and
outstanding leadership and stewardship of this very
difficult process. Through you, Mr. President, we
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the
Deputy Secretary-General and their team for the
reports, information notes and technical papers and,

18-1654411/24

A/72/PV.91

in particular, for their continued consultation and
engagement, which were highly appreciated and made
it possible for us to get this far.
While we are happy to have taken another important
step in this long journey, we must be cognizant that we
still have a long and winding road ahead of us. And we
must forever remember that we cannot do this alone;
rather, we must do it together, with collective resolve.
The repositioning of the United Nations development
system is not a one-pill fix. Instead, it requires careful
consideration and strategic moves, especially from
programme countries, particularly those further
behind, such as the small island developing States and
other countries in special situations. This can mean the
realization, or not, of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development for us and, more importantly, our goal of
eradicating poverty and improving the lives of every
citizen, no matter where they live.
We believe in the process of multilateralism and
appreciate that within such a process there must be
flexibility. However, we must make sure that countries
are not forced to be too flexible, to their own detriment.
Resolution 72/279 is an example of such an expanded
flexibility, for we all know that having a predictable,
independent and stable funding mechanism for the
resident-coordinator system is paramount.
The formula before us is not perfect. Our hope is
that the Secretary-General, as required, will review
and provide us with funding options to support the type
of system we envision to be the best for facilitating
countries in their implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
As the year 2030 is fast approaching and time becomes
essential, we might be tempted to rush things and make
ad hoc arrangements, but it is actually the time for us to
become more focused and strategic in order to ensure
that we do not continue to expend all of our energies on
repositioning and readjusting the system, but that we
focus on implementing the 2030 Agenda and delivering
for our peoples.
We therefore continue to call on the SecretaryGeneral to maintain his posture on transparency,
accountability and inclusiveness as he tries to formulate
the best options for our consideration. We also believe
that Member States and all entities of the United Nations
development system should be closely consulted in
order to ensure a more successful outcome.
12/24

31/05/2018

For those of us serviced out of multi-country
offices, the reform process will have to address the
challenges associated with this unique operating
context. The resolution’s stipulation of a deadline in
a framework in which the review is to be conducted
is a critical step to setting these countries on the right
path to achieving the 2030 Agenda. In this regard,
we call on the Secretariat to work closely with the
relevant countries to ensure their full participation in
formulating the right contexts for those multi-country
offices. In looking at the contributions of multi-country
offices, this review should address the real impact that
they are having on the sustainable development of their
members and thus on ensuring the fulfilment of the
2030 Agenda.
This also brings us to the matter of national
ownership and leadership in the context of the United
Nations development system and, in particular, in
the formulation of the strategic focus of the United
Nations Development Assistance Frameworks and the
United Nations country teams, which must be driven
and based on national development priorities. This
cannot be overemphasized, as it forms the basis on
which true sustainable development must occur. For
small island developing States and other countries in
special situations that are greatly dependent on the
system — and that are among those most likely to be
left behind — the whole repositioning of the United
Nations development system is a matter of great
importance, for it will determine how we proceed with
our implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
For us, therefore, the stakes are extremely high
in our effort to achieve as quickly as possible the best
system to facilitate the achievement of our goal. We
see the resident-coordinator system as a critical player
in this aspect and see merit in delinking the resident
coordinators from the resident representatives of the
United Nations Development Programme and the
need to provide predictable, independent and stable
funding for the system. However, we remain concerned
about the temporary funding arrangement proposed
in the resolution, as it does not provide security. We
are hopeful that the Secretary-General will be able to
provide us with truly viable funding options in the very
near future.
In conclusion, we want to request that consideration
be given to having the Secretary-General provide his
comprehensive and detailed report on the functioning
and funding of the United Nations development system
18-16544

31/05/2018

prior to the next cycle of the quadrennial comprehensive
policy review so we will be to be able to use it to guide
the system. This is extremely important, since the year
2030 is only about two review cycles away.
We remain committed to this repositioning process
and steadfast in our efforts to achieve the Goals set
forth in the 2030 Agenda. We will continue to engage
constructively. We ask that our requests for clarity and
our objections to some proposals not be misinterpreted
as wavering in our full commitment to the 2030 Agenda,
but rather as a reflection of our resolve to ensure
that we can build a strong foundation for propelling
its implementation.
Mr. Grant (Canada): I am delivering this
explanation of position on behalf of Australia, New
Zealand and my own country, Canada. We would first
like to congratulate the Secretary-General and his team,
and our able facilitators, the Ambassadors of Denmark
and Algeria. It was not always an easy road, but we
should all be happy about the strong result.
The reform of the United Nations system, including
the development pillar, is critical to enabling the United
Nations to reorder and revolutionize itself to better
deliver on the Charter of the United Nations. This is
fundamental for a more peaceful and prosperous world.
Resolution 72/279, adopted today, is a key part of that
reform. Canada, Australia and New Zealand are pleased
to welcome it as a vital step in the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda, and one that is grounded
in an approach that advances human rights, gender
equality and the central principle of leaving no one
behind. In welcoming the resolution, Canada, Australia
and New Zealand would note that the work does not
end here. As significant donors and supporters of the
United Nations system, we would like to make three
key points.
First, a strong, well-informed and practical
implementation plan will be critical to the success
of this system. Based on the vision of the SecretaryGeneral, Member States have created a new institution,
a stand-alone coordination office for an empowered
resident coordinator. In order for this transition to be
smooth, the implementation plan must build on what
has been proven to work in the past. In recognizing
this challenge, we must acknowledge that the residentcoordinator function is moving from depending on the

A/72/PV.91

infrastructure of a $5 billion organization to that of an
office that currently has a staff of 30.
In that context, the careful handling and maintenance
of relationships will be critical, particularly during the
transition period. Every resident coordinator must be
better supported than those fulfilling this function have
been in the past. That support cannot come from the
United Nations Development Operations Coordination
Office alone. They must receive better network support
from each member of the United Nations development
group. This also goes to a wider point, which is that
the structural changes we have adopted today must be
supported by cultural changes, including to leadership
and accountability. We trust that the SecretaryGeneral and the Deputy Secretary-General will lead by
example to drive a stronger and more accountable and
collaborative leadership culture, and to ensure that this
is effectively communicated in multi-agency forums
such as the Chief Executives Board for Coordination.
Canada, Australia and New Zealand look to
leadership from all of the members of the United Nations
development system, particularly UNICEF, the World
Food Programme and the World Health Organization,
as well as the United Nations Development Programme,
as the backbone of the system. We expect to see a
significant step change in the support and engagement
from those entities in order to get the system we need to
accelerate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
We also remind Member States that we have an
important role to play. We must provide a unified message
on reform to the governance boards and leadership of
the development system. To have them think differently
and approach the new structure collaboratively, we must
ensure that we here in New York, or Nairobi, Rome or
elsewhere, give the same message. These changes must
signal an end to a fragmented United Nations approach
on the ground.
Secondly, we strongly welcome the multi-country
office review, which should be carried out this year
to ensure that all the offices remain on the same
reform path. Given our significant investment in
multi-country offices, we look forward to strong
engagement and clear information leading to clear
results. Multi-country offices are a key part of ensuring
that no one is left behind, particularly citizens in small
island developing States, which both the 2030 Agenda
and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda address so clearly.

18-1654413/24

A/72/PV.91

31/05/2018

Thirdly, we note that the funding compact
discussions have yet to be fully addressed. The
resolution speaks to one segment, albeit a vital
one — the funding of the resident coordinator. Canada,
Australia and New Zealand also note that the funding
solution, as currently articulated in this resolution, falls
too heavily on a small group of donor countries. We
therefore call on countries that are not involved in this
funding structure, particularly high-income countries,
to consider contributions to the voluntary trust fund
and also look to the next phase of the funding compact
to see how they could contribute to addressing core
and non-core imbalances in the system. We see the
funding dialogues as an opportunity to explore how
different types of partnerships can support the work
of the United Nations development system and ensure
an expanded funding base that moves beyond a small
group of traditional donors.

Nations Development Assistance Framework. The
composition of United Nations country teams should be
determined in consultation with programme countries.
The selection criteria for resident coordinators should
be decided with input from relevant Member States,
in line with programme countries’ priorities and
development needs.

Canada, Australia and New Zealand look forward
to contributing to those discussions and to continuing
to work with the United Nations system and partner
Governments to improve outcomes and ensure that
the Sustainable Development Goals are properly
financed. We must now seize this once-in-a-generation
opportunity to meaningfully implement these reforms,
which will have real benefits as we strive to meet the
bold vision of 2030.

The reform of the development sector is a longterm and systematic project. The General Assembly’s
adoption of today’s resolution is only the first step of the
reform process. We expect the Secretariat, in playing
its follow-up role, to fully implement the mandate of
the General Assembly resolution and, while working
out specifics for the composition of country teams,
the configuration and the role of resident coordinators
and collaboration with programme countries, to
listen extensively to Member States, particularly
developing countries, and to fully respect the views of
programme countries.

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.
I would first like to congratulate my brother the
Permanent Representative of Egypt, Ambassador
Mohamed Edrees, on his birthday. Today is also
the birthday of the United Nations development
system reform.
Since the submission of the two reports on the
repositioning of the United Nations development system
by the Secretary-General (A/72/124 and A/72/684), and
after multiple rounds of painstaking consultations, and
thanks to the effective coordination of the facilitators
and the President of the General Assembly, member
States have reached consensus on resolution 72/279. I
commend the efforts of all parties in that regard.
Resolution 72/279 provides for greater respect on
the part of resident coordinators for the leadership and
ownership of host countries and makes it clear that
programme countries have the final say on the United
14/24

The resolution calls on the resident-coordinator
system and country teams to be accountable to
programme countries and requests an enhanced core
mandate of development for the development system,
with poverty reduction as an important objective. It also
asks the Secretary-General to report annually to the
Economic and Social Council on the implementation
of the reinvigorated resident-coordinator system,
including its funding. It charts out the direction and
priorities for future work in the development sector.

The hybrid funding model should reflect the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities,
with North-South cooperation as the main channel
and South-South cooperation as a complement. In
the implementation of country-specific plans, it is
imperative to fully respect programme countries’
opinions on the mode and time of reform, and to reach
consensus as much as possible.
China expects that, through reform, the United
Nations development system’s will remain focused on
development as its core function and to give priority
to achieving Sustainable Development Goals such as
poverty reduction. In the context of implementing the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, we should
deepen international development cooperation, jointly
seize development opportunities and properly address
development challenges in order to build a community
with a shared future for humankind in which all
countries enjoy development and prosperity. China is
18-16544

31/05/2018

ready to work closely with all other Member States and
the Secretariat to collectively achieve that goal.
Mr. Skinner-Kleé Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): My country aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Arab Republic of
Egypt on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. We also
wish to congratulate the head of the Egyptian delegation
on his birthday.
Of all the Secretary-General’s reform efforts, the
repositioning of the development system, which we
launched today through our adoption of resolution
72/279, could be seen as the most far-reaching
because of its intrinsic link to the sustainable peace
and prevention approach, which aims to address
the root causes of conflict. That, in turn, can lead to
social, economic and environmental development, that
is, the full implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
All our negotiation efforts and informative
sessions with the Secretariat, the reports of the
Secretary-General and our informal consultations
and interactive dialogues have enabled us to reach
consensus on substantive changes to the United
Nations development system with real consequences
for its operation in our countries — all with the aim of
supporting, as we have said, the implementation of the
2030 Agenda. We therefore thank and acknowledge the
countless hours of effort and work of the facilitators,
our friends and colleagues Mr. Sabri Boukadoum,
Permanent Representative of Algeria, and Mr. Ib
Petersen, Permanent Representative of Denmark. We
also recognize the efforts of the Secretariat, led by
the Secretary-General and Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed.
Overall, we welcome the outcome of this process,
as it builds on and is consistent with the quadrennial
comprehensive policy review of operational activities
for development of the United Nations system adopted
in 2016. We are pleased that a development approach
with poverty eradication as its main objective has
been maintained, and that national ownership has
been strengthened in several aspects of the system,
from the identification of criteria for the presence and
composition of the country team to the joint development
of the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework and the dual accountability of the efforts
of the resident coordinators. We are also satisfied with
the direction given to the regional approach, including

A/72/PV.91

a strengthening of the role of the regional economic
commissions in favour of the implementation of the
2030 Agenda.
With regard to the financing of the residentcoordinator system, we will await the implementation
plan to be presented by the Secretary-General on the
inception period. In this regard, we reiterate what was
said by the representative of Egypt with respect to the
cost-sharing modality, which should be considered
in the Fifth Committee, since contributions from the
Secretariat to the resident-coordinator system will
come from our contributions to the Organization.
Finally, we reiterate our thanks and appreciation
to all delegations for this great achievement in favour
of sustainable development. We remember the words
of the Secretary-General: it is ambition and consensus
that brought about this great achievement, a truly major
achievement that will help us to better serve our peoples.
Mrs. Arrieta Munguía (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico would like to congratulate the
facilitators, the Ambassadors of Algeria and Denmark,
and their teams, as well as the Ambassador of Egypt.
On this important occasion we welcome the
adoption of resolution 72/279, on the reform of the
United Nations development system, because we
believe in it. We believe that with the leadership of the
Secretary-General and the Deputy Secretary-General,
we can make the United Nations a modern, efficient
and effective Organization. Mexico has participated
constructively and creatively in the negotiation process
from the beginning, because we share the vision
of a new generation of country teams and resident
coordinators as the most important development assets
of the United Nations.
The resolution we have adopted contains core
elements pertaining to strategic direction, oversight
and accountability, and it gives us the tools to achieve
those objectives. However, many other aspects are part
of the reform of the Economic and Social Council,
which is why we invite all Member States to be
equally ambitious in this process. The Council is the
forum established to help us harmonize our visions
of development, which we will achieve only if we can
restore the Council’s spirit as a forum for discussion.
We cannot delay these changes.
In 2015, as an Organization, we dared to be bold,
creative and imaginative in adopting the most ambitious

18-1654415/24

A/72/PV.91

development framework the international community
had ever undertaken. Almost a year ago, the SecretaryGeneral spearheaded an inclusive process to deliver a
development system for the Organization that was fit
for purpose. Today we are delivering the first stage of
critical infrastructure that will enable Member States
to achieve what they agreed to in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): First of
all, I want to congratulate the Egyptian Ambassador
for his birthday. And while today is not my birthday,
yesterday was.
One and a half years ago, the General Assembly
undertook a comprehensive policy review of the
United Nations development system in order to better
position the Organization to support countries in their
efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Today’s adoption of resolution 72/279
marks another crucial milestone in the process of
repositioning the United Nations development system.
The Secretary-General endured pressures to reform
the system just for the sake of reform or for making
budget cuts across the board. Instead of going into
auto-pilot mode, he proposed changes as a means to an
end — that is, strengthening multilateral cooperation
for sustainable development. This attitude deserves our
strong support.
Brazil has actively engaged in the negotiations in
order to ensure that the resolution we have just adopted
reflects the best spirit of the quadrennial comprehensive
policy review and of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/72/684). We have shown flexibility in
accepting financing solutions that were not our original
preference because we understood that the possibility
of using assessed contributions would not be feasible
for some countries.
We believe it is important to highlight some points
that if properly implemented will facilitate the adequate
and timely translation of the resolution to all governing
bodies across the United Nations development system,
contributing to the smooth implementation of its
provisions. It will also enable a consistent approach
in the Second and Fifth Committees of the General
Assembly and in the different governing bodies of the
United Nations development system around the globe.
I would like to single out five areas where we think
the details have a devil lurking in them. Accordingly,
16/24

31/05/2018

they will require continued and special attention in the
aftermath of the adoption of the resolution.
First, the implementation of the new United Nations
country teams must be effected on the basis of the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
and national needs and priorities, and criteria to be
developed at Headquarters must inform and support,
not jeopardize, the essence of the Secretary-General’s
proposal, which is to establish a needs-based system.
Secondly, the implementation plan for the
new resident-coordinator system must clearly take
into account the proposed exclusions of the levy
for operations in developing countries. In Brazil,
for instance, we have several modalities for such
cooperation, including South-South cooperation, where
we are a donor. The levy should not be applicable to
those operations.
Thirdly, the role of efficiency gains as a source of
funding for the resident-coordinator system should also
not be overestimated.
Fourthly, the proposal to be submitted to the Fifth
Committee with regard to the participation of the
Secretariat in the cost-sharing agreement, as well as
the new Development Operations Coordination Office
arrangement in the Secretariat, must be detailed enough
to ensure that its consideration by the Committee
goes smoothly.
Fifthly, the resubmission of the strategic document
must be done in alignment with the original mandate of
the quadrennial comprehensive policy review.
Finally, I will say a word on the process. As stated
earlier by the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, it is our view that the adoption
of resolution 72/279 is the beginning, not the end, of
our collective work on the quadrennial comprehensive
policy review process this year. The active engagement
of all delegations in the governing bodies of the entities
of the United Nations development system is crucial,
beginning with the annual sessions of the New Yorkbased Executives Board that will take place a few days
from now, in June.
Furthermore, it will be important in the next session
of the General Assembly to revert the follow-up of the
quadrennial comprehensive policy review, including
of the present resolution, from the plenary back to the
Second Committee where it belongs, together with
Economic and Social Council. The Assembly can count
18-16544

31/05/2018

on Brazil’s continued and constructive engagement in
this process.
Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin this short statement by thanking the
Permanent Representative of Egypt for having shared
with us all that today was his birthday.
Uruguay is pleased to see the consensus achieved
with regard to the need to reinforce the United Nations
development system and thereby to pursue better
outcomes by fine-tuning its leadership structure, the
most reasonable use of its resources and greater clarity
in the division of responsibilities and, consequently,
in accountability as well. Uruguay commends and
appreciates the work carried out by the two facilitators,
our colleagues Sabri Boukadoum and Ib Petersen.
Uruguay attaches particular importance to and
is aware of the challenge inherent in the adoption of
measures at all levels for the repositioning of the United
Nations development system, in order to ensure that it is
properly aligned with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and can be implemented.
At this time of the month, only 13 days before
the World Cup begins, it is worth recalling a sporting
maxim: “It ain’t over till it’s over”. As our colleague
from Brazil has just recalled, much remains to be done
and our work is just beginning. We therefore reiterate
Uruguay’s enthusiastic support for the SecretaryGeneral and his entire team as they move to implement
all the proposed reforms.
Mr. Locsin (Philippines): The Philippines
expresses its best wishes for a happy life and continued
success for the Permanent Representatives of Egypt
and Brazil on their respective birthdays. We also
align ourselves with the statement delivered by the
representative of Egypt as Chair of the Group of 77
(G-77), and express our profound appreciation to the
Permanent Representatives of Algeria and of Denmark
for leading us to a consensus document in resolution
72/279. We hope that good-faith negotiations in a
spirit of compromise will be maintained throughout
the future discussions on United Nations development
system reform.
As a programme country, the Philippines
consistently maintains that the operational activities of
the United Nations development system must be aligned
with the national plans, priorities and changing needs of
Member States. We agree with China that members must

A/72/PV.91

be consulted on the composition of country teams and
the selection of resident coordinators. The Philippines
supports the position of the G-77 on the need to ensure
that final decisions on the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework (UNDAF) and the configuration
of United Nations country teams remain under the
authority of national Governments. That has been
our core principle in the preparation, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation of our country programme
UNDAF document and in our engagement with our
resident coordinator. It is important that the residentcoordinator system not lose sight of its focus on
development. A tailored approach must be emphasized.
In our case, we are a middle-income country that
in addition to having to overcome middle-income
countries’ unique challenges is particularly vulnerable
to disasters and the adverse effects of climate change,
all in an increasingly volatile political environment
where the last super-Powers may soon end up clashing.
That may entail readjusting national spending priorities
to favour security.
No matter how ambitious and comprehensive, the
repositioning process will not succeed without a realistic
funding mechanism. That must address the decline in
core contributions while at the same time ensuring that
no additional burden is placed on programme countries
beyond their capacity to bear it, although they must do
their fair share. We support the G-77 position on the
need for more stable, robust, predictable and sustainable
funding. We also support the position of the United
States in working to realign and redirect resources and
energies in order to address the issues most in need of
resolution and the requirements of those most in need
of help more efficiently, all with the aim of achieving
a world of peace, progress and freedom above all. The
Philippines will remain deeply engaged in the United
Nations development system reform process.
Mr. Morejón Pazmiño (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, my country associates itself
with the statement made by the representative of Egypt
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. I would also
like to join others in congratulating the co-facilitators
of this process and their teams for their tireless work.
Their experience and leadership were clearly vital to
the consensus achieved on resolution 72/279, which
we adopted today and which was the outcome of
significant negotiation efforts by our experts and of the
constructive spirit shown by delegations.

18-1654417/24

A/72/PV.91

31/05/2018

I would also like to congratulate SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed, who are here with us,
on their responsible and ambitious efforts to fulfil
the mandate entrusted to them by Member States to
prepare proposals for the repositioning of the United
Nations development system. As we did at the start
of the process, we reiterate our ongoing support and
acknowledge their own intense work and that of their
team. We would also like to express our gratitude for
the work of President Lajčák, who steered our efforts
towards today’s outcome.

Group of 77 and China, whom I wish a very happy
birthday, along with the representative of Brazil.

We have a resolution that is fit for purpose and is both
a road map and a tool. It is now time for implementation,
for which our continued commitment to the successful
implementation of both the quadrennial comprehensive
policy review and today’s resolution is required if we
are to ensure that the United Nations development
system achieves a structure and positioning that meets
all of our development needs and achieves effective
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals
on the ground. In that regard, we believe that the next
steps in this process must be directed at arriving at
ways to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and supporting countries in mobilizing
resources, including the funding and creation of
capacities to achieve economic goals such as sustainable
and inclusive economic growth, industrial development,
infrastructure investment and economic diversity.

First, the implementation plan should continue
to engage Member States during the transition of
the resident-coordinator system. We encourage the
Secretariat to continue to increase transparency and
inclusiveness, which will ensure accountability and
ownership by Member States, as well as build trust with
the United Nations development system as the process
continues. We welcome the remarks of the SecretaryGeneral mentioning those specific points. Rwanda
reiterates the necessity for the implementation plan to
be data-driven, and we encourage the United Nations
system and host countries to gather data with a view
to increasing coherence, collaboration and synergy
on the ground while building a solid foundation
for sustainability.

In conclusion, I would like to join others in greeting
my Egyptian neighbour and will venture to wish him a
happy birthday in Arabic.
Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): At the outset, my
delegation would like to commend the co-facilitators,
Ambassadors Boukadoum and Petersen, the Permanent
Representatives of Algeria and Denmark, respectively,
who led the intergovernmental consultations on
resolution 72/279 in an inclusive manner with an
unwavering resolve to find common ground for all
Member States. We commend the Secretary-General,
the Deputy Secretary-General and their team for their
involvement in the process through the many briefings
and the information made available for the consideration
of Member States.
Rwanda associates itself with the statements
delivered by the representative of Ethiopia, on behalf
of the African Group, and by Ambassador Edrees,
Permanent Representative of Egypt, on behalf of the
18/24

The next 12 years will be a defining moment for
the United Nations development system, ensuring
that accountability, coherence and transparency are
enhanced system-wide so as to maximize delivery
on the complexity and ambition set out in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development for our citizens
and countries. The implementation plan for resolution
72/279 will determine the success of that reform
process. In that regard, I would like to highlight the
following two key points.

In conclusion, Rwanda is ready to engage
constructively, since the repositioning of the United
Nations development system is just beginning and the
ownership of the process by both the Secretariat and
Member States will determine the outcome of the 2030
Agenda in the 11 years remaining for its implementation.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of Egypt
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, and joins those
wishing Ambassador Edrees a happy birthday. I am
glad that in 2016, as Chair of the Second Committee,
I was involved in the negotiations on the quadrennial
comprehensive policy review, providing guidance for
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development as an ambitious and holistic approach in
our efforts to eradicate poverty and further promote
sustainable development.
In the follow-up to the policy review this year,
we negotiated the repositioning of the United Nations
development system so as to ensure that the United
Nations is fit for purpose and has sufficient capability
18-16544

31/05/2018

and capacity to support States in implementing the
2030 Agenda. In that regard, I would like to express
my great appreciation to the Secretary-General, the
Deputy Secretary-General and their team for providing
the initial proposal for the United Nations development
system repositioning, in constant consultation with
States. I would also like to commend the co-facilitators,
our brothers from Algeria and Denmark, for their able
leadership in navigating us through the negotiation
process. We are pleased that consensus was achieved
on resolution 72/279, on the repositioning of the United
Nations development system. However, I would like to
comment on several salient points in the resolution.
We have agreed that the resident-coordinator
system will remain focused on development issues,
stressing the eradication of poverty in all its forms
and dimensions as its overarching objective. There
is a strong emphasis on national ownership and
leadership manifested, among other things, through the
process of preparing and finalizing the United Nations
Development Assistant Framework (UNDAF) in full
consultation and agreement with national Governments,
as well as a new generation of United Nations country
teams with a needs-based, tailored country presence.
The resident coordinators will report not only to the
Secretary-General but also to host Governments on the
UNDAF implementation.
However, today’s achievement is only the start of
our hard work ahead. We must maintain our focus on
the implementation of the repositioning of the United
Nations development system and, more importantly, on
how those changes will bring real development impact
on the ground as well as the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals. For that reason, we
would like to underscore several points.
First, the initial follow-up measures are critical
to launching the repositioning of the United Nations
development system. We will need a well-designed,
thorough implementation plan, in full consultation
with States, along with the fulfilment of front-loaded
contributions, if we are to ensure that we can start
the process on schedule by January 2019. We also
look forward to the Secretary-General’s review of
the configuration, capacity, resource needs, role and
development services of multi-country offices. There
are many countries that are in dire need of United
Nations support and capacity-building, including in
my own Asia-Pacific region, particularly the Pacific
island States.

A/72/PV.91

Secondly, we must ensure that the residentcoordinator system remains predictable so that it can
supply States with continued premium services. We
must therefore mitigate risks to the system associated
with unpredictability or a lack of resources.
Thirdly, we must emphasize the importance of
an inclusive, transparent and regular monitoring and
evaluation process. We expect full accountability
to States through regular reports and feedback
from those States in order to continually improve
implementation of the United Nations development
system repositioning. We look forward to the SecretaryGeneral’s implementation plan, and will participate
constructively in the follow-up to and implementation of
the United Nations development system repositioning.
Lastly, I would like to say that I for one am
quite glad about these changes. I served as a young
diplomat on the Executive Board of the United Nations
Development Programme almost 27 years ago, and now,
as a young ambassador, I am seeing changes. We all
need these changes. Speaking off the cuff now, I think
it is high time for us to have change. Nothing is perfect;
everything is imperfect, particularly in this body, but
I think this is a great step forward. I would like to
congratulate all of us in this Hall who have adopted this
very important resolution. It took us 27 years to achieve
these changes, and I for one congratulate all of us.
Mr. Marobe (South Africa): At the outset, South
Africa aligns itself with the statements delivered by
the Permanent Representatives of the Arab Republic of
Egypt and Ethiopia on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China and the Group of African States, respectively.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to thank the Secretary-General for the presentation of
his vision and proposals, and for his ongoing open and
transparent engagement with Member States since the
adoption in 2016 of resolution 71/243 on the quadrennial
comprehensive policy review. We further appreciate
the important role played by the Deputy SecretaryGeneral in steering these deliberations, as well as
the co-facilitators, the Permanent Representatives of
Algeria and Denmark, who led the intergovernmental
consultations to the achievement of a consensus text for
resolution 72/279.
My delegation has assured the Secretary-General
of our support for the implementation of the reform
of the United Nations development system. However,
central to that reform are mechanisms that allow for

18-1654419/24

A/72/PV.91

consistent evaluation and reassessment of what is
working and what is not. In that regard, we reiterate
the importance of the Secretary-General’s commitment
to undertaking periodic consultations and providing
regular reporting to Member States on the monitoring
of the implementation of the reform plan.
We also want to reiterate the concern expressed
by the African Group about the fact that with the
current funding mechanism agreed in the resolution,
the cost would be felt largely by poor and developing
countries whose development largely depends on every
possible form of funding. Inclusiveness, transparency
and accountability in this process are therefore crucial
so that we can ensure that the development gains do
indeed outweigh the costs.
The cost of the proposed reforms must ensure that
the returns on these investments are realized. This
can be done only in full consultation with and under
the leadership of national Governments through the
articulation of national priorities in the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework. In that regard, the
resident coordinator has to work within that purview
and maintain reporting to both the Secretary-General
and the host Government. The technical notes on the
funding of the reinvigorated resident-coordinator
system must remain a key element guiding the
implementation of this resolution.
In conclusion, the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development carved out an unprecedented
development trajectory for the international community.
The true success of the resolution that we have just
adopted today must be measured against the promise
that we collectively made to lift millions out of poverty
through the realization of the Sustainable Development
Goals. In an increasingly interconnected world, our
choice is between shared prosperity and shared misery.
The adoption of this resolution is a step towards the
former, and signals the intention to deliver on its
promissory note of leaving no one behind.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
At the outset, allow me to commend and thank
Ambassador Boukadoum and Ambassador Petersen
for their leadership of the negotiation process resulting
in the adoption this afternoon of resolution 72/279,
which is of crucial importance for all of us. I also
thank and congratulate the Secretary-General, the
Deputy Secretary-General and their teams. Since he
took office, the Secretary-General has insisted that the
20/24

31/05/2018

United Nations must be able to adapt to change and
reinvigorate itself if it is to be more effective. Thanks
to his perseverance and leadership, we have agreed
together on these 25 paragraphs.
Today’s adoption demonstrates the ability of the
United Nations to adapt to change, as well as our desire
to face our global challenges together and build a world
that is more sustainable and peaceful and therefore
more just. The United Nations as a whole has become
greater because of this notable success. Switzerland’s
commitment to the repositioning of the United Nations
development system is motivated solely by our desire to
make the activities and projects of the United Nations
more effective on the ground. I know that we all share
that desire. Let us never lose sight of that common
objective when we are called on to take decisions on
the implementation of the current resolution.
Switzerland will therefore continue in its unfailing
commitment to enabling the United Nations development
system to carry out its mandate more effectively.
We will do it both financially and at the level of the
issues involved, above all by respecting the realities on
the ground. We will also do this on the Executive Boards
of the United Nations funds and programmes and in the
Economic and Social Council, the Second Committee
and other Main Committees of the General Assembly.
Above all, we will do it in partnership with the Member
States and the United Nations system, as well as with all
humanitarian and private-sector stakeholders working
in the area of development. Development should not
be the prerogative of some, a playground for political
games for others or merely someone else’s concern. We
are all involved and responsible.
(spoke in English)
Before concluding, I would like to wish our friend
Mr. Edrees a happy birthday. I know that it is traditional
to sing “Happy Birthday”, but I can assure the Assembly
that it will be much better off if I do not sing.
Mr. Hattrem (Norway): I would also like to echo
previous speakers in expressing our appreciation to the
facilitators of the resolution for their excellent work.
Norway welcomes the adoption of resolution
72/279, on the repositioning of the United Nations
development system in the context of the quadrennial
comprehensive policy review, and we appreciate the
flexibility shown by all Member States. I would like to
take this opportunity to comment on two main issues.
18-16544

31/05/2018

A/72/PV.91

First, with regard to reforms at the country level,
Norway greatly appreciates the agreement to establish
the position of independent resident coordinators
with the authority to lead a new generation of United
Nations country teams and to make the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework the
single most important instrument for the planning
and implementation of United Nations development
activities. Together we now have a common responsibility
to ensure that the reforms are implemented. We look
to the Secretary-General’s leadership to ensure that
the country-level reforms are smoothly implemented,
including by following system-wide guidelines and
holding leaders at all levels accountable for common
results and enhanced efficiency. We look forward to
the Secretary-General’s implementation plan, which
we expect to cover all of the requisite steps to be taken
at the United Nations, including the development of a
timetable. With regard to funding arrangements, we
anticipate a realistic assessment of the various funding
streams, both in terms of volume and of what must be
done to ensure that such funding does not fall short
of expectations.

States. We are willing to look at what we can do better
and will participate actively in the upcoming funding
dialogue, with the aim of establishing concrete and
measurable targets for the United Nations development
system, as well as for Member States.

With regard to the position of resident coordinator,
we feel confident that the Secretary-General will
ensure that resident coordinators are accredited as the
highest-ranking representatives of the United Nations
development system in all host countries. As Member
States, we must make sure that the governing bodies
of all funds, programmes and specialized agencies take
the decisions required to ensure that their respective
entities contribute constructively to reforms.

Among positive results, we would like to single out
assigning the collective leadership of the Development
Operations Coordination Office to the United Nations
Development Group, which corresponds to the spirit of
collegiality called for under the operational activities
policy review in resolution 71/243, as well as the
establishment of new, system-wide evaluations. We
hope that it will ensure the highest possible standards
of independence and impartiality in its work.

Secondly, with regard to funding, country-level
reforms can be implemented smoothly only if the
resident-coordinator system is sufficiently funded.
Burden-sharing is a central principle of multilateralism,
and Norway urges all Member States to contribute to
the voluntary trust fund for the resident-coordinator
system. It is also crucial that all the contributors
of strictly earmarked funding accept that the 1 per
cent coordination levy is to be deducted from their
contributions. In the relevant governing bodies, we
must ensure that all entities pay their full share of the
enhanced United Nations Development Group costsharing arrangement. Norway sees a possible funding
compact as an opportunity to change the current
unhealthy funding pattern, which is heavily dominated
by strictly earmarked project funding and a lack of
predictability. Once again, this is a call to all Member

However, we would also like to focus on a few
problem areas within the process, first with regard to
the funding of the new resident-coordinator system.
We continue to assume that resolution 72/279 will not
have financial implications for the regular budget of
the United Nations. We also want to emphasize that the
international organizations and entities in the United
Nations Development Group are fully independent,
including with regard to the financial and budgetary
aspects of their operations.

Lastly, on this auspicious day I would like to join
colleagues in wishing the Ambassador of Egypt a
happy birthday.
Mr. Kononuchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation joined the consensus
on today’s adoption of resolution 72/279. We are
grateful to the facilitators of the resolution for their
work during the negotiation process. We welcome
the agreements reached among the Member States
on modernizing the United Nations Development
Assistance Frameworks (UNDAF), strengthening the
decisive role of national Governments in the area of
development, including the process of coordinating
the UNDAF, and ensuring that the role of resident
coordinator continues to be depoliticized and oriented
to issues related to development and oriented to issues
related to development and poverty eradication.

We believe that the very hastily agreed-on
combined model is far from the best option. Besides
that, as far as we can tell, it will not be able to ensure an
acceptable level of predictability for funding revenues
and it will increase the risk of deterring new donors,
particularly from the private sector. It is also clear to
us that the operational activities of the United Nations

18-1654421/24

A/72/PV.91

development system will come up against objective
difficulties in planning and distributing its budgetary
resources for programme needs. In that connection, we
would like to emphasize that while we agreed to the
existing model, we see it as a temporary measure for the
medium term. We hope to see a dialogue on spending
coverage policies among the Executive Boards of the
United Nations funds and programmes, and we call on
all countries to comply fully and speedily with their
financial obligations in accordance with the harmonized
reimbursement rates.
Over the long term, we hope to see the Secretariat’s
promised efficiency gains from the reforms, which
according to its calculations should amount to
$310 million annually by 2022. We assume that those
resources will be used to support the work of the
reinvigorated resident-coordinator system, with a view
to enabling it to receive the necessary funding soon
and to stop requiring undesirable additional levies
from donors, which in turn will increase interest in
supporting the development system among external
partners as well. We hope the full value of that factor
will be taken into consideration while developing the
implementation plan for transforming the new residentcoordinator system.
In addition, we would like to address the format for
conducting negotiations. In our view, the agreement on
the resolution on repositioning based on the facilitators’
text was negotiated on an exceptional basis. In future,
our delegation will insist on the traditional format for
consultations on General Assembly draft resolutions,
including with regard to the forthcoming quadrennial
comprehensive policy review of the United Nations
operational activities for development.
We intend to carefully follow the course of this
reform’s implementation. We hope that in future the
dialogue determining key details for implementing the
reform with all the participants in the United Nations
development system — particularly Member States
and the programmes, funds and regional economic
commissions — will be inclusive and transparent. In that
context, we await with interest the start of consultations
with Member States on the implementation plan.
Mr. Matsunaga (Japan): The Government of Japan
welcomes the adoption of resolution 72/279. Owing to
the complexity of the issues, as well as the nature of
the proposals, there were differences of opinion among
Member States. It is undeniable that the resolution is
22/24

31/05/2018

a product of compromise. But it is also a product of
the good faith and constructive spirit of Member States.
We especially want to compliment the co-facilitators,
Ambassadors Boukadoum and Petersen, for guiding
Member States in informal consultations both on and
off the floor and treading a thorny path on their way to
their goal of seeing this landmark resolution adopted
by consensus. We support the Secretary-General’s
reform initiative.
Now that the resolution has been adopted, the
United Nations development system will be put to
the test to see if it can really improve its efficiency,
coherence and, above all, its impact on the ground, as
the resolution demands. We sincerely hope that this
will be the case. To that end, we look forward to seeing
a well-thought-out implementation plan presented for
the consideration of Member States.
My delegation engaged in the consultations,
consistently played a duly constructive role throughout
that important process and chose to join the consensus
on the adoption of the resolution. However, we regret
that the language used in the oral statement prepared
by the Secretariat and delivered before the Assembly’s
adoption of resolution 72/279 was not in strict
compliance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly. It is incumbent on the Secretariat
to take all necessary measures to ensure that the
rules of procedure are respected so that the General
Assembly can make informed decisions. We chose to
refrain from dissenting from that departure this time,
with the expectation of seeing a prudent and solid
implementation plan presented in consultation with the
development system’s entities, in compliance with the
resolution and in anticipation of the system being able
to meet the challenges we have discussed.
Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Group of 77
and China (G-77). We would also like to join others in
wishing the Ambassador of Egypt a very happy birthday.
We would like to briefly underline the importance
of the moment we are celebrating today, both for
the United Nations development system and for our
multilateral system in general. Chile believes that all of
us in this Hall can be proud of what we have achieved
and hopeful about what it means for the future of our
work. Resolution 72/279, which we adopted today, has
the dual merit of achieving the consensus of the entire
18-16544

31/05/2018

membership and showing that it is possible for us to
move forward together in order to create a system that
can fully respond to our current challenges.
Today we are moving together towards greater
coherence, effectiveness and closeness in United
Nations efforts aimed at meeting the various needs
and priorities of our countries in the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We
particularly want to highlight consideration of the
diverse realities of development at both the national
and regional levels. At the national level, we want to
emphasize the cross-cutting role of national ownership,
which can ensure that the system responds effectively
to the challenges that each country faces in achieving
sustainable development. In Chile and our region those
challenges are closely linked to our particular situation
as middle-income countries. That is why, at the regional
level, we welcome the region-by-region approach that
will serve as the basis for the reform proposals to be
presented in 2019. It shows that we are dealing with a
text that not only reflects States’ unanimous support for
strengthening the Organization but also enables us to
make progress in concrete terms so as to strengthen the
technical support we receive.
We therefore join in congratulating the
co-facilitators, Ambassadors Boukadoum and Petersen,
as well as their teams from Algeria and Denmark,
on their successful leadership of a difficult process.
Our thanks also go to Egypt for its efforts to lead and
coordinate our work in the G-77, which was crucial to
the constructive progress of the negotiations. Last but
not least, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his vision for reforming our Organization and for the
efforts that we all know he and the Deputy SecretaryGeneral and her team have made to bring us together
today to adopt this resolution. They can rest assured
that they will continue to enjoy Chile’s full support in
their efforts to work for a better Organization.
Princess Al Saud (Saudi Arabia): My Government
aligns itself with the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt on behalf of the Group of 77
and China. I wish him a very happy birthday.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General and his
team for supporting the Member State-driven process
of repositioning the United Nation development system.
I would also like to thank the co-facilitators, the
Permanent Representatives of Algeria and Denmark,
for their efforts in leading the process to a consensus.

A/72/PV.91

My Government is pleased that resolution 72/279
stipulates that the United Nations development system
should focus on supporting countries in implementing
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In
doing so, it should take into account the different
development needs and capacities of each country and
ensure that it is aligned with their national priorities.
We realize that this important and ambitious agenda
requires sound leadership, enhanced capacities and
expertise and better collaboration and accountability to
ensure that no one is left behind. In that regard, we look
forward to a nationally led United Nations Development
Assistance Framework, a development-focused resident
coordinator and to country-team configurations
determined by Member States. We also look forward
to transparent reporting on the implementation of
the resolution and to continued consultation with
Member States on progress. We eagerly anticipate the
implementation of an efficient system that is capable of
realizing the 2030 Agenda. The Council can count on
my Government’s full support throughout the process.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): I too would like to thank
the Secretary-General and the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for their leadership. I also want to thank the
co-facilitators for their efforts, which made the adoption
of resolution 72/279 possible, and for their firm support
to a reform process aimed at making the United
Nations development system more efficient, coherent
and accountable. The repositioned development system
should be able to effectively serve countries at different
development levels. National ownership and consent
should be the guiding principles, with an emphasis
on countries with special needs. Coordination and
consultation between the national authorities and the
United Nations development system is essential for its
effective implementation. As a host country to a sizeable
United Nations country team, as well as to United
Nations regional offices, we consider it important to
maintain a close dialogue with United Nations entities,
particularly in the process of decoupling resident
coordinators from the United Nations Development
Programme. We expect the Executive Boards of the
United Nations funds and programmes to take the
necessary decisions in a timely manner in order to
carry out their mandates, including those pursuant to
today’s resolution.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
is not just about commitments, it is also about a
transformational shift in the United Nations development

18-1654423/24

A/72/PV.91

system. The adoption of today’s resolution is a major
step in that direction. Accordingly, in conclusion, I
would like to reiterate my country’s continued support
for the Secretary-General’s efforts to make the United
Nations development system better aligned with the
priorities of Member States.
Mr. Park Chull-Joo (Republic of Korea):
I would like to begin by thanking Ambassadors
Sabri Boukadoum and Ib Petersen, the Permanent
Representatives of Algeria and Denmark, for their
tireless efforts and leadership during the important
consultation process.
My delegation is pleased that resolution 72/279
has been adopted by consensus. The collective will of
Member States is essential to supporting the SecretaryGeneral in his ambitious reform agenda for making the
United Nations development system fit for purpose in
the era of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The fact is that the 2030 Agenda will not only require
the united determination of all Member States, but also
a level and quality of support from the United Nations
development system to match that determination. By
adopting this resolution, we have demonstrated our
wish to see such support delivered in order to ensure
that no one is left behind. But although the resolution
is a milestone achievement, we must not simply be
satisfied with its adoption. My delegation joins others
in emphasizing that this is merely the beginning of our
long-term efforts in the years to come.
Like others, we note that Member States are
asking not only for a more transparent and accountable
United Nations development system but also for a
more efficient one. We can see that, for example, in the
support for the Secretary-General’s plan for advancing
common business operations in order to achieve
greater efficiencies, synergies and coherence in the

24/24

31/05/2018

new generation of United Nations country teams. In
addition, we would like to re-emphasize the importance
of partnerships for the United Nations development
system, since it cannot do everything everywhere. That
means that expanded partnerships with non-United
Nations stakeholders, based on comparative advantages,
are crucial. There is also a need for recognition across the
board that preventing and breaking the cycles of crisis,
together with an understanding of the humanitariandevelopment-peacebuilding nexus, are essential to
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, and we
should ensure that the resident coordinators work along
those lines.
We look forward to the Secretary-General’s
presentation of his implementation plan for the inception
of a dedicated, independent, impartial, sustainable and
development-focused resident-coordinator system. We
also eagerly anticipate his suggested options for the
long-term restructuring of regional assets and the annual
report on the United Nations Development Operations
Coordination Office. We will also engage actively and
constructively in the upcoming funding dialogues.
In conclusion, the Republic of Korea reiterates
its full support for the Secretary-General’s landmark
reform initiatives, and will aid the ongoing effort of
the United Nations development system, particularly
through the Executive Boards of the United Nations
development system entities and the newly revamped
Economic and Social Council operational activities for
the development segment.
The President: We have heard the last speaker
in explanation of position. The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 24.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

18-16544
