A/63/PV.32

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

32

nd plenary meeting
Monday, 27 October 2008, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Nsengimana
(Rwanda), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 80 (continued)
Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
Note by the Secretary-General (A/63/276)
Draft resolution (A/63/L.6)
Mr. Ali (Malaysia): I join others in thanking
Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), for his
presentation to the General Assembly of the annual
report of the Agency for 2007. It was a year of notable
success for the Agency in its efforts to ensure that the
benefits of nuclear technology were shared globally for
economic and social development.
My delegation shares the concern of the IAEA
that the Agency’s Technical Cooperation Fund
continues to lag behind the pressing needs of
developing countries. In this regard, my delegation
reiterates the need for the IAEA to ensure an equitable
balance between the three pillars of its mandate:
nuclear applications, particularly through technical
cooperation; nuclear safety and security; and nuclear
verification. This is especially important with the
emerging convergence of a global nuclear energy
renaissance with the need to ensure the efficient use of
nuclear power while also addressing nuclear safety,

security and the verification of nuclear weapons
non-proliferation safeguards by the IAEA.
The emerging global food crisis requires the
attention of the IAEA in collaboration with the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO). In view of the proven benefits of nuclear
technology applications in food production and
agriculture, my delegation supports the continued
operation of the FAO-IAEA Joint Division and looks
forward to progress in dealing with the crisis with the
assistance
of
these
important
international
organizations.
It is in that spirit that my delegation looks forward
to the new three-year IAEA Technical Cooperation
Programme cycle, which puts emphasis on food and
agriculture, human health, natural resources and nuclear
power, in line with growing demand for technical
cooperation for both peaceful non-power and power
applications of nuclear technology from developing
member States. Towards this end, resources for the
management of technical cooperation for development
under IAEA Major Programme 6 must be increased.
With regard to the call for the establishment of
appropriate mechanisms to ensure that the resources
for the Fund are sufficient, assured and predictable,
Malaysia supports the idea of changing the status of
contributions to the Fund from voluntary to more
obligatory for all IAEA member States. Nevertheless,
Malaysia fully supports the call to employ hedging
mechanisms to protect against the erosion of the
Fund’s value owing to currency fluctuations. We also

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-57118 (E)

*0857118*

A/63/PV.32

support the establishment of appropriate criteria for
setting Fund targets in order to avoid the unfavourable
experience that recipient member States currently have
to go through in negotiating Fund targets. In order to
encourage more recipient States to provide
extrabudgetary contributions to the IAEA in line with
the concept of shared responsibility — such as those
made to projects under the Regional Cooperation
Agreement for Research, Development and Training
related to Nuclear Science and Technology in Asia and
the Pacific — Malaysia calls on the IAEA to exempt
such contributions from programme support costs.
For its part, Malaysia has consistently honoured
its obligations to contribute on time and in full to both
the regular budget and Fund of the Agency, in addition
to making extrabudgetary contributions for the
Regional Cooperation Agreement. As a member State
that has benefited from the Technical Cooperation
Programme, Malaysia has also, in return, supported the
Programme and other IAEA activities through in kind
contributions, by providing experts and fellowship
training opportunities to other member States and by
hosting various Agency activities.
In this regard, my delegation wishes to thank the
IAEA and to put on record our appreciation of the
IAEA Technical Cooperation Department’s continuing
support for the implementation of IAEA technical
cooperation projects and various other activities in
Malaysia, including the trust shown to Malaysia in
allowing it to continue hosting the IAEA Postgraduate
Educational Course in Radiation Protection and the
Safety of Radiation Sources. My delegation also wishes
to express our gratitude to other member States that
have shown interest in the course, which has attracted
candidates from not only within our region but beyond.
With regard to the application of full-scope
safeguards to all nuclear activities in the Middle East,
Malaysia regrets that there has been no progress on
consultations on the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in that region. In this regard,
Malaysia wishes to reiterate the need for a prompt
establishment of such a zone, as recognized in relevant
United Nations resolutions. Malaysia views with
serious concern the fact that certain nuclear facilities
and materials in the Middle East are not subject to
IAEA comprehensive safeguards. Thus Malaysia calls
on Israel to join the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), to refrain from engaging in
nuclear military activities and to unconditionally open

2

all its nuclear facilities and activities to IAEA
inspections and safeguards in order to clarify the extent
of its past and present nuclear activities. Only then
could the goal of establishing a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the Middle East be achieved.
My delegation firmly believes that the future of
the IAEA should be based on the fundamental bargain
underlying the NPT, in particular, the inalienable right
of all the States parties to the Treaty to develop,
research, produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes without discrimination and in conformity
with articles I, II and III of the NPT. That approach
should encompass the need to respect the choice and
decision of each country with regard to the range of
peaceful uses of nuclear energy that they wish to
undertake without jeopardizing their respective
national policies or international cooperation
agreements and arrangements for peaceful uses of
nuclear energy and its fuel cycle.
Another fundamental principle is for developed
Member States to promote the satisfaction of the
legitimate needs for nuclear energy of developing
countries by allowing them to participate to the fullest
extent possible in the transfer of nuclear equipment,
materials and scientific and technological information
for peaceful purposes with a view to achieving the
greatest possible benefit, and by applying relevant
aspects of sustainable development to their activities.
On the issue of nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation, Malaysia firmly believes that any
concern that any party may have on such matters can be
best addressed through multilaterally negotiated,
universal, comprehensive and non-discriminatory
agreements. Malaysia also firmly believes in the need
for
nuclear
weapon
non-proliferation
control
arrangements to be transparent and open to participation
by all States, and to ensure that they do not impose
restrictions on access to the material, equipment and
technology for peaceful purposes required by
developing countries for their continued development.
It is also a matter of extreme importance that the
IAEA secretariat be allowed to maintain and enhance
its impartiality and professionalism, particularly in
carrying out its safeguards verification activities.
Malaysia strongly rejects any attempt by any party to
politicize the work of the IAEA, including its
Technical Cooperation Programme, as that is
tantamount to a violation of the statute of the IAEA.

08-57118

A/63/PV.32

In parallel, there is also a need for nuclearweapon States and all States that are not parties to the
NPT to exercise greater political will in favour of
general,
complete
and
irreversible
nuclear
disarmament, as called for under the Treaty.
At the operational level, Malaysia firmly believes
in the need for the IAEA to sustain a proper balance of
emphasis between the three pillars of its mandate on
peaceful applications of nuclear technology, including
technical cooperation, nuclear safety and security, and
nuclear weapon non-proliferation safeguards and
verification. In that regard, Malaysia does not see any
need to impose any new or additional legally binding
safeguards obligation on NPT States parties as a
prerequisite for the peaceful use of nuclear technology
beyond those of the Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreements and the Model Additional Protocol.
In order to preserve the relevance of the IAEA to
the needs of its developing member States, renewed
attention should be directed to the promotional aspects
of the Agency’s mandate in terms of technical
cooperation. In view of the respective obligations of
member States concerning IAEA safeguards, Malaysia
rejects any approach that would have the effect of
granting a right for the IAEA secretariat to exclude
certain technologies from the Agency’s Technical
Cooperation Programme.
Malaysia believes that any notion of a global
nuclear order should not worsen the dichotomy
between developing and developed member States by
endorsing an emerging regime of nuclear technology
suppliers and recipients on top of an existing regime of
nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclear-weapon States.
That is especially important in the current period,
where more developing States need to develop
legitimate peaceful nuclear power programmes to
ensure their energy security and long-term sustainable
development.
Malaysia further believes that any initiative to
develop any multilateral approach to the nuclear fuel
cycle and fuel supply assurances should not create such
a new regime of nuclear technology haves and havenots. Malaysia firmly believes that the establishment of
any such multilateral approach or regime should be
based on extensive, comprehensive and transparent
consultation between all interested parties and member
States, and that all decisions should be taken by
consensus.

08-57118

Finally, Malaysia would like to express once
again its appreciation to Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei,
Director General of the IAEA, as well as to the IAEA
secretariat for their significant and valuable work in
fulfilling the three pillars of the Agency’s mandate.
Malaysia pledges its full support to the IAEA, as one
of the organizations of the United Nations system, so
that it may continue to uphold and maintain its central
and universal role in addressing the enormous
challenges ahead.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to express
Japan’s appreciation to the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, for having submitted the
Agency’s annual report.
The IAEA plays a crucial role in maintaining
peace and promoting global prosperity. It disseminates
the benefits of nuclear technology for humanity. It
verifies non-proliferation. It provides services to
developing countries. Those functions are becoming
increasingly important.
Japan has been making significant contributions
to the IAEA as a member of its Board of Governors
since its foundation and also as a lead country in
promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Japan
adheres to the three non-nuclear principles and is
committed to strengthening the IAEA safeguards
system by sharing its advanced safeguards technology.
The scientific knowledge and technology acquired by
Japan is shared with many developing countries
through the IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme.
Nuclear energy provides great capacity and
potential for ensuring a reliable and clean energy
supply. The value of nuclear energy has been
rediscovered in our common efforts to combat global
warming. In the recent years of the so-called nuclear
renaissance, a growing number of countries are
expressing their interest in introducing or expanding
nuclear power programmes.
Nuclear power programmes must be developed in
the most secure way and strictly for peaceful purposes.
It is vitally important that non-proliferation safeguards,
nuclear safety and nuclear security — in other words,
the “three S’s” — be ensured. The role of the IAEA is
therefore becoming ever more important. Earlier this
year, an international initiative proposed by Japan on
three S’s-based nuclear energy infrastructure was
launched at the Hokkaido Toyako summit of the Group

3

A/63/PV.32

of Eight. In cooperation with the Agency, Japan would
like to take measures to follow up that initiative and
expand support to those countries planning to start up
nuclear power generation.
As the only country that has endured atomic
bombings, Japan is determined to continue to work
strenuously for the elimination of all nuclear weapons.
As part of such efforts, Japan, together with many
sponsors, has just presented a draft resolution on
nuclear disarmaments to the current session of the
General Assembly.
The 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
will provide another important opportunity. The second
session of the Preparatory Committee, held in April to
May this year, was more substantive than that held last
year, and it successfully adopted a procedural agenda.
We hope that the third session will be productive and
that it will pave the way to a successful Review
Conference.
The International Commission on Nuclear
Non-proliferation and Disarmament, established this
year by Japan and Australia, has commenced its
activity by holding its first meeting in Sydney last
week. We hope that the Commission will also make
meaningful contributions to the success of the 2010
Review Conference.
Nuclear non-proliferation must be verified
through the internationally credible and objective
safeguards system. Japan has made every effort to earn
international confidence in its extensive activities by
fully cooperating with the IAEA and maintaining a
high level of transparency. As a result, the IAEA has
concluded that Japan’s nuclear programmes are
exclusively for peaceful purposes. The integrated
safeguards system has now been implemented in Japan
and the world’s first site level integrated safeguards
approach was introduced last month for facilities,
including a reprocessing plant, in the most efficient
manner.
The nuclear development undertaken by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a threat to
the peace and security not only of Japan, but also of
East Asia and the entire international community. It
represents a serious challenge to the NPT regime. In
the Six-Party Talks, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has not yet agreed to a concrete framework of
verifications.

4

The establishment of an effective verification
framework by the Six-Party Talks is essential for the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. By first
striving towards an expeditious agreement of such a
framework, Japan will continue to actively work
towards the peaceful resolution of nuclear issues within
the framework of the Six-Party Talks.
Iran has, regrettably, continued and even
expanded its uranium enrichment-related activities,
despite repeated calls by the international community.
In order to remove concerns and to gain the confidence
of the international community, Iran has to fully
cooperate with the Agency and respond sincerely to the
requirements set forth by the relevant IAEA Board and
Security Council resolutions. Japan continues to work
towards a peaceful and diplomatic resolution of the
issue.
The vital missions of the IAEA continue to grow.
I assure the Assembly that Japan will continue to play a
leading role in contributing to the work of the IAEA
with its experience and knowledge. Japan has fielded
Ambassador Yukiya Amano, the former Chairman of
the Board of Governors of the IAEA, as a candidate to
be the next Director General of the IAEA. I strongly
urge members’ support for his candidacy.
Mr. Gatan (Philippines): The Philippines
welcomes the report introduced by the Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
recognizes the importance of the Agency. At the same
time, the Philippines agrees with the Director General’s
assessment that the Agency is at a crossroads. Since it
was founded some 50 years ago, the IAEA has helped
member States achieve their development goals and
contributed to international peace and security. The
world today faces a complex web of challenges, such as
the fluctuating and unpredictable cost of fossil fuel,
climate change, food and financial crises and a political
environment that impinges on the relevance and
effectiveness of the Agency. The Philippines believes
that, for the Agency to move forward to meet the
challenges and opportunities of the coming decades, an
enabling environment for a reinvigorated global nuclear
order is necessary.
The Philippines foresees a renaissance of nuclear
energy over the next two decades that will be an
overarching force that will create opportunities as well
as challenges for member States and the IAEA itself.
Driven by fluctuating fossil fuel prices and the fact that

08-57118

A/63/PV.32

this energy source is finite and harmful to the
environment, many countries are increasingly turning
to nuclear energy.
Given that development, there must be training
for a new generation of human resources; the design of
reactors that are safe, secure, economical and
proliferation-resistant; an assured supply of nuclear
fuel; radioactive waste management, including
disposal; effective and quick radiological emergency
response system; and public acceptance. Towards those
ends,
the
Philippines
supports
strengthened
cooperation at the regional and international levels.
The Philippines is also of the view that the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy — specifically the use
of nuclear power, which can lead to sustained
development — provide immense benefits for
developing countries. In that regard, the Philippines
Government is reassessing the possibility of using
nuclear power as one of the sources of energy to meet
the ever-growing demands from our energy sector,
brought about by a robust and growing economy.
Enlarging the contribution of nuclear applications
is important not only for their contributions to the wellbeing of humanity, but also for the concept of the
universality of benefits to member States. The
Philippines believes that an expansion of the mandate
of the Agency in that regard will strengthen the support
of the developing countries for the IAEA. We reiterate
the critical role of the Agency’s safeguards and
verification
activities
in
ensuring
nuclear
non-proliferation. The Philippines commends the
efforts of the Director General and the Secretariat in
that regard.
The Philippines and the IAEA have expansive
links in other areas of technical cooperation, and that
partnership has accomplished much in terms of
increasing industrial productivity, the irradiation of
food exports, access to clean drinking water and
addressing other environmental challenges.
The Philippines and the IAEA also cooperate in
the important field of cancer therapy through the
Programme of Action for Cancer Therapy (PACT). The
Philippines is pleased that the Agency made that a
priority activity, given the rise in number of cancer
patients, particularly in the developing world. That
collaboration with PACT will lead to enhanced cancer
training capabilities in the region in the context of the
regional cancer training network. The Philippines urges

08-57118

member States to continue to support the Programme
through additional contributions.
The Philippines commends the achievement of
the Agency in its comprehensive programme to combat
the risk of nuclear terrorism and to assist Member
States in strengthening their nuclear security. The
Philippines appreciates the Agency’s assistance in
starting its nuclear security programme.
As more countries look to the possibility of
adding nuclear power to satisfy their ever-increasing
energy needs and as demand for technical cooperation
from developing countries continues to increase to
meet development needs, the Agency must continue to
play its vital role in enabling developing countries to
use science and technology for development and for
maintaining international peace and security. Needless
to say, the IAEA can do so only with a renewed sense
of cooperation and strong partnerships with Member
States.
In closing, let me reiterate the continuing
cooperation and commitment of the Philippines to the
IAEA as we meet the challenges and opportunities of
the twenty-first century.
Mr. De Figueiredo (Angola): Allow me to join
previous speakers in congratulating Mr. Miguel
d’Escoto Brockmann on his election to preside over the
sixty-third session of the General Assembly.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
express our appreciation to the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the
Agency’s secretariat for the comprehensive 2007 annual
report, through which we have learned more about the
activities carried out by the Agency in the past year
under the three pillars of its mandate: technology,
safety, and security and verification. The 2007 annual
report confirms that the Agency’s activities are central
to the maximization of the use of nuclear technology
for socio-economic development and for preventing its
misuse for non-peaceful purposes.
The Republic of Angola attaches paramount
importance to the Technical Cooperation Programme of
the IAEA, as it considers it to be an efficient tool for
the use of nuclear science and technology for peaceful
purposes. It contributes to the solution of problems in
areas such as human and animal health, agriculture and
food, industry, groundwater management, energy
production and the environment. In that connection, the

5

A/63/PV.32

Angolan Government has noted with appreciation the
information contained in the Agency’s Technical
Cooperation Report 2007, indicating that 122 member
States and territories benefited from the technical
assistance provided by the IAEA in the year 2007.
Thirty-seven African countries benefited from that
assistance in the same year, with the Agency’s support
essentially concentrated on human health, agriculture
and food.
The eradication or control of cancer, sleeping
sickness, HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis and pest
insects is one of the important preconditions for the
reduction of extreme poverty and hunger by
50 per cent by 2015, as foreseen by the United Nations.
In that regard, the Government of Angola strongly
supports the Agency programme for the application of
the sterile insect technique in member States to combat
the tsetse fly. Research with a view to utilizing that
technique against anopheles, locusts and other pest
insects should be intensified.
The cooperation with the African Union and other
pertinent regional and international institutions aimed
at harmonizing all efforts in conformity with the
African
Union’s
Pan-African
Tsetse
and
Trypanosomosis Eradication Campaign should be
strengthened.
The partnership between the IAEA and the Food
and Agriculture Agency of the United Nations (FAO)
has successfully resulted in a strengthening of the
capacity to apply nuclear technology in key agriculture
projects. That includes the efficiency and sustainability
of land and water management; breeding new crops
with special qualities and adapted to marginal
environments; improving animal production and
health; controlling insects that are major pests for
plants and livestock; and increasing food safety while
facilitating
international
trade.
Taking
into
consideration all the aforementioned benefits deriving
from that partnership, the Government of Angola
expresses its deep concern about the intention of the
FAO to terminate that valuable cooperation at the end
of this year, and appeals to both organizations to
review the issue.
With the support of the Agency, the Angolan
Government is implementing eight national projects
and participating in 15 regional ones. The national
projects deal with the establishment of the first
radiotherapy centre in the country; the introduction of

6

nuclear medicine techniques in clinical practices;
veterinary drug residue monitoring; isotope techniques
to study the effect of bio and inorganic fertilizers;
mutation breeding; and the establishment of a
non-destructive testing laboratory for industrial
applications.
In 2007, Angolan technicians benefited from
scientific visits and research grants abroad. In that
context, special mention is to be made of the field of
ionizing radiation. The regulation of its use for medical
purposes in several hospitals in the capital, the
inspection of various health-care centres in the country
and the installation and use of X-ray equipment and
other radioactive sources oriented towards industrial
radiography have greatly contributed to providing
better assistance to the population. My Government
wishes to strengthen its cooperation with the Agency
on matters concerning radiotherapy and nuclear
medicine in order to strengthen the National Oncology
Centre.
For the 2009-2011 cycle, the Angolan
Government seeks support for the implementation of
seven projects in the areas of nuclear physics,
agriculture, human health, water resources, industrial
applications and radiation protection. Four have
already been selected: the establishment of a phase II
laboratory for teaching nuclear physics; strengthening
national capability in medical physics; strengthening
national capability in the prevention, maintenance and
repair of scientific instruments and nuclear medicine
equipment; and national regulatory control and
occupational radiation protection programmes.
With regard to the implementation of the IAEA
safeguards, the Angolan Government recognizes the
right of all States to make full use of nuclear
technology and scientific applications without
discrimination and in conformity with the Agency’s
statute.
To conclude, the Government of the Republic of
Angola recommends the approval of the report of the
IAEA by the General Assembly.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): It is a profound honour
and pleasure to address this Assembly on behalf of my
delegation on the important agenda item before us for
consideration in this plenary meeting of the General
Assembly today. In that regard, I would like at the
outset to express my deepest appreciation and gratitude
to the Director General of the International Atomic

08-57118

A/63/PV.32

Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr. Mohammed ElBaradei,
for his informative report on the work of the Agency.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
note (A/63/276) transmitting the report of the Agency
to the General Assembly. I am very confident that both
documents will make a useful contribution to an
informed consideration of, in particular, draft
resolution A/63/L.6, submitted for adoption in
connection with the agenda item now being discussed.
As we all know, the IAEA has been working for
the realization of the “Atoms for Peace” vision since
the day of its establishment. It is indeed gratifying to
recall that the Agency and its Director General won the
2005 Nobel Peace Prize for their outstanding
contribution to global peace and security. We felt a
modest sense of satisfaction at seeing the Agency
celebrate its fiftieth anniversary with such a
magnificent achievement.
As a founding member of the IAEA, Ethiopia has
always attached and will continue to attach great
significance to the maintenance of global peace and
security, all the more so in connection with the specific
area upon which the Agency is entrusted and mandated
to focus.
As regards the use of nuclear energy, I am
pleased to inform this gathering that Ethiopia is
engaged in a number of national and regional projects
applying nuclear techniques with the aim of addressing
various socio-economic development problems in the
areas of agriculture, human health, water resource
management, energy planning, non-destructive testing,
nuclear instrumentation and radiation protection. The
country is pursuing a focused approach in areas of high
relevance to promoting socio-economic development
objectives.
Our biggest technical cooperation project with
the IAEA is aimed at eradicating the tsetse fly from the
25,000 square kilometres in the southern Rift Valley
area of Ethiopia. Initiated in 1997, the project uses the
sterile insect technique (SIT) as part of an integrated
pest management approach. It is still of the highest
priority in Ethiopia’s technical cooperation with the
Agency, particularly since over 240,000 square
kilometres of fertile agricultural land in the western
and southern parts of the country are infested by five
different species of tsetse fly that transmit
trypanosomiasis.

08-57118

The project includes three major components:
suppression of the existing fly population,
establishment of a centrally operated sterile insect
production plant, and a field operation to control and
eradicate the fly population using SIT technology. The
suppression activities have already reduced the
prevalence of trypanosomiasis among the livestock in
the treated area. A tsetse fly-breeding and irradiation
facility in Addis Ababa was officially inaugurated in
February 2007, and the first pilot release of sterile
tsetse flies was successfully carried out, with the
encouraging result of a 95-per-cent survival rate two to
three weeks after release.
The project has made significant progress with
the support of the IAEA, the Food and Agriculture
Organization and the OPEC Fund for International
Development, as well as with generous assistance from
the Governments of the United States of America and
China. The African Development Bank and the United
Nations Trust Fund for Human Security, funded by the
Government of Japan, have also joined our efforts to
make that model project a success story in Africa,
where about 37 countries are believed to have been
seriously affected by the problem. We are greatly
encouraged by the firm commitment of all those
international organizations and development partners
to continue to support the efforts of the Ethiopian
Government, for which we remain sincerely grateful.
Ethiopia’s technical cooperation activities with
the Agency in the areas of human health and water
resource management have also resulted in a modest
national infrastructure for the application of nuclear
medicine, radiotherapy and isotope hydrology. The
country recently acquired a new cobalt machine, with a
new source, through a cost-sharing arrangement
between the Agency and the Government to help
improve the only radiotherapy centre still serving the
country’s more than 77 million people.
Some preliminary data indicate that only about
400 cancer patients out of an estimated 115,000 new
cancer cases per annum are treated by means of
radiotherapy. That clearly shows the inadequacy of the
services in that critical area of concern. For that reason
the Government of Ethiopia, in collaboration with the
IAEA, has developed an action plan to extend
radiotherapy and nuclear medicine services to five
hospitals located in different parts of the country. We
therefore call on all our development partners to step
up their generous technical and financial support to

7

A/63/PV.32

help us implement the action plan and save the lives of
thousands of people dealing with cancer through wellequipped and expanded radiotherapy and nuclear
medicine services in the country.
In addition, our technical cooperation with the
IAEA to apply isotope techniques in managing our
water resources has enabled us to build some basic
capacity to generate useful isotopic data. The
establishment of an isotope hydrology laboratory at
Addis Ababa University and a national groundwater
database system, as well as training the necessary
personnel, constitute some of the major strides made so
far in laying the basic infrastructure for an Ethiopian
groundwater resources programme, which is part of the
Government’s 15-year water sector development
programme.
The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
has shown some promising steps towards enhancing
the relevance and efficiency of its activities, including
through its Joint Division with the IAEA, which is
important for developing and least developed countries
in particular. The Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Nuclear
Techniques in Food and Agriculture has been
especially instrumental in creating synergy between the
two organizations and, from our perspective, in
supporting our efforts to eradicate the tsetse fly and
trypanosomiasis. Ethiopia believes that any measure to
terminate the Joint FAO/IAEA Division would
adversely affect that synergy, with a shared objective
of contributing to the maintenance of global food
security. We therefore call for the reinforcement of that
useful partnership between the two global
organizations.
We also firmly believe that provision of adequate
and predictable resources to the Agency’s programmes
and, more importantly, balanced distribution of
resources to the Agency’s safeguards, nuclear safety
and technical cooperation activities need to be ensured.
The Technical Cooperation Programme plays a crucial
role in transferring nuclear technology to developing
member States of the Agency.
As the IAEA is expected to increase its efficiency
and effectiveness in nuclear verification, nuclear safety
and technology transfer, Ethiopia realizes the Agency’s
need to upgrade its laboratory and computation
facilities and to enhance its management information
system, so as to maintain its competence and
independence. In line with that, implementation of the

8

external
auditor’s
recommendation
to
adopt
International Public Sector Accounting Standards and
an Agency-wide information system for programme
support needs to be adequately addressed and
supported by Member States.
Ethiopia believes that promoting the peaceful use
of nuclear programmes would have manifold benefits
for all member States and humanity at large. In that
regard, ratification and implementation of the
additional protocol to the safeguards agreement and the
modified small quantities protocol would help to
enhance the verification process by the IAEA as the
competent global authority mandated to do so.
However, in addition to all that, universal application
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons is truly critical to ensuring global peace and
security.
As one of the founding members of the Agency,
Ethiopia is cognizant of its responsibility to control
radioactive and other nuclear materials and to promote
the peaceful use of nuclear applications for global and
regional security. Moreover, as an outgoing member of
the IAEA Board of Governors, Ethiopia has also had
the honour and pleasure of serving member States of
the Agency to its level best in that capacity. We wish
the incoming members of the Board of Governors
every success and assure them of our continued
cooperation and commitment to the lofty ideals of the
Agency.
Ethiopia has ratified the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty and the Pelindaba Treaty on the
African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone. We have done so
on the basis of our long-standing commitment to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and, ultimately, to a nuclear-threat-free world. In that
regard, it is important to underscore that nuclear
non-proliferation efforts can lead eventually to a
nuclear-threat-free world if, and only if, they are
complemented by genuine disarmament measures by
all nuclear-weapon States.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate our profound
thanks and appreciation to the IAEA, in particular to its
governance and leadership, for their dedication to
strengthening crucially essential technical cooperation
activities between the Agency and my country. I would
also like to reassure the Assembly that, apart from
abiding by its international obligations as a member
State, Ethiopia will continue to do its utmost to further

08-57118

A/63/PV.32

enhance the positive spirit of cooperation with the
Agency and with our development partners, who have
thus far made generous contributions to our
development endeavours in this particular field.
Mr. Pramudwinai (Thailand): It is with great
appreciation that the delegation of Thailand took note
of the 2007 annual report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) (see A/63/276). Having just
completed our term as a member of the Agency’s
Board of Governors for the period 2006 to 2008,
Thailand takes this opportunity to reaffirm its
continued support for the Agency’s indispensable role
in promoting the peaceful use of nuclear energy and
strengthening the non-proliferation regime. Thailand
believes that the IAEA’s role in enhancing human
security and the capacity of Member States to achieve
the Millennium Development Goals should be
accentuated.
Over the years, nuclear applications in the fields
of human health and agriculture have been the
hallmarks of partnership between Thailand and the
IAEA. My delegation commends the Agency’s
Programme of Action for Cancer Therapy and its
recently formalized partnership with the World Health
Organization, which is geared towards preventing
cancer and reducing cancer rates in developing nations.
We also support the Joint FAO/IAEA Division of
Nuclear Techniques in Food and Agriculture. Thailand
sees the merit of continuing the FAO/IAEA partnership
with a view to responding to the demands and needs of
Member States vis-à-vis food safety and food security.
For developing countries to reap the benefits of
nuclear
technology,
the
Agency’s
Technical
Cooperation Programme remains the key component.
On our part, we have maintained active collaboration
with the Agency in various capacity-building activities.
We will continue to do so in the years to come.
Thailand believes that, as the Agency charts its
future course in the so-called global nuclear order,
effective management of the Agency will be crucial to
enable it to respond adequately to various proliferation
challenges. We believe that it is important for the
Agency to be provided with sufficient, assured and
predictable resources to do its job. In that regard, my
delegation commends the Director General’s initiative
to establish the Commission of Eminent Persons on the
future of the Agency. We take note of the report of the
Commission, which will be an important contribution

08-57118

in improving the work of the Agency between now and
2020, and beyond.
Regarding another area of the global nuclear
order, Thailand wishes to mention our proposal, along
with that of the countries of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), for the
establishment of the South Asian nuclear-weapon-free
zone. We support the establishment of nuclear-weaponfree zones in all regions of the world. Any possible
forum for an exchange of experiences on nuclearweapon-free zones should be welcomed as
constructive. The efforts of Mongolia in hosting the
meeting of the focal points of all regional nuclearweapon-free zones in April 2009 are highly
commendable.
Strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation
regime is a common and shared responsibility of the
international community. Thailand is fully committed
to the implementation of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We
underscore the role of the IAEA as the sole multilateral
authority for safeguards and verification. We also
support efforts to enhance the effectiveness and
efficiency of the Agency’s safeguards system,
including the Agency’s comprehensive safeguards
agreements and additional protocols. As we approach
the convening of the third session of the Preparatory
Committee for the 2010 NPT Review Conference,
which is to be held in New York next year, my
delegation hopes that the deliberations will lead to
further progress on substantive issues. In that regard,
Thailand is also hopeful that the international
community will further step up its efforts to honour its
NPT
commitments,
on
both
the
nuclear
non-proliferation and the nuclear disarmament fronts.
My delegation takes note of the Director
General’s report to the Board of Governors on the
implementation of safeguards in the Islamic Republic
of Iran throughout the past year. While we fully
support the inalienable right of every NPT State party
to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, we
must ensure that that right is pursued in accordance
with the obligations under the NPT, the comprehensive
safeguards agreements and the additional protocols.
Thailand looks forward to a peaceful settlement of the
Iran nuclear issue. We urge all parties concerned to
stay the course of diplomacy and to refrain from
confrontation.

9

A/63/PV.32

On the recent developments in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Thailand expresses its
support for the ongoing dialogue within the framework
of the Six-Party Talks aimed at achieving long-term
peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula. We
welcome the progress made towards the full and
balanced implementation of the 2005 Joint Statement.
On our part, Thailand will continue to work closely
with our partners in the ASEAN Regional Forum to
contribute to progress in the complete and verifiable
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.
We commend the IAEA’s role as a cornerstone of
the global non-proliferation regime and join other
members of the international community in praising
the Agency’s annual report, which not only reflects a
track record of accomplishments but also provides a
realistic outlook of where future challenges lie. In that
regard, Thailand reiterates its full confidence in the
integrity, impartiality and professionalism of Director
General Mohamed ElBaradei and the IAEA secretariat
in continuing that important work.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate the new member States joining the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), namely,
the Sultanate of Oman, the independent State of Papua
New Guinea and the Kingdom of Lesotho. I wish them
every success in their work at the Agency. The
enlargement in the Agency’s membership is evidence
of the growing prestige of that organization.

that regard, I would like to mention the fact that
Ukrainian experts took an active part in the work of the
Agency’s Safety Standards Committees.
We welcome the Agency’s activities in the area of
nuclear safety. Of particular importance for Ukraine in
that field are the problems of radioactive waste
management during the decommissioning of the
Chernobyl nuclear power plant and the transformation
of the shelter object into an ecologically safe system.
The Agency continues to provide assistance in the
remediation of the affected territories in Ukraine. The
results of the Agency’s recent activities in those areas
laid the groundwork for the United Nations Action Plan
on Chernobyl to 2016, which was prepared this year by
the Inter-Agency Task Force on Chernobyl. We hope
that the attention devoted to the Chernobyl issue will
not decrease, since further joint efforts are required in
order to resolve that challenge to the entire
international community.
Ukraine notes with satisfaction that, last year, the
Agency completed a range of projects on the
harmonization of safety assessment processes and the
demonstration of safety during the decommissioning of
nuclear facilities. Of the 32 nuclear reactors being
dismantled around the world, 4 are in Ukraine, and we
benefit from the lessons learned in that regard.

Ukraine is satisfied with the fact that the Agency
has continued to act in accordance with the three main
pillars of its activity, that is, technology, safety and
verification. Ukraine, which has 15 operational units at
four nuclear power plants, fully recognizes the role of
the Agency in developing nuclear power applications.
Nuclear power will remain an important energy
component providing for the economic security of the
State from a middle- and long-term perspective, as
envisaged in Ukraine’s energy strategy for the period
until 2030.

We welcome the fact that, last year, the Agency
continued to develop projects in the area of human
health. In particular, Ukraine would like to emphasize
the importance of the Agency-initiated Programme of
Action on Cancer Therapy, from which my country
also benefits. In 2007, the Agency provided assistance
aimed at improving nuclear security arrangements
through the Integrated Nuclear Security Support Plans,
in which Ukraine also actively participated. In
particular, the Agency continued to strengthen border
control capabilities in many Member States by
providing radiation-detection instruments and by
training hundreds of people in the area of nuclearsecurity-related responsibilities.

The Technical Cooperation Programme continues
to be one of the principal mechanisms for carrying out
the Agency’s basic mission. In 2007, Ukraine hosted
eight regional and interregional events within the
framework of the Programme. Their topics reflected
both Ukraine’s considerable expertise and its needs
with regard to the dissemination of knowledge and
training in the field of nuclear safety and security. In

I would like to note with appreciation that, in
2007, the Agency continued its efforts to develop
nuclear fuel supply assurances. Ukraine, which
possesses sufficient deposits of uranium, looks forward
to participating in future consortiums and to providing
uranium ore to meet relevant needs. We are open to
international cooperation in that area. As a potential
uranium exporter, Ukraine welcomes the formulation

10

08-57118

A/63/PV.32

by the Agency last year of draft best practices in the
areas of radiation management, health and safety,
waste and the environment and related regulatory
aspects of uranium mining.
We appreciate the Agency’s support for the
process of converting research reactors from highly
enriched uranium to low-enriched uranium fuel.
Ukraine fully supports that programme and took an
active part in repatriating highly enriched uranium to
its country of origin.
We highly value the Agency’s International
Project on Innovative Nuclear Reactors and Fuel
Cycles. Last year, Ukraine decided to provide the
project with a cost-free expert.
Ukraine wishes to reaffirm its support for
activities to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of
the safeguards system and welcomes the Agency’s
efforts to prevent the diversion of nuclear energy from
peaceful uses to military purposes, to detect covert
weapon activities and to reduce the risk of nuclear and
radiological terrorism.
In conclusion, I would like to express our great
appreciation for the efforts of Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei,
Director General of the Agency, and of the Agency’s
secretariat to strengthen international cooperation in
the area of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, which
were demonstrated last year. Through its nuclear
power, nuclear applications and technical cooperation
programmes, the Agency continues to meet global
challenges and to assist member States in addressing
issues such as energy supply, nuclear safety, human
health, food security, water availability, resource
conservation and environmental protection.
Finally, I wish to state that Ukraine fully supports
draft resolution A/63/L.6, entitled “Report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency”.
Mr. Kim Bonghyun (Republic of Korea): My
delegation would like to express its appreciation to
Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), for his
comprehensive briefing on the Agency’s broad range of
activities. We are pleased to take note of the Agency’s
recent achievements in the fields of nuclear energy,
nuclear applications, safety and security and
verification, as described in the annual report of the
IAEA for 2007 (see A/63/276).

08-57118

The Republic of Korea underlines the importance
of the IAEA in promoting the safe, secure and peaceful
uses of nuclear science and technology, and we would
like to reaffirm our commitment to cooperate with the
Agency in all areas of its activities.
My delegation also commends the recent report
entitled Reinforcing the Global Nuclear Order for
Peace and Prosperity: The Role of the IAEA to 2020
and Beyond. In our view, that report was timely, and
the global nuclear system should be consolidated and
reinforced in order to address the new opportunities
and challenges arising from the expanded use of
nuclear energy. The IAEA, with its expertise and
professionalism, should continue to play a crucial role
in supporting the nuclear renaissance in the coming
years.
In that regard, my delegation would like to touch
upon some issues that we consider relevant to the
future work of the IAEA.
First, the universalization of the comprehensive
safeguards agreement and the additional protocol is an
essential means to improve the current safeguards and
verification regime. We would like to call upon those
States that have not yet done so to conclude such
agreements and bring them into force without delay.
The additional protocol should become a verification
standard, as recent events have suggested that the
comprehensive safeguards agreement alone is no
longer adequate in enabling the Agency to fully
implement its mandate.
Secondly, the Republic of Korea attaches great
importance to the issue of a new multilateral
framework for guaranteeing the supply of nuclear fuel.
Any new mechanism should provide economical,
reliable and equitable access to nuclear fuels, while
limiting proliferation risks. As a major user of nuclear
energy, the Republic of Korea will continue to
participate in and make positive contributions to the
relevant discussions on that issue.
Thirdly, nuclear terrorism remains the most
imminent threat to the peace and security of the
international community. The Nuclear Security Report
2008, in our view, contains very useful information
that will assist State and non-State actors alike in
addressing certain aspects of that grave issue. We
recognize the important role of the Agency as a focal
point in facilitating the enhancement of nuclear
security at both the national and the international

11

A/63/PV.32

levels. The Agency’s experiences should be shared
with other international organizations and with relevant
global initiatives.
The expanded use of nuclear energy requires the
strengthening of nuclear non-proliferation and
heightened security measures as never before. In that
regard, my delegation would like to emphasize that the
peaceful resolution of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea nuclear issue is vital to securing
lasting peace and prosperity on the Korean peninsula
and in North-East Asia. My delegation would like to
reiterate that the framework of the Six-Party Talks
remains the most effective tool for resolving the
nuclear issue related to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
Since last June, we have witnessed ups and
downs with regard to that issue. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea submitted a declaration of
its nuclear programme in June of this year and, at the
heads of delegation meeting of the sixth round of the
Six-Party Talks, held in Beijing last July, the
participants reached a consensus on the full
implementation of the second-phase actions and agreed
to establish a verification mechanism and a monitoring
mechanism within the Six-Party Talks process.
We welcome the Six-Party Talks being brought
back on track through the recent agreements on
verification, the subsequent United States action to
remove the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
from the list of State sponsors of terrorism, and the
resumption of disablement measures by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. We hope that the next
round of Six-Party Talks will be held as soon as possible
and that a verification protocol will be concluded among
the six parties for verifying the completeness and
correctness of the declaration submitted by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
My delegation would like to highlight the IAEA’s
continued essential role in the verification process. As
the Six-Party Talks process proceeds, my Government
will continue to work closely with all parties concerned
to resolve the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
nuclear issue in a peaceful manner, and trusts that the
international community will continue to render its
valuable support in the denuclearization process.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, my delegation would like to thank you
for having convened this meeting to consider the report

12

of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). It
would like to voice its appreciation to the Director
General of the Agency for having given a most
impressive statement this morning and for having
highlighted the challenges now confronting the
international community in the area of the exploitation
of nuclear energy in the present context.
One thing particularly struck us. The acquisition
of the technological capacity for uranium enrichment
and the isolation of plutonium makes the countries that
benefit from cooperation with the Agency potential
nuclear-weapon States, given the ease with which
nuclear material can be diverted to military purposes.
That observation is all the more concerning since the
growing demand for energy is prompting a nuclear
renaissance and consequently an increase in the
number of countries that wish to have access to nuclear
energy as a way to meet their needs.
Access to nuclear energy is an inalienable right of
all sovereign States. Nevertheless, it is important that
the international community be endowed with the
means to prevent an exponential increase in nuclearweapon States. It is therefore necessary to strengthen
the authority of the Agency to ensure unfailing
monitoring of nuclear energy production activities
through more binding methods of preventing the misuse
of existing production capacity for military purposes.
We support the proposal of the Agency to create a
multilateral fissile material bank to ensure the ongoing
supply of fissile fuel to all existing nuclear installations
or those yet to be built, free from political influence.
The inability of the IAEA to provide assurances on the
nuclear activities of States without an additional
protocol or the various other factors that ensure the
perceived security of States offer no effective
guarantee regarding access to nuclear weapons.
In our view, there is a need to encourage the
creation and transfer of a technology for nuclear energy
production that does not directly confer the capability
of acquiring nuclear weapons. European countries have
stated over the last few years that they are making
progress in that direction, and that deserves the support
of the international community.
The Agency should become further involved in
research to widen the technological gap between the
capacity to use nuclear energy peacefully and that to
produce nuclear weapons. Generally speaking, Benin
supports the recommendations of the Commission of

08-57118

A/63/PV.32

Eminent Persons convened by the Agency to secure the
use of nuclear energy for peaceful ends while reducing
the risks of proliferation, which are now at an
unacceptable level. The international community,
however, must also strengthen the multilateral
mechanism for the settlement of disputes concerning
nuclear materials. The role of the Agency in that
respect is critical.
A second major challenge that emerges from the
Agency’s annual report is the exacerbation of the risks
of proliferation to non-State actors in situations
involving the spread of registered fissile materials. The
fact that in an impressive number of cases the theft of
fissile materials has never been resolved exposes us to
terrible danger.
The international community should strengthen
its capacity to monitor fissile materials and to locate
and ensure the recovery of stolen materials. To that
end, there is a need to make full use of the potential for
cooperation and exchange of information offered by
resolution 1540 (2004) on the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction to non-State actors. All
States must understand and be aware of the risks linked
to that phenomenon and strive to identify a systematic
policy of prevention. The creation of a global network
for cooperation and the exchange of information would
strengthen the effectiveness of those means which the
United Nations is using to move forward in that area.
We encourage efforts to promote the use of
nuclear energy for the purposes of development, in
particular in the areas of agriculture and health. Those
are purposes highly beneficial to humanity that will
help us to meet existential challenges.
In conclusion, my delegation will support the
draft resolution to be adopted on the report of the
Agency.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in the debate on this item.
Before giving the floor to the representative of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, who
wishes to speak in explanation of position on the draft
resolution, I remind delegations that explanations of
vote or position are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Sin Song Chol (Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea wishes to stress its position

08-57118

with regard to draft resolution A/63/L.6, entitled
“Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency”.
As described in the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) report and resolution GC(52)/RES/14,
cited in the draft resolution before us, the Agency has
not yet abandoned its prejudiced and unfair position on
the nuclear issue of the Korean peninsula.
The nuclear issue that we are talking about here
is a direct product of the hostile policies of the United
States of America towards the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, and the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is still designated by the United
States as a target for a pre-emptive nuclear strike.
In spite of those undeniable facts, the IAEA has
persistently ignored the root causes of the nuclear issue
and disregarded the honest and sincere efforts of the
Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to settle the issue. Worse yet, the Agency
attempted to infringe upon the sovereignty of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, insisting on
special inspections in our country in concert with the
United States, which generated the nuclear issue. That
biased and unjust attitude of the IAEA only
complicated the process of attempting to resolve the
nuclear issue.
Unless the IAEA takes an impartial position
towards the settlement of the problem, in keeping with
its assigned mission, no measures taken or resolutions
adopted by the IAEA will help to resolve the nuclear
issue. That has been vividly demonstrated throughout
the process of attempting to resolve the nuclear issue.
As a result of those considerations, the delegation
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea strongly
rejects resolution GC(52)/RES/14, adopted at the
General Conference of the IAEA. The delegation of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will closely
monitor the future stands and activities of the IAEA
vis-à-vis the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula.
The Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is consistent in its position that the
nuclear issue should be resolved peacefully through
dialogue and negotiations. As is well known, there is,
on the one hand, the 19 September 2005 Joint
Statement, which was agreed by the six parties at the
Talks and welcomed by the international community,
and, on the other, the principle of action for action,
which constitutes a criterion for assessing its

13

A/63/PV.32

implementation. To date, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has faithfully honoured all of its
commitments under every agreement reached by the
six parties at the Talks, including the Joint Statement,
in conformity with the principle of action for action,
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will
continue to do so. If the other parties at the Talks do
the same by faithfully fulfilling their own obligations,
the process of denuclearizing the Korean peninsula will
advance smoothly.
The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea would like to conclude its
explanation of position by disclosing Japan’s true
mindset regarding the nuclear issue. Although it is a
party to the Talks and loudly pretends that it is
interested in the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula, Japan tends to be negative and insincere
regarding the resolution of the nuclear issue. Indeed,
that attitude is a deliberate, ill-natured move to
hamstring the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula.
As we have witnessed on various occasions
during the current session of the General Assembly,
most countries, in speaking about the nuclear issue,
welcome the recent agreement between the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and the United States and
express the hope that the Six-Party Talks will make
progress. But Japan has been unique in exposing its
stereotypes, assigning blame and complaining
wherever and whenever opportunities to do so are
provided.
It is already widely known that Japan is a very
disruptive country that is trying at any cost to avoid
meeting its obligations and that has only created
artificial obstacles in the process of the Six-Party
Talks. What now concerns Japan is that, if the hostile
policies of the United States towards the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea are terminated, the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula is realized
and lasting peace and stability is achieved in the region
of North-East Asia, Japan will no longer have a pretext
for fulfilling its ambition to reinvade the region. Even
now, the only thing that Japan wants to do is reclaim
the sacred territory of Korea by reviving its militaristic
ghosts and disregarding the devastation wrought by its
tremendous and large-scale past crimes against
humanity, rather than sincerely honour all its
commitments under the agreements reached at the SixParty Talks.

14

The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea firmly believes that, if Japan had
been excluded from the process of the Six-Party Talks,
much greater and better progress would have been made
by now in the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the only speaker in explanation of position.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/63/L.6. Before proceeding to take action on
the draft resolution, I should like to announce that, since
its introduction, the following countries have become
sponsors: Albania, Angola, Armenia, Australia, Belize,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada,
Colombia, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, India, Iraq, Ireland,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, New Zealand, Nigeria, Panama,
Peru, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, the Russian Federation, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, Turkey and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/63/L.6?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 63/6).

A/63/L.6

was

adopted

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
call on those representatives who wish to speak in
exercise of the right of reply. May I remind members
that, in accordance with General Assembly decision
34/401, statements in exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Okuda (Japan): My delegation would like to
exercise its right of reply in response to the explanation
of position made by the representative of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The allegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea that Japan is insincere in pursuing
the settlement of the denuclearization issue of the
Korean peninsula is entirely groundless, and we are
certainly strongly opposed to that statement. The claim
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that
Japan seeks to become a military Power is totally false,
and we categorically reject that allegation. In fact, it
was the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that
created a great threat to peace and security in NorthEast Asia when it announced that it was carrying out a

08-57118

A/63/PV.32

nuclear weapons test and launching ballistic missiles.
The Security Council made it clear in its resolutions
1695 (2006) and 1718 (2006), which it adopted
unanimously, that those acts constituted a clear threat
to international peace and security. The sanctions
imposed on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
have the backing of the entire international community.
In order to remove the military threat it has created, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must continue
to make efforts towards full implementation of the
joint statements of the Six-Party Talks of September
2005. And the statement that our delegation made on
the draft resolution earlier today remains valid, which
is to say that the nuclear development undertaken by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a threat
to the peace and security, not only of Japan but also of
East Asia and the entire international community. And,
therefore, in order to solve this issue, Japan will
continue to very sincerely pursue the settlement of this
problem.
Mr. Sin Song Chol (Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea) (spoke in French): The delegation
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea believes
that the Japanese delegation has not yet understood or
grasped the thrust of the statement that we made as an
explanation of position before the vote. In fact, it is our
duty to make known to the international community
what the attitude of Japan is to this nuclear problem.
For that purpose, my delegation would like to simply
mention some specific cases that show clearly and
accurately how Japan is trying in vain and futilely to
halt the process of the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula.
(spoke in English)
Japan is now behaving very shamelessly in
insisting that it will not fulfil its commitment to make
economic compensation as agreed upon by the six
parties at the Talks. Japan has never tried to implement
the issues discussed and agreed upon by the six parties
but has instead conducted hectic diplomacy to persuade
the United States not to cross the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea off its list of State sponsors of
terrorism. Unfortunately, these efforts ended with an
official announcement by the United States
Government, removing the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea forever from the list. By insisting
that it will not participate in the aforementioned
economic compensation, Japan is deliberately
neglecting and disturbing the October 3 agreement. It

08-57118

is the ulterior intention of Japan to create hurdles and
complexities in the path of the Talks at any cost, in a
bid to block resolution of the issue and steadily put
strain on the situation on the Korean peninsula.
The Japanese delegation has also mentioned the
Security Council resolution, which, I would like to
remind every delegation present in this Hall, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
categorically rejected. In order to understand the
motivation of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to reject that resolution, it is very important for
everyone gathered here to understand what is at the
root of that so-called resolution. I would like to remind
all delegations that that Security Council resolution is a
product of the hostile United States policy toward the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. That is why
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
categorically rejected that resolution, which it
considers a product of United States anti-Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea policies.
Mr. Okuda (Japan): I will be very brief. I would
like to draw the attention of the Members of the United
Nations to the statement that was just made by the
delegation of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, in which it was stated that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea rejected — I repeat,
rejected — the Security Council resolutions, which
were adopted unanimously. And I think this says much
about the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
sincerity on this issue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of agenda item 80?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 105
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(g) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Conferences
Note by the Secretary-General (A/63/107)
The President (spoke in Spanish): As indicated
in document A/63/107, since the terms of office of
Burundi, El Salvador, France, Lesotho, Malaysia, the
Philippines and the Russian Federation will expire on
31 December 2008, it will be necessary for the

15

A/63/PV.32

President of the General Assembly to appoint, during
the current session, seven members in order to fill the
resulting vacancies. These members will serve for a
period of three years, beginning on 1 January 2009.

We have thus concluded this stage of our
consideration of sub-item (g) of agenda item 105.

After consultations with the Chairmen of the
Groups of African States, Asian States, Eastern
European States and Western European and other
States, I have appointed the Congo, France, Malaysia,
Mozambique, the Philippines and the Russian
Federation as members of the Committee on
Conferences for a period of three years, beginning on
1 January 2009.

Implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations

May I take it that the General Assembly takes
note of these appointments?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Regarding the
remaining vacant seat to be filled by a Latin American
or Caribbean State, I will continue to hold
consultations with that regional Group.

16

Agenda item 109

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now turn to agenda item 109 entitled
“Implementation of the resolutions of the United
Nations”. It is my understanding that there is no
request to consider this item at the present session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item to the
sixty-fourth session and to include it in the provisional
agenda of the sixty-fourth session?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): This
concludes of our consideration of agenda item 109.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

08-57118
