TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR
nd
MEETING: 25 NOVEMBER 1971

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1602) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption

...........,...,..........,...........

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
fal Letter dated 24 November 1971 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/10396);
fb) Fourth report of the Committee established in pursuance of Security Council
resolution 253 (1968) (S/10229 and Add.1 and 2) . . . . . . . . . . , t . . , . . .

1

of the agenda

S/PV.1602

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SIXTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SECOND

Held in New York on Thursday,

25 November

PTEsident: Mr. E. KUI/AGA (Poland).

1971, at 11 a.m.

we wished the United Nations to be aware of significant
developments.

Presenr:
The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, SomaIia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.

2. There has never been any doubt in this forum that the
settlement of the Rhodesian problem is primarily a matter
for the British Government, Indeed, every resolution
adopted on the subject has explicitly reaffirmed it. Nevertheless, it has also always been recognized that the question
was one of legitimate and continuing concern to the rest of
the world community. For that reason, if for no other, it
seems to my Government right and fitting that we should
inform the Security Council a-t virtually the same moment
as my Foreign Secretary is informing the House of
Commons of the very latest developments, of the present
situation and of future prospects as we see them.

Provisionalagenda(S/Agenda/l602)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia :
(al Letter dated 24 November 1971 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/ 10396);
lb) Fourth report of the Committee established in
pursuance
of Security
Council
resolution
253 (1968) (S/10229 and Add.1 and 2).

3. I am afraid it will take some time. The events of the
past few days can hardly be understood without reference
to the past, and they will have consequences of considerable importance for the future. The proposals for the future
of Rhodesia’ that I am going to describe are inevitably
complex and detailed where they apply to matters of a
constitutional nature. However, I am sure that the Council
will wish for a full account, with nothing of importance
omitted. It is obviously essential that, whatever judgement
individual members of the Council may ultimately make,
they should each be in possession of all the relevant
information.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda wasadopted.
Question concerning the situation in Soutl!ern Rhodesia:
{uj Letter dated 24 November 1971 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Presidentof’the Security Council.(S/10396);
(b) Fourth report of the Committee establishedin pursuance of Security Council resolution 253 (1968)
(S/l 0229 and Add.1 and 2)”
1. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): I should like first
of all to thank you, Mr, President, and all my colleagues for

coming

MEETING

here at such relatively short notice so that I may

inform the Council at the earliest possible moment of the

most recent developments with regard to Rhodesia. As YOU
know, it has always been the policy of my Government to
give the United Nations the fullest possible account of the
discharge of our responsibilities towards that Territory. We
have done this both on occasions when we Were seeking
action
by the Council in support of our own endeavours
and on occasions when no action was called for but when

4. I have only one other preliminary point, but it is
important. It is that the fact that agreement has been
reached on certain proposals does not in itself represent any
change in the present situation. This is the first step only.
Finality will not be reached until the people of Rhodesia as
a whole have had a full and free opportunity to demonstrate whether the proposals are acceptable to them. During
the time that this test of acceptability will take, there will
be ample opportunity for reflection, analysis and judgemerit by all those who interest themselves seriously in this
problem. Meanwhile, as far as the United Nations is
concerned and indeed as far as British legislation is
concerned, including the sanctions legislation Which
has
recently been renewed, the position is unchanged. Indeed
the proposals themselves end with the statement that
nothing in them “shall be regarded as implying any change
h the current attitude of either side to the present status of
Rhodesia or of the 1969 Constitution”.
5. When we last debated the question of Rhodesia a year
ago, in 1970, I remember that I described how the present
1 See Offictil Records of the Security Council, Twenty-sixth
Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1971,
document S/lG405.

* Subsequently issued as Official Records of the Security Council,
Twenty-sixth
Year, Special Supplement Nos. 2 and Corrigendum
nrtd 2A.

1

British Prime Minister on HMS Tiger in 1966, and al
those discussed in October 1968 aboard HMS Feu?d
would hardly have been possible. Were it not so, the 1’
Constitution could hardly have come into effect. Howe
as we all know, those events did take place, and-disag
able as it may be to have to admit the fact-the Bn:
Government did not have the power to prevent them o
impose its will.

British Government, as soon as it came into office, had
made clear its intention, which had formed part of its
commitment to the British electorate during the preceding
elections, “to make a further effort to see whether a
settlement of the Rhodesian problem on the basis of the
five principles is possible” [1556th meeting, para. 1321. In
a moment I shall outline the result of that effort. But if it is
to be understood at all, it must be seen in context. I must
therefore claim your indulgence, Mr. President, and that of
the Council if I rehearse very briefly the course of events
leading up to the ,present situation. The present situation is
only fully understandable against that background.

9. Perhaps at this point I ought to pause a moment to I
yet once more with the argument that has so often b
raised here before-namely, the thesis that the Brj
Government had only to use a little force and ail wo
have been settled satisfactorily. This is a familiar issuef
and has been argued out fully. Many members of
Council will have heard our side of the caseably set our
my predecessor. This is that the application of force 1
neither feasible nor desirable. It was not feasible beca
the historical fact that Rhodesia had been virtually a
governing and possessed its own forces for nearly ha\
century would have required an invasion in the middle (
continent: it wasnot desirable becausethe results ofviol
action are incalculable. The launching of what would h
been war wasnever justifiable.

6. From 1894 until 1923 Southern Rhodesia wasadministered by the British South Africa Company, a company
established by Royal Charter. In 1898 both executive and
legislative councils were established and by 1907 there was
a majority of elected members, representing the white
settlers, on the legislative council, In 1920 that council
passed a resolution requesting the establishment of responsible government “forthwith”. The issue was put to, the
white electorate as one of two choices: responsible selfgovernment, or entry into the Union of South Africa as the
fifth province. At a referendum in 1922, 8,744 votes were
cast for self-government, and 5,989 for the alternative.
Accordingly, after the 1922 referendum Southern Rhodesia
was formally annexed to His Majesty’s Dominion as a
colony on 12 September 1923; under the Southern
Rhodesia Constitution Letters Patent of 1923, issued on
1 October 1923, the colony was granted full internal
self-government, subject to a formal reservation to the
British Government of legislation affecting the interests of
the African population. In general, the British Government
conducted international relations on behalf of Southern
Rhodesia; but Commonwealth relations, trade relations and
relations with colonial Territories in Africa were mainly
conducted by the Southern Rhodesian Government directly. That state of affairs lasted until 1953 when for a
further ten years Southern Rhodesia formed part, together
with Northern Rhodesia-now Zambia-and Nyasalandnow Malawi-of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland.
When the Federation was dissolved on 31 December 1963
the Southern Rhodesian Government resumed the powers
similar to those which had been transferred to the Federal
Government in 1953,

10. At this point, too, we have to consider objecti\
what the effect has been of mandatory United Naci.
sanctions, for which the British Government origin:
asked in order to assist it in bringing the rebellion to
end. We for our part have played our full role in apply
those sanctions and we are grateful for the support weh
had from the United Nations. It has been the Bril
delegation which has played the primary part in bring
suspected casesof evasion to the notice of the sancli$
Committee. It has been the British delegation, too, wfa
has constantly urged that Committee to draw up constr
tive and helpful guidelines for other Governments in !
implementation of their own sanctions legislation, parti
larly in respect of the factors they could usefully con&
when dealing with cargoes going to or coming fri
Mozambique and South Africa which could perhap%
destined for or orginate from Rhodesia. These sanctir
have not been without their effect, as was recognizedwl
the sanctions Committee produced its last report. ‘IF
have severely hampered the expansion of the Rhodes.
economy, and, as Mr. Smith has himself admitted, tl
have compelled Rhodesia to buy at a premium and seti1
discount. I feel sure that this has played its part in nrai;~
the Rhodesian authorities more willing to negotiate rr
satisfactory basis.

7. It will be clear from this brief account, as indeed it was
clearly brought out in the early debates on Rhodesia in the
United Nations in 1962, that Rhodesia was not an ordinary
colonial situation in what one might call the classic sense.
Britain has never in fact administered Rhodesia directly by
physical presence, Thus the leverage that the British
Government might have exerted-the direct exercise of
power by a physical presence-was not available to us, and
has not been for almost half a century. At all times since
1923 it has been necessary on internal questions for the
British Government to work by agreement with those who
control power in Rhodesia.

11. But, as was also recognized by the sanctions C0mr;
tee, they have not bitten so deep asto compel Mr. Smith
capitulate and to accept an imposed settlement. Here tc
therefore, just as the British Government had no power1
impose its will, and disagreeable as this too may be tolrzi
to admit, even with the support of United Nab*::
sanctions the way was not open to impose a settlement.

8. Of course, what I have just said is both familiar and
obvious enough. Were it not so, the British Government
would evidently never have encountered the illegal Declaration of Independence in 1965. Were it not so, the rejection
by Mr. Ian Smith of the proposals worked out with the

12. This, then, has been the position. For Six YeSrS s
have been faced with an internal situation in Rhodesia !
which we disapproved but which we were powerless 1
influence directly. Although international disapproval b:
been manifested strongly, its main effect hasbeen net c’

2

the present rulers of Rhodesia but on the Rhodesian
Africans. Was there any escape from a deteriorating
situation? And what might be an acceptable alternative?
But, before we come to that question, let us look a little
closer at what would be likely to happen if no acceptable
way out could be found.

can only harm the Rhodesian Africans, which can only turn
Rhodesia into a dependency of South Africa, Whatever
doubts we may have had about the good faith of the other.
side, however gradual progress may be, the effort is worth
making. For this is the question that we face: can we stop
this process, this steady erosion? Can we pull Rhodesia
back from the edge of the abyss? Can we find a foothold, a
platform at which we can halt this slide and from there
move on to racial equality, indeed to a multiracial society?
Can we give the Rhodesian Africans a chance to get the
jobs, to get the education, to get the wealth, to move on to
run their country?

13. There is no doubt how the development of the
situation should be measured: it is in practical terms. Of
course, it can be pointed out that there is a theoretical
deterioration in that any and every step away from legality,
as represented by the illegal Declaration of Independence
and by the 1969 Constitution, was a deterioration. But
there is more to it than that. Racial discrimination has been
increasing steadily, and on the basis of the present
Constitution parity is a very remote prospect and majority
rule is totally excluded. The 1961 Constitution, though not
designed as an independence constitution, at least provided
for African political advance and contained a Declaration of
Rights to safeguard the legitimate interests of all the people
of Rhodesia. The 1969 Constitution explicitly denies any
possible advance beyond parity to majority rule, and has a
non-justifiable declaration of rights, denying the courts the
right to inquire into or pronounce upon the validity of any
law on the grounds that it is inconsistent with the
Declaration of Rights. Expenditure on education of Africans has been limited to 2 per cent of the Rhodesian
budget. Those and many more instances of growing racial
discrimination against Rhodesian Africans may be found in
any survey of recent developments.

17. That, therefore, is how my Government sees its
obligation to try to find a solution. That is how we
interpret the call that was most recently affirmed by this
Council in paragraph 2 of Security Council resolution
288 (1970) which calls upon
“the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, as the administering Power in the discharge of its
responsibility, to take urgent and effective measures to
bring to an end the illegal rebellion in Southern Rhodesia
and enable the people to exercise their right to selfdetermination, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and in conformity with the objectives of
General Assembly resolution 15 14 (XV) of 14 December
1960”.
18. In seeking to find this opening, my Government, as it
has often made clear, has set itself, in the form of
guidelines, five principles to which it has consistently held.
These are that in any settlement {a) the principle and
intention of unimpeded progress to majority ,rule would
have to be maintained and guaranteed;(b) there would also
have to be guarantees against retrogressive amendment of
the Constitution; (cl there would have to be imtnediate
improvement in the political status of the African population; (d) there would have to be progress towards ending
racial discrimination; and (e/ the British Government would
need to be satisfied that any basis proposed for iudependence was acceptable to the people of Rhodesia as a whole.
These five principles have been reiterated by successive
British Governments at every stage, and they still apply
today. It is of course the fifth and last which governs the
four preceding principles. The process of hammering out an
agreement has been slow and difficult, but we now consider
that we have agreed proposals which accord with the first
four principles which we believe we can now put before the
people of Rhodesia, and ask them whether they want to
accept them or not. It is for them to judge-they will have
to live under the system, they will have to work it, they will
obtain its benefits. My Government believes it provides a
way forward.

14. Whatever the reasons for this-and it is common
ground that fear and ignorant prejudice are at the roots of
racial discriminationTthere
is no doubt that the lot of the
Rhodesian Africans is bad and is steadily getting worse.As
things stand in Rhodesia they have little chance to get the
education to improve themselves, the political freedom to
express themselves, or the economic opportunities to raise
their standard of living, No one can really offer the African
any alternative, unless it is to sacrifice his life in a recourse
to violent protest.
15. In these circumstances, the atmosphere of Rhodesia is
coming increasingly to resemble that of South Africa.
Forced economically and psychologically to become dependent on its powerful southern neighbour, the white
population of Rhodesia seems to have become increasingly
influenced by the same fears and prejudices which have
shaped the attitudes to the black African population that
are prevalent in South Africa. Thus we are faced with the
steady, perhaps accelerating, downhill run towards the
installation of apartheid in Rhodesia; to a further deterioration of the position of the Rhodesian Africans in education,
in employment, in land-holding, in social life and in any
kind of influence. The process has not yet gone beyond
recall but it is only too likely that it will continue
unchecked if something is not done to find another way
out.

19. We should like to have been able to offer them
something more of our own making. Enough is known of
the history of British decolonization to show that we are
here de,aling with an exceptional and not a typical case.We
have to take account not only of developments in 1923,
but of the situation as it has evolved since 1965 and is
evolving now. We have to recognize also that this is
probably the last chance. We consider, however, that the
agreed proposals that I am about to describe do give

16. Paced with this prospect, it is small wonder that many
people have felt that every effort ought to be made to try
to reverse this descent downbill. There have been pleas
from the most diverse quarters that further efforts should
be made to reach an agreement-to halt this decline which
3

Rhodesians the opportunity to move forward again. It is
they who must give the answer.

Every effort will be made by the commission to ensure tlg~
all Rhodesian Africans understand the proposed terms and
every Rhodesian who wishes to do so will be given eve@
opportunity to express his views to the commission, Thus
all urban centres will be visited, and rural meetingplacs
will, where necessary, be visited twice; the first time to
explain the proposals and to answer questions, the sccunj
to assessthe views expressed. The meetings held in the
tribal trust lands will be arranged to allow the tribe
Africans to expresstheir views themselves; consultation wiB
not be confined to Chiefs. Anyone who wisheswill be able
to give his evidence in camera. The test will inch&
Rhodesians who live outside the Territory.

20. I now come to the proposals for a settlement that
were agreed between Sir Alec Douglas-Home and Mr. Smith
in Salisbury on 24 November and have since been accepted
on this basis by the British Cabinet. I intend to make
available to all members of this Council the full text of
these proposals. Meanwhile, I shall do my best to give an
extensive description of them together with some explanation-since some of them are very complicated-and an
indication in each case of the manner in which they
correspond with the five principles to which I have already
made reference.

25. We ‘come now to the central part of the proposalis,
namely the constitutional arrangements, which are vital jn
terms of the first principle, unimpeded progress to majorhr;
rule. In these proposals we have made a real change &
direction-a substantial change in direction away from the
present state of affairs as embodied in the 1969 Corn&
tution.

21. First of all there is the test of acceptability. Since the
proposals in their entirety are conditional upon the British
Government being satisfied that they are acceptable to the
people of Rhodesia as a whole, the first point to which we
address ourselves is the test of acceptability. Indeed this is
the first point dealt with in the agreed proposals. It has
been agreed that the British Government will appoint a
commission to ascertain directly front all sections of the
population of Rhodesia their views on the acceptability of
the proposals and to report thereon to the British Government. The chairman will be a much esteemed and senior
member of our highest appellate court, the House of Lords,
This is Lord Pearce, a former Lord of Appeal in Ordinary.
In addition there will be two deputy chairmen and a
number of commissioners. They will visit the main centres
of population, councils in the rural areas and traditional
meeting places in the tribal trust lands.

26. The first stipulation of the proposals regarding the
House of Assembly reads as follows:
“The existing provisions governing the increase of
African representation in the House will be repealed , . .*l.
They will be replaced by the detailed arrangements that I
shall now try to summarize, though these will of courseba
set out in full in the published text of the proposals. 1 am
afraid they are rather complex, and I must ask you to
follow me in an exercise in arithmetic.

22. In the period before and during the test of acceptability, normal political activities will be permitted to the
satisfaction of this commission provided they are conducted in a peaceful and democratic manner. Radio and
television time will be made available to political parties
represented in the House of Assembly.

27. First of all, the House of Assembly. The base,line iz
the composition of the House of Assembly asit is now and
as it would be at the moment of the coming into force oi
the proposals-in other words, after the test of acceptability
and legislation by the Rhodesian and British Parliamerns.
This base line is a total of 66 members, made up of SO
Europeans, elected by voters on a European roll; 8 Airi.
cans, elected by voters on the African lower roll; arid
8 Africans, indirectly elected by electoral colleges of chiefs,
headmen and elected councillors.

23. The commission will carry out its inquiries in public or
in private as it deems appropriate. There will be immunity
for witnesses heard by the commission in respect of their
evidence and freedom for persons resident in Rhodesia,
whatever their political views or affiliations, to enable them
to appear before the commission. All Rhodesian Government employees will be permitted to express their viewsto
the commission. Persons in detention or under restriction
will be similarly permitted. Arrangements will be made in
London and elsewhere as necessary for Rhodesians resident
abroad to submit their viewsto the commission.

28. Under the new proposals, the Africans will proceed lo
parity of representation in the House of Assembly b!means of additional seats created on the basis of progressive
increases in the number of Africans registered on a new
African roll to be known as the African higher roll, Which
will have the same qualifications as the European roll. \Vhen
the number of African higher roll voters equals 6 per ccat
of the total European roll voters, the Africans will receive
two additional seats; the first two seatsthus created wig be
African higher roll seats-i.e. directly elected-and the nest
two will be indirectly elected under the existing system and
so on alternatively until 34 seats have been created-that is
to say, 18 African higher roll seats and 16 indirectly elected
seats. At this point parity will have been reached and the
House of Assembly will be made up as follows: 50
Europeans members, 8 Africans elected by African lcw?r
roll voters, 24 Africans indirectly elected (i.e. the Prasenl
8 plus 16 new ones) and 18 directly elected by African
higher roll voters.

24. The test of acceptability, as I have described it,
represents the means of fulfilment of the essential fifth
principle. It will be a full, free, and fair ascertainment and it
will be under the direct control of the British Government,
not of the Rhodesians. It will be carried out by persons
whose experience and whose independence of the Rhodesian authorities can be relied upon. The methods used
will be exhaustive and will not be confined to routine and
traditional assemblies, such as the indabas of tribal chiefs.
Under the method agreed it will not just be, asit would in
the case of a referendum, a question of seeking views but
rather of explaining the proposals before seeking views.
4

29. Perhaps at this point I should digress to explain the
nature of the indirectly elected African seats. These
members are elected by electoral colleges, consisting of
chiefs, headmen and elected councillors of African district
councils within the rural area. There are now some 150
councils and new ones are being established. The role and
influence of both the chiefs and the district commissioners
in them are being gradually reduced. Thus the councillors
of whom there are 760, many of whom are elected, already
outnumber the chiefs and headmen, of whom there are
706, who sit by virtue of their office. There were
close-fought contests in a number of the electoral colleges
in the 1970 elections. The indirectly elected representatives
will ensure that the rural Africans, few of whom yet qualify
for the electoral rolls, will have a growing voice in
Parliament as well as the urban Africans. It is, I think,
worth noting that even under the present arrangements the
eight indirectly elected African members have invariably
voted with their directly elected African colleagues on all
important issues.
30. At the point that parity has been reached with 50
Europeans and 50 African Rhodesians, a referendum will be
held among all the African voters, in which the Europeans
will not take part, to decide the future of the indirectly
elected African seats, of which there will be 24 at this
point. The referendum will be to decide between three
choices: whether these 24 seats should remain indirectly
elected; or whether they should be re-allocated as to one
quarter to the African lower roll, making a total of 14 for
that roll, and as to three quarters to the higher African roll,
making a total of 36 for that roll; or whether they should
all be reallocated to the higher African roll, making a total
of 42 on that roll,

33. At this point perhaps I should say something about
the electoral arrangements. As regards the African higher
roll the number of voters registered on this and the
European rolls will be reviewed at six-monthly intervals by
the Registrar-General so that the necessary arrangements
can be made for the addition at the next general election of
any additional seats corresponding to the increase in the
registered voters. This will mean that the delimitation
commission, whosejob it is to draw up revised constituency
boundaries, will be sitting almost permanently, Under the
electoral law it will be required to ensure that each
constituency contains as nearly as possible equal numbers
of voters. The effect of this is that the country will be
divided into a growing number-18 by the time parity is
reached-of single member African higher roll constituencies, in addition to the European and African lower roll
constituencies.
34. For the European and African lower roll existing
arrangements will be retained-i.e. 50 single member European constituencies and 8 African constituencies. As regards the common roll there will be a single national
constituency for all these seats.
35. In addition to the House of Representatives there will
continue to be a Senate. This will remain constituted as at
present. Its powers, which are limited, will not be affected
by the proposals except that as a consequence of the new
Declaration of Rights enforceable by the courts the Senate
Legal Comnrittee will become unnecessary and will be
abolished.
36. We now come to the Declaration of Rights, which is a
very important element in the proposals. There will be a
new Declaration of Rights affording protection to the
fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual and
conferring a right of access to the High Court for the
purpose of obtaining redress for any person who alleges
that its provisions have been contravened in relation to him.
In particular, on discrimination the Declaration will reenact the safeguard relating to discrimination contained in
section 67 (4) of the 1961 Constitution.

3 1. The next step in the progress from parity to majority
rule will take place at the next general election after parity
when 10 common roll seats will be created. They will be
filed by election from a roll consisting of the voters on
both the African higher roll and the European roll. Before
this takes place an independent commission will have
decided whether the creation of such seats is acceptable to
the Rhodesian people and, if not, what alternative arrangements would command support, But any decision not to
create these common roll seats would be regarded as a
constitutional amendment and therefore covered by the
guarantees subject to African control which I shall describe
later.

37. The other main constitutional provisions which I
should like to bring to your notice are those relating to
amendment of the Constitution. The specially entrenched
provisions of the Constitution wiIl include among other
things both the new provisions to give effect to the
proposals as regards increased African representation and
the new Declaration of Rights, including the provisions for
its enforcement by the High Court. Furthermore, certain
key provisions of the Electoral Act regarding voting
qualifications will be subject to the same requirements
regarding amendment as the specially entrenched provisions
of the Constitution,

32. Therefore, as soon as the African Rhodesians registered on the African higher roll outnumber the white voters
on the European roll it will be possible for them to secure
the majority of these common roll seats giving them a
majority in the Assembly. The size of the House of
Assembly will remain constant after the creation of the
common roll seats. My Government is satisfied that these
constitutiona proposals provide for unimpeded progressto
majority rule in accordance with the first principle. Wehave
eliminated the existing provision that there can never be
majority role and by getting rid of the income tax regulator
we have eliminated a device which could be used to block
Africans getting on to the franchise, and provided a
straightforward way by which Africans can advance to
Parity and beyond.

38. Throughout the period up to parity the blocking
mechanism for the specially entrenched clauses of the
Constitution will be two-thirds of the Assembly and the
Senate, voting separately, plus majorities of the European
and African Members of the Lower House, again voting
separately.
39. As I have gone along I have tried to explain these
proposals in terms of the five principles. But I would be the
5

first to admit that we are dealing with complicated matters
and I think therefore that at this point it might be useful to
summarize how the first four principles have been met.

is to be an African, will also have to be agreed with the
British Government. It will be established as soon as
possible after the test of acceptability has been completed.
Its findings will be published and the Bhodesian authorities
have given assurancethat they will, except where there are
considerations which any Government would regard as
overriding, commend to their Parliament such changes in
existing legislation as are required to give effect to its
recommendations.

40. As regards the first principle the provision in the
present Constitution preventing any increase in African
seats beyond the parity will be repealed. Further, the
provision for increased African representation linked to the
number of voters on the African higher roll, and the
addition of common roll seats after parity has been
reached, will ensure unimpeded progress to majority rule.
This is something which has never before been agreed by
the Rhodesian regime and represents the major breakthrough that we have sought.

46. There are certain other provisions in the agreed
proposals which have a direct bearing on this important
question of the status and rights of the Africans. As you
will realize when you see the text of these proposals, I am
taking them slightly out of order but I think it is
convenient to do so because of their connexion. The
Rhodesian authorities have agreed on the release shortly of
a significant number of detainees and restrictees. As part of
a return to normality, they will review all cases of those
detainees and restrictees not already released. The further
special review will be carried out by the existing tribunal, of
which the Chairman is a judge of the Rhodesian High
Court, as soon as possible after the test of acceptability has
been completed. The recommendations of the tribunal will
be binding on the detaining or restricting authority. For the
purposes of this special review an observer appointed by the
British Government in agreement with the Rhodesian
Government will be entitled to be present. The Rhodesian
Government will also allow the return of Rhodesian exiles
and prepare for the ending of the state of emergency. As
vacancies occur in the Rhodesian Public Service they will be
filled according to the criteria of merit and suitability,
regardless of race.

41. With regard to the second principle, that there will
also have to be “guarantees against retrogressive amendment of the Constitution”, it will be seen that in all casesin
the progress to majority rule it will be necessary to obtain
the approval of a majority of the African representatives in
the House of Assembly for any amendment in the specially
entrenched clausesin the Constitution. No amendments to
specially entrenched provisions will be introduced until
after the creation of the first two, directly-elected, African
higher roll seatsor until three years have elapsed, whichever
is the sooner. In other words, there will always up to parity
be a blocking mechanism in the hand of the directly-elected
Africans. After parity a two-thirds majority of the House of
Assembly will need the support of at least 17 Africans,
42. As regards the third principle, that there would have
to be “immediate improvement in the political status of the
African population”, the creation of the new African higher
roll will bring it the prospect in the near future of increased
African representation in the House of Assembly. It will be
seen from the text of the proposals that there will be an
extension in the franchise qualifications for the African
lower roll. This will enfranchise a large additional number
of Africans. Further benefits will follow in connexion with
the development aid to which I shall refer in a moment,

47. ‘ Finally, the proposals contain important provisions
about land and development.
48. In the African area there are at present approximately
5 million acres of unoccupied land which is available for
settlement by Africans: 3.5 million acres in the tribal trust
lands and 1.5 million in the purchase area. Provision exists
under which significant additional land can be made
available and the Rhodesian Government intends to make it
available as the need arises. Both Governments agree that
they will immediately devote a proportion of an increased
aid programme to the improvement of areas currently
occupied or intended for occupation by Africans.

43. As regards the fourth principle, that there would have
to be “progress towards ending racial discrimination”,
measures include a new and strengthened declaration of
rights which will be enforceable in the Courts.
44. This brings us to the next point in the agreed
proposals. There will be a review of existing legislation.

49. With the exception of certain forest and national park
areas the development of which may involve the removal of
a limited number of occupants without established rights,
the only two casesin which the Rhodesian Government is
considering the eviction of Africans from land in the
European area are Epworth and CbishawashaMissions. The
Rhodesian Government has given assurancethat it willnot
take steps to evict African tenants or other occupants from
these two areas or from other areas in which they are living
until such time as the commission to review racial discrimination, to which I have already referred, has reported and
its recommendations have been fully considered.

45. The Rhodesian authorities have intimated their firm
intention within the spirit of the proposals to make
progress towards ending racial discrimination. An independent commission will be set up to examine the problem of
racial discrimination. It will be required to consider existing
legislation and to make recommendations to the Rhodesian
Government on ways of making progress towards ending
racial discrimination. There will be included in the functions of the commission a special duty to scrutinize the
provisions of the Land Tenure Act and to consider the
possible creation of an independent and permanent land
board to preside over the long-term resolution of the
problems involved. The terms of reference of the commission have been agreed with the British Government and the
composition, which will be of three members one of whom

50. There will be a development programme to increase
significantly educational and job opportunities for Africans
in order to enable them to play a growing part in the
6

), country’s future development. The British Government will
1, provide up to %S million per year for a period of 10 years in
1 capital aid and technical assistance to be applied to
purposes and projects to be agreed with the Rhodesian
Government, to be matched appropriately by sums provided by the Rhodesian Government for this development
programme. This will be in addition to the annual expenditure currently planned by the Rhodesian Government for
African education and housing and for development projects in the tribal trust lands and African purchase areas.
Part of this development programme will be devoted to the
establishment of new irrigation schemes,.intensive cultivation projects and the improvement of communications and
industrial projects in the tribal trust lands and African
purchase areas. As regards education, the moneys will be
used to improve and expand facilities for Africans in
agriculture, technical and vocational training, teacher-training and training in administration and for other educational
purposes in the field of primary, secondary and higher
education. The parallel development of the two elements in
programme wiIl thus help to ensure that new job
opportunities for Africans will become available as the
economy expands and additional educational facilities are
provided for them.

this

SI . The Council has listened very patiently to these
extremely complicated proposals, and members may well
now be asking themselves: what exactly do they add up
to? Where do we go from here?

Government has enacted the necessary legislation and taken
the necessary steps to give effect to the proposals that the,
final section of the proposals, which envisages the conferring of legal independence upon Rhodesia and the lifting
of sanctions, will come into effect.
55. Until that stage is reached, the situation will remain
exactly as it is now. No legislation will be required or will
be undertalcen by my Government and all existing measures
will remain in foTce.
56. There comes a moment in every question when we
need to stand back and look at the problem as a whole.
Every one of us will be conscious of his own responsibilities
and of the wider context of principle and of reality in
which he seek9 to carry them out. Those who have
responsibility with regard to Africa stand, as a British Prime
Minister pointed out nearly 10 years ago, in the path of a
wind of change. For many years that wind has blown
strongly and steadily. If it has not yet succeeded in bringing
every ship home to the right port, that is not to say that it
could have done so better had it blown at hurricane force.
Our belief, as is well known, has always been in evolution,
not revolution: we have always understood the impatience
that this has sometimes generated, though we might at
times have asked for a more generous understanding of our
motives.
57. At this moment our task might be said to be to ensure
that the wind of change, which is in danger of shifting to
the wrong quarter, can once more blow steadily in the right
direction. This question is far too serious for us to indulge
in wishful thinking. It is far too complex for strong words,
though strong words would indeed be appropriate to the
present plight and likely sequel for the African majority in
Southern Rhodesia if the status quo continues. The dark
cloud of growing racial discrimination is creeping northwards and seems bound to turn Rhodesia into a satellite of
the apartheid system unless it is halted and reversed.

52. The answer, as I tried to make clear at the beginning
of my long account, is that we do not go anywhere until we
how
the views of the people of Rhodesia as a whole. As
Sir Alec Douglas-Home said recently in Parliament, the only
reason we are in this business at ail is that we want to help
the Africans towards a better future than they are
othenvise likely to have. The central issue of the agreed
proposals is their advancement-their advancement in edu.
cation, their social advancement, their economic advancement and their political advancement. Their participation in
every respect is essential to the successof the proposals. It
therefore follows that their acceptance of the proposals is a
sine quanon of the whole exercise which cannot begin until
this is ascertained.
53. It is the view of my Government that the agreed
proposals present an acceptable alternative to the status
9~0, a healthy reversal of the present increasingly unhealthy trend, and an honourable solution fully in accurdante with the five principles to the human and political
probIems involved. If this were not our view we should not
be recommending these proposals. But we do not pretend to
have the last word, We leave that to the Rhodesian people
themselves.
54. We are therefore for the present and perhaps for the
next few months confronted only with a hypothesis. If the
evidence-which wilI be fulIy, freely and fairly collected-is
to the effect that the Rhodesian people as a whole do not
accept these proposals, then they will have been made in
vain.
If it is found that they do accept them, then we shall
be able to press ahead with the appropriate legislation and
with making them work. It is only at that stage and when
the British Government is fully satisfied that the Rhodesian

58, In contrast to this, any lightening of the clouds might
seem like a new dawn. In some ways it could be and it
should be, The development plans that are an essential part
of the agreed proposals will immediately release unprecedently large funds to improve the lot of Rhodesian Africans
in the most immediately beneficial way: that is to say, in
their living conditions and in the education and further job
opportunities that will enable them as individuals and
families to raise their standard of living and achievement.
But more imporimt, if the Rhodesian Africans seize the
opportunities which this economic and educational advancement will provide, the prospect will be open to them
of achieving political freedom and responsibility for deciding their own fate, for playing a full and eventually decisive
part in a multiracial society.
59. This is the opportunity which is being offered. It is for
the people of Rhodesia as a whole to say whether it is
acceptable to them. We do not know what they will say. We
shall not change our policy with regard to the present
Rhodesian rkgime until that opinion has been ascertained.
With regard to that ascertainment we shall have nothing to
hide and we shal.l give a fulI and complete account of its
results. When these are known, and not before, we shall

7

know whether we can go forward. This is the way in which
we are carrying out our special responsibility for Rhodesia,
in a way that all may see.

demand. But instead of that, Lord Home and the racist, Ian
Smith, present the Zimbabwe people with a declaration of
rights.

60. Mr. MALIK

65. The contents of the HomeSmith agreement are not
yet fully known. We objected yesterday to a meeting being
specially convened today to listen to the representative of
the United Kingdom here. We insisted that the United
Kingdom delegation distribute the text of that agreement
so that members of the Security Council should have the
opportunity to study it and expresstheir opinions. But the
representative of the United Kingdom insisted, with the
support of some of his friends, that a meeting of the
Security Council must be held today in a ridiculous and
hasty manner, ignoring the national feelings of the American people and their important holiday, Thanksgiving Day.
Thus the members of the Security Council do not know the
contents of the Home-Smith agreement. None of us have
read that agreement. But the essential meaning is obvious
from the information we have heard today and from the
reports in the American press. It is a deal between an
English lord and a Southern Rhodesian racist, the objective
of which is to maintain for an indefinite period the racist
order existing in Southern Rhodesia, and to cover up that
order with an external window-dressing of unlawful
“legality”.

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): The statement made by the

representative of the United Kingdom, the representative of
a State which is a permanent member of the Security
Council and the administering Power bearing a special
responsibility for the situation in Southern Rhodesia,
concerned the important question of the implementatioh of
Security Council decisions on Southern Rhodesia. It will, of
course, be studied by the delegation of th.e Soviet Union
and we reserve the right to speak on it in more detail at a
later stage of the discussion of the item on Southern
Rhodesia on the agenda of the Security Council.
61. However, we would like to dwell at this point on some
aspects of that statement and of the agreement which was
worked out in Salisbury and which, it seems, is going to be
called the “HomeSmith agreement”.
62. Firstly, attention must be drawn ‘to the fact, widely
known and obvious to us all, that the talks wereheld with
an illegal regime which has been condemned by the United
Nations as a usurpatory and racist regime. The Home-Smith
talks were held in defiance of a direct appealby the General
Assembly to have nothing to do with that illegal regime and
not to hold talks with it about the future of the Zimbabwe
people. Anyone who wishes to check this may read it in
General Assembly resolution 2652 (XXV).

66. We are told that the United Kingdom delegation-and
Lord Home was accompanied by a numerous suitesupposedly managed to obtain some confessions relating to
the tempering of the racist discriminatory laws and progress
towards the establishment of majority rule. All that,
however, is a fiction. This racist-imperialism deal (that is
the only way it can be described) in fact puts off for an
indeterminate period the time longed for by the Zimbabwe
people, when that people will be able to achieve freedom
and national independence and become master of its own
land, master of its own soil, taken from it by the foreign
colonialists or, as the United Kingdom representative said
today, occupied soil. That deal sanctions the rule of a racist
minority over the indigenous population of Southern
Rhodesia-the Zimbabwe people.

63. The General Assembly called on the Government of
the TJnited Kingdom to hold consultations with the
political parties of the Zimbabwe people, which are engaged
in a just and lawful struggle for the freedom and independence of Southern Rhodesia, for its liberation from racist
tyranny, and for the establishment in Southern Rhodesia of
a system of popular rule and democratic government in
accordance with the will of the majority of the population.
Yet the representative of the United Kingdom, when
informing the Security Council of that agreement today,
told the Council officially that the Government of the
United Kingdom did not know the Zimbabwe oeople’s
opinion regarding that agreement. Such is the poiition of
the United Kingdom Government and such is its attitude
towards United Nations decisions regarding Rhodesia,
which condemn the illegal racist regime and forbid any
further dealings with it. But the United Kingdom Foreign
Secretary opened talks not with the representatives of the
Zimbabwe people but with the racist and Fascist regime in
Southern Rhodesia, which has established its tyrannical
domination over the many millions of Zimbabwe people
and has deprived that people of elementary human rights,
freedom and national independence.

67. The American press tells us that after the final meeting
the leader of the Southern Rhodesian racists, Smith, told
journalists: “I am a very happy man.” He, the racist tyrant,
is happy, but the Zimbabwe people are not happy about
this deal between an English lord and the ringleader of the
racist clique in Southern Rhodesia. Smith had reason to be
glad, but the feelings of the Zimbabwe nation were well
expressed by one of the African nationalist leaders in
Southern Rhodesia, Mr. Chinamano. He said that tile
indigenous population of Rhodesia had no reason to be glad
about the agreement between Home and Smith. Since the
Africans did not take part in those talks, said Chinamano,
there was every reason to presume that the agreement was
concluded against the interests of the Zimbabwe people.
Douglas-Home came to an agreement with Smith on the
best way for both sides to present their bargain to world
public opinion, the United Nations and the Security
Council. And we seethis today at the Council meeting. But
the essence of the question was decided beforehand+ The
United Kingdom will try to impose on the Zimbabwe
people the agreement it has concluded with the racists. At

64. The representative of the United Kingdom informed
the Security Council here today of a declaration of rights
worked out by Lord Home and the leader of the Southern
Rhodesian mcists, Smith, Gentlemen, members of the
Council, what kind of declaration of rights could they be
talking about? The Zimbabwe people demand complete
freedom and national independence, unlimited by declarations of any kind-that is what the Zimbabwe people
8

the same Rime it will try to sugar that pill and that wasthe
mission the United Kingdom representative was carrying
out today.

Rhodesia-the Zimbabwe people. He also emphasized that
the so-called United Kingdom principle of “steady progress
towards majority rule” had no political meaning, since, if
power remained in the hands of the foreign racist minority,
its racist ringleaders would sabotage and undermine any
progress towards majority rule.

68. According to reports in the press, the United Kingdom
promises to finance a long-term programme of education
for the Africans in order to prepare them for more rapid
political progress. The representative of the United Kingdom said that here today also. But what does this mean?
Each of us sees in this the reappearance of a long
condemned colonialist theory that the Africans are supposedly not ready for independence or to manage the
affairs of their own States.

72. The discussions between the United Kingdom Government and the racist Smith clique, conducted behind the
backs of the indigenous population of Southern Rhodesia
and its representatives, can be regarded at the international
political level and in the context of the discussion of this
question in the United Nations only as a colonialist racist
collusion, the essence of which is United Kingdom assistance to help the racist regime maintain and strengthen the
racist order in Southern Rhodesia.

69. The fallaciousness of this imperialist theory wasshown
up long ago and was proved by the example of the
attainment of independence by many African countries.
Their representatives in the United Nations and on the
Security Council have no worse an education, level of
preparedness, understanding of international problems or
ability to defend the interests of their countries and peoples
than the United Kingdom diplomats. Among the Zimbabwe
people, too, there are politicians who are able, capable and
sufficiently prepared to be able to resolve the affairs of
tfreir country independently, without the advice of an
English lord and a Southern Rhodesian racist. However,
they are in the prisons and torture chambers of the racist
Southern Rhodesian regime.

73. The United Kingdom talks with the Southern Rhodesian rbgime, its supplying of arms to the South African
racists, its co-operation with the Portuguese colonialists, its
withdrawal from the Committee on Decolonization,2 and,
finally, the use of the veto by its representative in the
Security Council to prevent the adoption of even a
comparatively weak resolution against the Smith racist
regime, proposed by the African delegations-all these are
links in the same colonial policy of the United Kingdom
Tories, who are providing help and patronage for the racist
colonialist regimes in southern Africa, which have been
frequently, decisively and unconditionally condemned by
the United Nations,

70. It should be stressed in particuIar that this deal was
made in secret from the Zimbabwe people; this was
confirmed today by the United Kingdom representative,
who admitted that he did not know the Zimbabwe people’s
opinion of that bargain. This too is a flagrant violation of a
decision of this current twenty-sixth session of the General
Assembly, which reaffirms that any settlement relating to
the future of Southern Rhodesia must be worked out with
the fullest participation of all nationalist leaders representing the majority of the people of Zimbabwe. Such an
agreement must be endorsed freely by that people, Representatives of the Zimbabwe people, as I have already
mentioned,
are languishing in prisons and concentration
camps. The leader of the Zimbabwe African People’s Union
(ZAPU), Joshua Nkomo, and the leader of the Zimbabwe
African National Union (ZANU), Ndabaningi Sithole, have
been in prison for many years now, without trial or
investigation.
But it is with them, the fighters for the
freedom and independence of the Zimbabwe people, that
conditions should be worked out for the settlement of the
question of Southern Rhodesia and the granting of total
and unrestricted freedom and independence to the Zimbabwe people.

74. The Security Council cannot ignore the remarkable
fact that the visit of the United Kingdom Foreign Secretary
to the Southern Rhodesian racists coincided with the
adoption by the United States Congress of an act revoking
the embargo on purchases of chrome ore from Southern
Rhodesia by United States monopolies. That question as we
know was considered in the General Assembly. Is this a
coincidence? No, it is not. It too is a link in the same chain
of unified action by two great Powers, taken with the active
support of the United Kingdom and United States imperialist monopolies in order to satisfy the interests of those
monopolies. This action shows once more that international
obligations, United Nations decisions, Security Council
decisions and the freedom and independence of the
Zimbabwe people are pushed into the background when it
comes to the profits of the monopolies, their capital
investments, the exploitation of cheap African labour and
the strengthening of economic and strategic positions in
southern Africa. It is quite obvious that attempts are being
made to save the illegal racist regime of Southern Rhodesia,
to support the Portuguese colonial system and the racist
system of South Africa, in order to maintain and strengthen
in southern Africa a bastion of imperialism, colonialism and
racism, designed to prevent at any price the completion of
the irreversible historical process of the national liberation
revolution on the African continent and the implementation in southern Africa of the Declaration on dkcolonization adopted by the United Nations in 1960. Up to now
that Declaration has been a mere scrap of paper for the

71. However, some explanation has filtered into the press
as to what the representatives and leaders of the Zimbabwe
people think of this shameful deal by the United Kingdom
Government.
It was stated in particular that the leader of
ZANU, Mr. Sithole, resolutely condemned, in a memorandum addressed to Douglas-Home the attempt by the United
Kingdom
Conservatives to reach agreement with the racist
minority
which rules Southern Rhodesia. In that memorandum, according to the press, Sithole stressed that his
party would agree to nothing except the immediate
granting of independence to the indigenous population of

2 Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.
9

colonial territories of southern Africa; it has not been
implemented, and everyone knows who is responsible.

the imperialists and their racist henchmen in Africa”,s That
is the Soviet description of that shameful deal.

75. Such policies and actions in connexion with Southern
Bhodesia can only be described as connivance at and
patronage of the despotism and racist terror created by the
Smith regime and are arousing rightful anger throughout
the world. Naturally they could not but arouse the serious
concern of the African peoples and alarm among the
overwhelming majority of delegations to the twenty-sixth
session of the General Assembly. This found concrete
expression in the resolutions recently adopted on the
initiative of the African delegations at the twenty-sixth
session of the General Assembly. One of those resolutions
decisively condemns the United States for violating the
United Nations decisions imposing sanctions against the
racist regime of Southern Rhodesia and banning any kind
of economic or trade relations with it. In violation of these
United Nations decisions, the United States Congress, ashas
already been noted, adopted an act allowing chrome ore’to
be imported from Southern Rhodesia into the United
States. The second resolution, which I have already
mentioned, was adopted at the current session of the
General Assembly, also on the initiative of the African
delegations, in connexion with the visit to Southern
Rhodesia of the United Kingdom Foreign Secretary,
Douglas-Home, and his talks with the racist regime, which
has been condemned by the United Nations and has
established its illegal rule in that country. The United
Kingdom Conservative Government not only ignored the
demands of the indigenous population of Rhodesia; it
ignored the demands of all progressive people in all Africa
and throughout the world and it also ignored a decision of
the United Nations.

78. In the light of the attitude of the Africans towards the
Home-Smith agreement, the Security Council has the right
to know and must know the opinion of the Zimbabwe
people and its representatives. The delegation of the Soviet
Union insists therefore .that the United Kingdom representative should not just limit himself to the information he
presented to the Security Council today on the Home.
Smith agreement but should reveal here today, at the
Security Council meeting, the full contents of the memoranda which, according to the press, were received by Lord
Home in Salisbury from the leader of ZAPU, Mr. J. Nkomo,
and the leader of ZANU, Mr. N. Sithole. Until it is
acquainted with those documents, the Security Council
cannot take any decisions on the basis solely of the
one-sided and clearly tendentious information given by the
United Kingdom representative.

76. It is well known too that in many of the decisions of
the Organization of African Unity-as can be confirmed
officially by the representative of that Organization, our
mutual friend the distinguished Mr. Thiam, who is present
here-the regime of Ian Smith has been described as an
illegal racist and oppressive regime. It was emphasized in
decisions of the Organization of African Unity that the
United Kingdom Government has no right to conduct talks
of any kind with the racist minority clique which seized
power against the will of the majority of the population of
the country. The demand “No independence for Rhodesia
before the establishment of majority rule” is a universal
demand not o~nlyof the Zimbabwe people but of the whole
of Africa. This demand is confirmed also by the decisions
of the United Nations. However, it has been completely
ignored and is being ignored by the United Kingdom
Government.

79. The Soviet delegation also proposes that the leaders of
those two parties, Mr. Nkomo, and Mr. Sithole, should be
invited to the meeting of the Security Council and that the
Security Council should listen to their information on the
real situation in Southern Rhodesia and their opinioil of the
Home-Smith agreement.
80. In conclusion, I should also like to remind the
Security Council that, as we have already pointed out on
many occasions, the fundamental and consistent position of
the Soviet Union in supporting peoples fighting for their
national liberation against imperialism, colonialism and
racism was confirmed once again at the twenty-fourth
Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, That
position is an integral and indivisible part of the progranunc
for the fight for peace and international co-operation, and
for the freedom and independence of peoples, which was
confirmed by that Congress. A rapid and complete irnple
mentation of United Nations decisions on the elimination
of the remaining colonial regimes and a universal condem.
nation and boycott of ra-ism and apartheid in all their
forms and manifestations are the concrete and fundamental
goals of that programme, which ,.the Soviet Union will
continue to pursue unswervingly.
81. Mr. TERENCE
(Burundi) (interpretation flU??l
French): We listened with close interest to the long
statement made earlier by the representative of the United
Kingdom. The delegation of Burundi will study this
statement very carefully. In a word, we shall be happy to
study it with a magnifying glass.
82. On the other hand, we shall make some comments
here which will constitute the first of the statements we
shall deem it necessary to make subsequently before this
Council. We also regard the British statement as a prelude
to the substantive debate which will take place asof today,
depending on the consultations which you, Mr. President,
will hold. We therefore see in this statement a kind of
introduction to the discussions which will take place
shortly on the problem of Rhodesia as such, in conform@’
with the agenda before the Council in document
S/Agenda/l602. It is in this context that we wish to mske

77. Even the American press today had to announce that
the Africans are disturbed and concerned by the deal made
between Home and Smith, and that they fear that as a
result of that deal the interests of the Zimbabwe people
have been betrayed and sold out. This is the same as the
appraisal which, according to the American press, wasmade
of that deal in a statement by the Soviet telegraph agency
TASS. The agreement was described as a sell-out of the
African majority. TASS said the accord would “go down in
history as an undisguised and shameful collusion between

3 Quoted in English by the speaker.

10

e
B
B
I,

in audience by the British Secretary of State for Foreign
Affairs, while others were not.

some comments, without prejudging the merits of the
document which has been submitted. It is above all in the
light of that document that we take the floor at the present
stage.

87. Secondly, as regards the new agreements, we have not
been told why the release of political prisoners and the
repatriation
of political exiles is to be discretionary
-because, if I correctly quote from the notes I jotted
down, our colleague from the United Kingdom spoke of
“the release . , . of a significant number of detainees and
restrictees”s [see para. 46 above].

83. We consider that the independence of Rhodesia
cannot and must not under any circumstances be mortgaged. We therefore feel some concern because Sir Colin
Crowe himself has repeatedly stressed that the situation is
only a status quo. We are therefore justified in asking now
what progress has been achieved as a result of the
agreements which have been signed.

88. As we see it, all political prisoners and exiles should
benefit from these agreements if the agreements are
supposed to be impartial. Of course, we are not here
pleading the cause of prisoners who may have been
punished for common law crimes; we are speaking of
political rest&tees and exiles who were the victims of the
political situation created by the Ian Smith regime. Accordingly, we consider that all the leaders, all those who have
sought to lead Rhodesia to independence should be set free
and that all the political exiles should be unconditionally
repatriated.

84. First of all, it is fitting and legitimate to wonder
whether the electoral system which has just been decided is
not infinitely complex, particularly if one is to judge from
the past situation whereby Rhodesians were not able to
accede to independence because they did not have sufficient education. If that was the case and if they were not
able to express their will on independence in a referendum,
one wonders whether they will be able to express their
viewson what the representative of the United Kingdom
called the “test of acceptability of the proposals”. In other
words, we wonder whether the Rhodesians, who were
judged incapable of expressing their will on independence,
will be able to do so on so complicated an electoral system.
For if one cannot do the least then one cannot do the most,
the least being the will to independence. We also note that
the various phases through which the people of Rhodesia
must pass constitute a long chain, which could have been
avoided had agreement been reached on accession to
independence quite apart from the present situation.

89. As regards political posts: if the intention is to reach
an understanding in the near future then Rhodesians must
be given posts on the basis of their merit and their personal
value.
90. Some mention has also been made of a new educational system; but one cannot help wondering whether the
funds to be disbursed by the United Kingdom for the
education of the African masses may not perhaps be
diverted and instead used to alleviate whatever minor
ills-repeat,
minor ills-may have been caused by the
economic sanctions imposed by the Security Council. Are
there any guarantees that these funds will in fact be used in
accordance with the decisions and the agreements? Shall
we be able to get assurancesfrom the British Government?
That is one of the questions we wished to put.

85. Consequently, the electoral system as now established
is a source of genuine concern to my delegation. Our
position in Burundi is to argue the case, wherever necessary
and possible, for multiracial and multinational societies.
You will understand, then, that the failure of those
agreements to recognize the equality of rights of Rhodesian
citizens is already a matter of grave concern to us. As we
see it, Rhodesia has both black and white inhabitants who
should accede to independence, irrespective of any racial
consideration, religious label or any other separatist factor,
SO that independence will be the heritage of all citizens,
whoever they may be, in the light of and on the basis of
personal individual criteria and values.

9 1. As regards the granting of independence to colonial
peoples, my delegation would like to submit some thoughts
to this august assembly. Frequently, the lack of training of
colonial peoples has been mentioned and it has been said
that this lack of training justifies the maintenance or
continuation
of the colonial system. Now, there is no
country in the worId that can provide all its people with
academic training and education unless that people is
independent. That is to say, independence is the essential
pre-condition for universal education. TO mention what
some newspapers describe as “tiny” Burundi, as an example, let me tel1 you that today we have a compulsory
educational system on a national scale and we are now
turning out 50 university graduates a year. That wasnot the
case in the past. So that if after years of colonization
Rhodesia has not been able-during the almost 100 years it
has been virtually self-governing-to tram skilled personnel
who can take over when the time comes, it will take more
than two years or five years to produce people the Ian
Smith regime will regard as fit to succeed it. We do not
think that will be possible, and we would also extend this
argument to the case of the Portuguese Territories.

86. But the situation, as described, rather seems to
institutionalize
the fait accompli, namely, that black
inferiority exists and that white supremacy must be
maintained, at least for a certain period, the duration of
which was not mentioned. We persist in thinking that racial
heterogeneity can afford a complementarity among citizens, whatever their racial differences. Homogeneous societies which tend to draw back upon themselves and become
exclusivist cannot benefit either the whites themselves or,
still less, the black Rhodesians. Thus, we are forced to
conclude that these agreements leave the problem fundamentally and basically the same. We would like to know
today, or at future meetings, why the leaders of the-rebel
regime seek to exercise a discretionary right with regard to
the release of detainees and restrictees or the return of
exiles? During Sir Alec Douglas-Home’s stay in Salisbury
for instance, some prisoners were authorized to be received

92. We know that Portugal has had colonies in Africa for
500 years, Yet that same Portugal has been incapable of
11

training skilled personnel who could run the country were
Portugal one day to withdraw.

my delegation feels compelled to put and to which we
would like to have replies, if possible today, but at any rate
at our future meetings, because as we see it the debate on
Rhodesia is now open and we must continue to the
adoption of a resolution which will be submitted later by
members of the Security Council.

93. And then, one might rather ask whether certain
colonial regimes do not themselves need training, from
other Powers or from the Africans themselves, if for 100
years or 500 years these regimes have been incapable of
providing the colonial peoples with the necessary education. This holds true both for Portugal and for Rhodesia.

98. I thank you, Mr. President, and I reserve the right to
speak at a later time, as circumstances dictate.

94. So you can see why we, for our part, continue to be
concerned, despite the generosity of the British, who have
decided to grant these funds so as to ensure a sort of
accelerated education for the Rhodesians. Unless there is
supervision of the way the funds are used, unless there are
guarantees that the programme will be administered by
honest men-and this is not prejudging the issue-we fear
that the funds may be used for other purposes.

99. The PRESIDENT (interpretation jfom French): I have
to inform members of the Council that I have just received
a letter from the representative of Saudi Arabia [S/10398/
requesting that he should be allowed to participate in the
debate without the right to vote on the item on the agenda.
If there is no objection I shall invite the representative of
Saudi Arabia to participate in the debate in the Council and
I now call on him.

95. Nevertheless, we are grateful for the efforts which the
British Government has endeavoured to make, even though
the results-at least on the present level-are far from
satisfactory. The intentions were good, but in practical
terms a greater effort must be made so as to reach the
ultimate aim, which is nothing other than unrestricted,
unmortgaged independence for all the Rhodesian population, and above all without any shame. By this we mean
that there must be a multiracial, multinational people
complementing each other without any exclusion for the
simple reason that we consider any racial system a
degradation. The Africans have shown on many occasions-1 would mention Zambia, Kenya, Tanzania and my
own country where, after accession to independence, we
have rather sought to co-operate, and we would wish this
system to be continued in the case of Rhodesia and in the
case of the Portuguese Territories-that what they wish is to
co-operate with those who yesterday were their colonizers.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. Baroody (Saudi
Arabia) took a place at the Council.

96. The situation which has just been created is hardly a
rosy one. Nevertheless, if the British Government intends to
solve the problem once and for all it should realize that
once Rhodesia is independent its white settlers will not be
destined for the slaughter-house. On the contrary, they will
be called upon to participate in the material, educational
and political development of the Rhodesian people as a
whole. If no account is taken of this system, which is the
only possible one and the only ideal one, then perhaps the
black Rhodesians, once they have taken independence by
force despite the white settlers and despite the United
Kingdom, will not then adopt so conciliatory an attitude as
the one we are advocating at present: this because human
feelings which are universal and which no one can control,
except by a wise policy which once and for all should
commit itself to the cause of independence in as short a
time as possible,

100. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Thank you,
Mr. President. I shall dispense with paying you a tribute
because, after all, you are such a modest and capable lnan
that I would be embarrassing you if I did so at this late
hour, but you know of the affection and deep respect
which I have had for you ever since I had the honour and
privilege of knowing you. The hour is late and I shall not
keep you long from sharing with our American hosts their
traditional Thanksgiving turkey dinner, which anyway does
not usually begin before two o’clock or even later.
101. I have asked for the floor at this early stage becauseI
feel constrained to make a few conrments on the burning
question of Southern Rhodesia lest we get lost in the
labyrinth of debate that no doubt will ensue within the
following days, and the suggestions which I have to make in
particular to the five permanent members of the Council,
may lose their impetus. You have all welcomed the
representative of the People’s Republic of China-and
rightly so. He is now seated among you and I sincerely hope
that your congratulations will be matched by your collcctive endeavour, the five of you, to seek a just and practical
solution to the question which has bedeviled the United
Nations for so many years.
102. I listened to the first part of the statement delivered
this morning by my illustrious friend, Sir Cohn Crowe,the
representative of the United Kingdom. I must say that the
statement was laudable for its frankness and quite plausible
on the basis of premises which, I am afraid, are invalid iI1
the context of the United Nations Charter. Sir Colin Crewe
gave me the impression that there seems to be an enter@
cordiale between Mr. Ian Smith and his party on the one
hand and the United Kingdom Government on the other. A
total of 250,000 whites and 4 million blacks-we do not
have to go into detail-constitute
the population of
Southern Rhodesia. We are told that a political arrangement
has been concluded. Has it been done with the consent of
the 4 million blacks? Since the days of Magna Carta, the
British have always brought to our attention how tine and
just their democratic parliamentary system of government
was, but this reminds me of Periclean democracy, a

97. There is another question which I should like to raise
before concluding and until I have another opportunity to
make a statement in the light of the document submitted to
us earlier. I should like fomlally to put the question: what
will be the duration of the rebel regime in Rhodesia, since
the status quo is maintained, and what will be the duration
of the transitional system established under the agreements
signed yesterday? These are some of the questions which
12

[
$

democracy for the Athenians. Anyone who lived outside
the walls of Athens was considered to be a barbarian. Are
the blacks considered barbarians by Mr. Ian Smith’s white
r&rne?
Are they considered human or subhuman by
Mr. Ian Smith’s regime? That is the question.

10’7. Freedom? Come on. People are not that free
nowadays. I would make a comment on your word
“freedom”. I think you were “aggressedagainst” by the
Germans; I have no doubt about it, but I am talking now
about the United Kingdom, not the Soviet Union, so do not
inject your “freedom” in my statement. We all want
freedom.

103. If they were not as developed economically as the
whites, why is it then, in the United Kingdom, that the
poor and the under-privileged have the same vote as the
others in the parliamentary system of the United Kingdom? This is my other question.
104. I shall begin with my comments and, I hope,
statements of fact. First, the whites of Southern Rhodesia
are obsessed by a genuine fear that if a majority rule is
established in that country, in no time the whites will lose
their identity. Nobody can contest that: 250,000 whites,
4 million African blacks. The ratio between the blacks and
the whites is great, and no one expects the whites, 25 years
Or even 50 years from now, to have their fears dissipated.
Therefore, it is not a question of time; it is a question of
how to deal with that issue.
105. My second comment is, I hope, also factual. The
United Kingdom population happens to be preponderantly
white, with a few exceptions, and they consider the whites
of Rhodesia their kith and kin. So the British, understandably, are not expected to chastise Mr. Ian smith and those
constituting
his regime because if they do, any British
Government-whether
Labour or Conservative-will fall
overnight. We have to accept this fact. I am sure that Sir
Colin Crowe thinks the same way, but I am saying it for
him because it is rather embarrassing for birn to say so. This
is a statement of fact. Can anyone refute it as a statement
of fact?

108. Another comment I wish to make-which, I believe,
you will all consider factual-is that economic sanctions
have not proved to be adequate, as Sir Colin Crowe
candidly told us in his statement. But I wouId say
something else: I would say that smuggling and shipping
under neutral flags can be done unscrupulously and with
impunity. When in my early years-and I am talking about
half a century ago-1 was involved in national liberation
movements in the region of the Middle East, we used to
smuggle arms and ammunition from under the nose of the
French and the British, who werethe mandatory Powers in
that area. Sometimes we bought the arms from French
sources. Let me refresh your historical memory, Sir,
becauseyou must have been very young. The steel cartels in
the First World War sold to both sides,the German and the
French. They found a way of doing it. Money, money,
money-all trouble comes from too much money and too
much wealth.
109. Whether or not the agreement concluded by Mr. Ian
Smith and Sir Alex Douglas-Home will be ratified is beside
the question. The status quo, or something similar to it, in
Southern Rhodesia remains. The representativesof 250,000
whites will continue to rule and control 4 million blacks.
This is the sad thing about the whole question. And the
Mother of Parliaments, the United Kingdom, rationalizes its
stand on the grounds of kith and kin and on the grounds of
economics and of strategic considerations.

106. My third comment is that economics, rightly or
wrongly-we
are not going into the ethical or moral
question-shape
the policies of States, big and small,
whether we like it or not. Aristotle should have said that
man is an economic animal, rather than a political animal,
because politics revolves around economics. When I mentioned this to my good friend the representative of the
Soviet Union, he said: “This is Marxist.” I said: “Come on,
what do you mean, Marxist? This has been so since the
days of Adam and Eve.” As if Marx invented this truth! The
mythological
Cain and Abel were two brothers, one of
whom wanted to have more than the other. Those who
believe in the monotheistic religion think that Adam and
Eve had two sons and one killed the other. He wasgreedy;
he wanted to have the whole earth to himself. Therefore,
do not expect the United Kingdom to be an exception.
After all, economics and finance determine the policy of
the United Kingdom to a large extent, and the United
Kingdom
is not different from others, except once in a
while when it has. tried to find a motivation for war. It
fought the First World War against German militarism. It
was the biggest naval Power and France was the biggest
military
Power and was therefore the ally of the United
Kingdom,
as was Russia also. They were fighting German
militarism
and tyranny, or something like that. In the
Second WorId War, they were fighting German nazism and
fascism-but
in fact they were fighting to preserve their
Empire. Economics is stronger than politics.

110. What is the solution to this impasse? More abortive
Security Council resolutions? I have witnessed in this
Council resolutions of condemnations, resolutions that
threatened to invoke Chapter VII of the Charter-sanctions
and this and that-with no result whatsoever.Economic and
military sanctions, when we know that Southern Rhodesia
continues to be one of the strongest white enclaves,
militarily speaking, in Africa.7 Economic sanctions, when
we know that their tobacco is smoked with euphoria in
many parts of Western Europe? I do not know about the
Russians;maybe you have your own tobacco.
111. Their nickel is being sold at cut-rate prices-and not
because of the effect that sanctions have had. A ton of
nickel two years ago sold for $16,000 and a fraction which
I do not have in mind. Now it barely fetches $3,000
because there is a world recession-not because of the
sanctions but becausethere is a world recession.The price
of copper and nickel has gone down tremendously. So let
us not mix the issuesand saythat they have felt the impact
of the sanctions. They have not; the lower prices are caused
by the bad days we are witnessinghere in the host country,
where things are not as they used to be three or four years
ago. The Gmnans are now also beginning to feel the
recession. I do not know about our Japanesefriends. More
power to them becausethey know how to manage their
economy: $1.50 per hour for skilled labour-and they are
13

happy-while here it is $7.50 and they do not do things as
they should. I have to take my car to the garage every now
and then because the workers have no more pride in
manufacturing cars. Next time I shall buy a Japanesecar or
a Swedish car.

and have been doing it-rightly so, in the name of freedm
and liberation. Why should there not be rebellion? But [
doubt that they will collectively adopt such a solution,
because it will throw them into a state of confrontaricb.
And we know what happened after Lumumba was killed,

112. So let us not be fooled by the statement of the
United Kingdom that the sanctions are working. They are
not working at all; the fact is that there is a world recession,
In their heart of hearts the British know that sanctions do
not work: they are ink on paper.

119. The Western Powers said “Hands off black Africa*.
This is what they told the whites of Western Europe asd
since then the Soviet Union, wisely, refrained from ;a
military confrontation with the Western Powers became
after all, they wanted peace. We can refute that statement!
I waspresent here during the crisis in the Congo.

113. What shall we do then? More persuasion? I am sure
that the United Kingdom tried to persuade Ian Smith to
alter his policy, but within the framework of maintaining
white supremacy. There is racial discrimination, Unfortunately, there is also discrimination which is non-racialdiscrimination between classes, between brother and
brother. Between brother and brother, I should like to call
it prejudice and not discrimination. But we have to contend
with racial discrimination.

120. A fourth plan would be for the Asians and Africans
and their friends to boycott the goods of the countri~
which trade with Southern Rhodesia. I doubt that suc,hs
boycott would be effective since the Afro-Asian countr&
are in a state of economic development and they need &e
Western Powers and the socialist States to extend aid aad
technological assistanceto them.
121. Then we may ask, Sir, since you mentioned all those
solutions as being only academic in so far as irnplementa~
tion is concerned, will you, the representatives of the fire
Great Powers, or your Governments, declare your helpIm.
ness to solve the problem? Then you are on a par with the
non-permanent members of the Security Council, Moral
support for the four million blacks of Southern Rhode&?
My dear friend and colleague, Sir Colin Crowe, it is nor a
question of tea and sympathy. You can have tea and
sympathy with old ladies in hotels but not with liberated
people, sympathy with their plight, the plight of fotlr
million. What, offer them tea and sympathy? No,

114. Mr. Ian Smith and his successors will not be
persuaded to pave the way for majority rule, whether now
or 25 years hence. You cannot persuade a people that is
panicking about losing its white identity. It is a real fear; it
is a psychosis, They think there is something magical about
their white colour. That is another fact to which I should
like to draw the Council’s attention.
115. I do not mean that the United Nations-and, more
particularly, the Security Council-should not keep up its
pressures. But I believe we should find other avenues, and
those avenues are open to the so-called big Powers-the five
permanent members of the Security Council.
116. Let us see what are the options or the alternatives
that these Powers may or may not be able to use. My
African friends always tell me: ‘Where there is a will, there
is a way. Why do not the five major Powers act? ” Well, let
us seehow they expect them to act. My friends from Africa
and from Asia think that it is open to the big Powers to use
external force-force from without; after all, it is their
prerogative to maintain peace and security in the world. I
think that is far-fetched. They will not resort to such
drastic measures. I believe our African friends know it in
their heart of hearts, and, although they ask them to do
that, the five Powers will not do it, collectively and by
agreement. And remember the veto; if anybody suggests
such,action, there is the veto.
117. Secondly, they say that the big Powers should help
to create an African army, assisting it financially and also
with anything it needs to wage war on Rhodesia. Such a
solution-and it is not far-fetched-they will not adopt, and
perhaps wisely so becausethe blacks are still no match for
the whites in Rhodesia. Anyway, the five Powers will not
agree among themselves to resort to such drastic measures,
which, I am sure, they are afraid might create a precedent.

122. I can see the twilight of solutions. I have aired rni
views in the Fourth Committee on many occasions dur%
the last seven or eight years. Nobody took my suggestions
in earnest. The hour being late now, may I request you 10
consider this statement of mine as preliminary to a set ef
points which, with the President’s permission and thal of
the members of the Council, I will read to you wheneveriZ
is feasible for the President, and the Council to give mP
some time to present them?
123. Now that I have finished this preliminary statemen!.
I thank the President and the members of the Council for
having been patient with me. I feel horror at the thou@
that 60 million turkeys have been slaughtered, but man
being a predatory animal it sometimes makes me wonder
whether he will ever reform. Bon appe’tit to all of YOU.
124. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fvom French): 1
thank the representative of Saudi Arabia for his kind words
addressed to me and to all members of the Council.
125. Mr. JOUEJ!4TI (Syrian Arab Republic) (in@rPre@tion porn Frendh): It goes without saying that mJ
delegation reserves the right to express its views on the
contents of the statement made by the representative Ofthe
United Kingdom, the Administering Power for southern
Rhodesia. Nevertheless, it can be observed at once that the
statement contains no specific reference to the right cf the
Zimbabwe people to self-determination, a principle cn
which the consideration of the problem of Southern

118. The third possible solution Is to foment rebellion
inside Southern Rhodesia. They can do it in the classical
manner: in the name of freedom and liberation. Well, two
of the permanent members, I am sure, would like to do that
14

Rhodesia in the United Nations has always been based. Nor
is there any mention of procedures to govern the exercise
of that right. It is simply a question of a complex system of
socalled parity representation-the parity, if there is any,
being projected into a distant future. One problem which is
at the heart of the tragedy of the Zimbabwe people is dealt
with only marginally, and that is the problem of racial
discrimination which is practised against the African majority, so as to maintain them under the colonial yoke in a
status of chronic inferiority.

United States Government. I will not deny that this
action-not supported by the United States Government
-reflected a certain concern amongst our people and
amongst their representatives about the ineffectiveness of
the sanctions. As we indicated in the Fourth Committee,
there does not seem to be a dearth of buyers for Rhodesian
chrome. The United States is not buying chrome from
Rhodesia. Somebody else is. And I will not engage in a
debate here on the capitalism that has been practised. We
are now paying for chrome from other sources three times
what we were paying when chrome was being sold in the
market by the Rhodesians. But if the Ambassador and
others had spent as much time seeing why the sanctions
have not been fully effective-if they had spent as much
time on that phase of the problem as they spend hammering away at the United States, which has not yet violated
the sanctions-perhaps the problem would be further along
the road to solution. I recognize that the distinction
between the Administration’s policy-the policy of the
United States Government-and the action taken by the
Congress is a distinction that it is hard for some Governments to make, I would simply remind my colleague that
the United States is not in violation of those sanctions.

126. The statement of the United Kingdom simply refers
to the appointment of a commission to study the problem,
as though the question of equality of rights and duties were
a secondary matter, and were not at the very heart of the
entire problem. In fact, if the statement has any merit, it is
that this time it admits that racial discrimination is
practised, that the Africans are expelled from their lands
and that they are deprived of their right to property,
employment, education and economic opportunities. The
eloquence of the statement in describing this racial discrimination is certainly striking. We are ‘most grateful to the
representative of the United Kingdom. Nevertheless, we
must recall that when representatives of justice-loving countries have reported these practices in the United Nations,
the representatives of the United Kingdom invariably
accused them of exaggerating. It has taken them all these
yearsfinally to recognize the facts.

131, Mr.

TERENCE (Burundi) (interpretation
from
This final statement will be brief. Even were the
Council to continue its debate-as the importance and
gravity of the situation dictate-I do not wish to be the one
who holds up the debate. A little earlier I dwelt on the
inextricable process of the new system just set up. I might
have included among the anomolies I enumerated and
emphasized as sources of concern the negotiations and
agreements that took place not only in the absence of the
Africans but even to their exclusion, which is also a source
of concern to my delegation. We consider that those
agreements and negotiations should have taken into account those primarily concerned, who are the Africans, and
that anything negotiated on the fate of Africans in their
absence and to their exclusion cannot be expected to
produce satisfactory results.
French):

127. I would not wish to dwell on other aspects of the
problem. There will be full opportunity to do so. But one
element seems to me at first sight to be lacking in all these
proposed processes-the time element and, as a corollary,
the alternative. How long do they think it will take this
50-SO parity to be achieved? For example, after how many
years is it expected that the referendum will be held in
regard to the 24 indirect seats? If the test of acceptability
should prove negative, how does the United Kingdom
intend to discharge its responsibility as Administering
Power? Will it leave the Smith regime full freedom of
action by saying that the proposals were rejected? These
are key questions which, if unanswered, will render
consideration of the statement very difficult and perhaps
without any real significance.

132. In” conclusion, the Africans not only should have
taken an effective part and have been consulted as fully
fledged partners, but they should even have been considered on a preferential basis.

128. The PRESIDENT (interpretation JLom French): The
representative of the United States has asked to exercisehis
right of reply and I call on him.

133. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): My delegation listened with
interest to the statement made by the representative of the
United Kingdom and also to subsequent statements by
members of this Council. In a matter of such importance
my delegation will naturally require time to give the
statement the consideration it deserves, and I reserve the
right of my delegation to speak at length at the next
meeting of the Council.

129. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): Members can
be sure that, since this is an American holiday, 1qwil.l be
very brief. I would, as a preliminary, like to suggest to
Ambassador Baroody that once all those turkeys have been
slaughtered it would be a shame to waste them. Many of us
do have our meal at lunch time and we should be grateful,
on Thanksgiving, for all favours. I am grateful for his
relative brevity. I appreciate his understanding of the
American position,

134. However, I am glad that the representative of the
United Kingdom, when introducing his statement, said that
the United Kingdom had always recognized that the
question of Southern Rhodesia was one of legitimate and
continuing concern to the rest of the world community.
Indeed, when this Council was frrst seized with the question
of Southern Rhodesia in 1965 it adopted a resolution
[202 (1965)] which endorsed a request that had been made
by the General Assembly and by the Special Committee on

130. I should like to reply very briefly-in two minutesto the theory of connivance put forward by my colleague
from the Soviet Union. We are not singing a duet. The
action of the Congress that Ambassador Malik alluded to
did not have the support of the Administration of the
5

decolonization urging the United Kingdom Government to
obtain the release of all political prisoners, detainees and
rest&tees in Southern Rhodesia, the repeal of all repressive
and discriminatory legislation in Southern Rhodesia and the
removal of all restrictions on political activity and the
establishment of full democratic freedom and equality of
political rights. Of course, since 1965 this Council has been
seized with the question on many occasions, and on the last
occasion, in 1970, it adopted a rather long resolution
(277(1970)]
emphasizing that the United Kingdom had
the primary responsibility of enabling the people of
Zimbabwe to exercise their right to self-determination and
independence in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and in conformity with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV).
135. My Government firmly believes in the principle of
self-determination and the procedures this Organization has
worked out over the years to ensure that peoples can
legitimately and properly express their right to self-determination. There can be no qualification on this. We must
proceed on the basis that all citizens of Southern Rhodesia
are entitled to equal rights and equal freedoms without
distinction. My Government does not subscribe to the idea
that there can be first-class and second-class citizens in a
country. If the Africans have been generous enough over
the years to accommodate a white immigrant community in
their midst we must ensure that that small white community conducts itself so that its will is always in accord
with the majority will of the Territory.
136. The representative of the United Kingdom-and I am
now speaking quite briefly-spoke of a test of acceptability.
Before the projected Royal Commission proceeds to ascertain public opinion, my delegation would like to know
whether it is intended that there be an intensive campaign
of public enlightenment, carried out well before the Royal
Commission undertakes its task.
137. My delegation would like to know what would be the
position of the two main African political parties in
Southern Rhodesia, known as the Zimbabwe African
People’s Union and the Zimbabwe African National Union
-both of which, as members may know, have been
proscribed though together they constitute and represent
the vast majority of Africans in that Territory. According
to the statement, only those political parties represented in
the present Assembly will be able to make use of radio and
television in the political campaign that will precede or run
parallel to the test of acceptability-thereby
ensuring that
the two main parties will not have an opportunity of
addressing their people through the mass media.

assuming that the proposed constitutional reforms are
accepted and implemented, to reach parity. Newspaper
reports indicate that such progress will take at least 25
years, Others are less optimistic and say 30 to 35. Rut,
acknowledging the kind of qualifications that have been
demanded of Africans, educational qualifications, I must
say that those are not really the supreme test. I can speak
from personal experience. My own father was an illiterate
Somali, but I can assure you he knew more about my
country, how to govern his family and how to participate in
the affairs of his country, than I, who have had the benefit
of a university education, can ever hope to know, In this
problem, the test of a man is not whether he has had
secondary school or university education: the test is his
citizenship. We are all endowed with certain inalienabIe
rights, and one of those rights is that of full political
participation in the life of one’s country, and I submit that
that must be the criterion on which any proposals aimed at
bringing about a political solution to the problem of
Southern Rhodesia must be judged.
140. My delegation was also interested to see that a
commission is to be established to determine in what way
discrimination can be eliminated. For the past six yearsthe
white minority regime has been able to demonstrate how it
feels on the question of white and black participation in the
political life of the territory. The very First paragraph of the
proposal for the constitution for Rhodesia which was
adopted by the rebel regime in 1969 began:
“The Government of Rhodesia believe that the present
Constitution is no longer acceptable to the people of
Rhodesia because it contains a number of objectionable
features, the principal one being that it provides for
eventual African rule and, inevitably, the domination of
one race by another and that it does not guarantee that
government will be retained in responsible hands.”
141. The United Kingdom representative speaksof guarantees being built into the new Constitution. Who is going to
guarantee those guarantees? The United Kingdom Government?
142. Another question on which my delegation would like
to have some information in order to make a constructive
contribution to this debate is whether the United Kingdom
Government envisages at any period United Nations participation in the test of acceptability, This matter is of
profound importance to the Council. Since the time wllen
the United Kingdom brought the question to the Council,
the Council has concerned itself intimately in trying to see
in what way the welfare of the people of Southern
Rhodesia could be protected and promoted. Does the
United Kingdom Government envisage at least a team of
observers from the United Nations, established by this
Council, being present when the test of acceptability is
being conducted?

138. In this connexion my delegation would like to
associate itself with the very important proposal made by
the representative of the Soviet Union that a request be
addressed to the United Kingdom Government to invite the
leaders of these two political parties, Mr. Joshua Nkomo
and Mr. Sithole, to come here so that we can have the
benefit of their views.

143. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): In its statement, my delegation

requested the United Kingdom representative to infornl the
Security Council of the contents of the memoranda which,
according to press reports, were addressed by Mr. fiOm0
and Mr. Sithole to Sir Alec Douglas-Home, the Pore@*’
Secretary of the United Kingdom. We should like to havea

139. My delegation would like to have some idea from the
representative of the United Kingdom as to how long his
Government believes it would take the African people,
16

II
$
I

reply from the United Kingdom representative-either now
or, if this is not possible, perhaps at the next meeting.

that proposal, perhaps we can consider it adopted without
special consultations?

144. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I
should like to remind you that in an earlier statement the
representative of the Soviet Union proposed that the
Security Council should invite Mr. Nkomo, the representative of ZAPU, and Mr. Sithole, the representative of ZANU,
to address the Council concerning the item on the agenda.
The representative of Somalia has just supported that
proposal. I propose to hold the customary consultations on
this subject and I shall keep members of the Council
informed of the results.

146. Sir Colin CROWE! (United Kingdom): I would
suggest that this is something that would require a certain
amount of consideration by the Council, since it has been
produced in the way it has. It would certainly require, on
my part, consultations with my Government.

145. Mr. MALIK
(translated

147. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I
shall therefore hold the customary consultations on this
subject. As I hear no objection, I take it that the Council
agrees.

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
If there are no comments on

The meeting rose at 2.05 pm.

from Russian):

17

WOW

TD OBTAIN

UNITED

NATlONS

PUBlICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world. Conrult
Your
or Geneva.

may be obloinrd
bookrtore
w write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Soles Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBltCATtONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

Les publicattonr
des
dipositairer
du monde
Nations
Unier,
Section
HAti

flOllYr(HTb

throughout
New York

UNILS

Notions
Unies
sont en vsnte
dons
ter libroirier
et Ier ogences
sntier.
tnformst-voul
ouprLs
de votro librairte
ou odressor-vouj
6:
der venter,
New York ou Genive.

H3AAHHR

OSIEAHHEHHLIX

OPCAHHIAUHH

HAUHA

II:t~dwt O~vns~~:tnrpmOlr~.nfgt~~cti~~~~x
IIaf@i 3toiti110
syun~b n littnttfht~ yaramtax n
mwwr~~asnonws pniiouaxnnpa.IIano;lmocnpam 00wt;lattnttxRttamwtliiwi110w
xwa:tnttc II.III unmn~c uo aJpccy : Oprattnaaqmt
OB~e~ttmtahtx
Iht~ttii,
Ccti~eut uo
upo~a~ic
n$qannil,Ham-fiopr; ILIR SfCeaesa.
COMO

CONSEGUtR

PUBLtCAClONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publiceciones
de lot Naciones
Unidos
sst6n
en todoa porter
det mundo.
Conrulto
o su tibrero
Ventor,
Nuevo
York e Ginebro.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

UNtDAS

en yenta
o dirljare

1.00 (or equivalent

en librerlos
o: Nocioner

in other

y co101 distribuidoros
Unidos,
Soccidn

currencies)

de

82185-October

1973~2,050
