4

General Assembly-Seventeenth Session

States of America, in the letter dated 28 October 1962
from Mr. Kennedy to Mr. Khrushchev, and in the letter
dated 28 October 1962 from Mr. Macmillan, Prime
Minister of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, to Mr. Khrushchev,
Convinced that no efforts should be spared to achieve
prompt agreement on the cessation of all nuclear tests
in all environments,
1. Condemns all nuclear weapon tests;
2. Asks that such tests should cease immediately and
not later than 1 January 1963 ;
3. Urges the Governments of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America to settle the remaining differences between
them in order to achieve agreement on the cessation of
nuclear testing by 1 January 1963, and to issue instructions to their representatives on the Sub-Committee on
a Treaty for the Discontinuance of Nuclear Weapon
Tests to achieve this end;
4. Endorses the eight-nation memorandum of 16
April 1962 as a basis for negotiation;
5. Calls upon the parties concerned, taking as a basis
the above-mentioned memorandum and having regard
to the discussions on this item at the seventeenth session
of the General Assembly, to negotiate in a spirit of
mutual understanding and concession in order to reach
agreement urgently, bearing in mind the vital interests
of mankind;
6. Recommends that if, against all hope, the parties
concerned do not reach agreement on the cessation of all
tests by 1 January 1963, they should enter into an
immediate agreement prohibiting nuclear weapon tests
in the atmosphere, in outer space and under water,
accompanied by an interim arrangement suspending all
underground tests, taking as a basis the eight-nation
memorandum and taking into consideration other proposals presented at the seventeenth session of the General Assembly, such interim agreement to include adequate assurances for effective detection and identification
of seismic events by an international scientific commission;
7. Requests the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation
Committee on Disarmament to reconvene not later
than 12 November 1962, to resume negotiations on the
cessation of nuclear testing and on general and complete disarmament, and to report to the General Assembly by 10 December 1962 on the results achieved with
regard to the cessation of nuclear weapon tests.
1165th plenary meeting,
6 November 1962.
R

The General Assembly,
Believing that a cessation of nuclear weapon tests 1s
the concern of all peoples and all nations,
Declaring it imperative that an agreement prohibiting
nuclear weapon tests for all time should be concluded as
rapidly as possible,
Recalling its resolutions 1648 (XVI) of 6 November
1961 and 1649 (XVI) of 8 November 1961,
Profoundly regretting that the agreements called for
in those resolutions have not yet been achieved,
Noting that the endeavour to negotiate a nuclear test
ban agreement has been taking place at the Conference
of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament,

Noting that the discussions and negot1at10ns at
Geneva are based on the draft treaty submitted on 28
November 1961 by the Union of Soviet Socialist RepubIics,8 the memorandum submitted on 16 April 1%2 by
Brazil, Burma, Ethiopia, India, Mexico, Nigeria,
Sweden and the United Arab Republic 4 and the comprehensive and limited draft treaties submitted on 27
August 1962 by the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America, 11
1. Urges the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation
Committee on Disarmament to seek the conclusion of a
treaty with effective and prompt international verification which prohibits nuclear weapon tests in all environments for all time ;
2. Requests the negotiating Powers to agree upon an
early date on which a treaty prohibiting nuclear weapon
tests shall enter into force ;
3. N ates the discussions and documents regarding
nuclear testing contained in the two reports of the
Conference ;6
4. Requests the Secretary-General to bring to the
attention of the Eighteen-Nation Committee the records
of the seventeenth session of the General Assembly
relating to the suspension of nuclear testing.
1165th plenary meeting,
6 November 1962.
1767 (XVII). Question of general and complete
disarmament

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1722 (XVI) of 20 December
1961,
Convinced that the aim of general and complete disarmament must be achieved on the basis of the eight
agreed principles recognized by the General Assembly
in resolution 1722 (XVI),
Reaffirming its responsibility for disarmament under
the Charter of the United Nations,
Taking note of the two interim progress reports of
the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on
Disarmament, 6 the draft treaty on general and complete
di~armament under strict international control, submitted by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,7 and
the outline of basic provisions of a treaty on general
and complete disarmament in a peaceful world. submitted by the United States of America, 8
Noting with regret that during six months of negotiations at Geneva little agreement was achieved on vital
problems of disarmament,
Expressing its appreciation to the participants in the
Eighteen-Nation Committee engaged in disarmament
negotiations at Geneva for their perseverance in trying
to reach agreement,
Welcoming the spirit of compromise which prompted
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United
States of America to introduce certain modifications into
their two draft treaties on disarmament,
3 !hid.,
4 !bid.,

annex 1, section I.
section T.
6 lbid., document DC/205, annex 1, sections O and P.
6 [bid., documents DC/203 and DC /205.

7 C! fficial Rccnrds of tlzr Gn1.cral Assembly, Se1•e11teenth
Srsszon, Annexes, agenda item 1)0. document A/C.l/867.
8 A/C.1/875.
