United Nations

S/PV.6464

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6464th meeting
Wednesday, 22 December 2010, 11.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Rice/Mrs. DiCarlo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Ms. Čolaković
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Briens
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Nishida
Mr. Assaf
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2010/630)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-70462 (E)

*1070462*

S/PV.6464

The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2010/630)
The President: As this is the last scheduled
meeting of the Security Council for this year, I would
like to express, on behalf of the Council, our deep
appreciation and thanks to our colleagues who will be
leaving us at the end of the year: Ambassador Thomas
Mayr-Harting of Austria, Ambassador Tsuneo Nishida
of Japan, Ambassador Claude Heller of Mexico,
Ambassador Ertuğrul Apakan of Turkey and
Ambassador Ruhakana Rugunda of Uganda. We have
been through a lot together over the past two years. We
have appreciated their seriousness of purpose, their
dedication to the work of the Security Council and
their friendship.
I have received letters from the representatives of
Afghanistan, Australia, Canada, Germany, India, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy and Pakistan, requesting
to participate in this meeting. I propose to invite those
representatives to participate in this meeting without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: On behalf of the Security
Council, I extend an invitation under rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan.
There being no objected it is so decided.
I have received a letter from His Excellency
Mr. Peter Schwaiger, Deputy Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, in which he
requests to participate in this meeting in accordance
2

with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/630, the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Staffan de Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura: I thank you, Madam President,
for giving us the opportunity as the year draws to a
close to review, together with the Security Council, the
situation in Afghanistan from the United Nations point
of view during a period of many developments. But
before doing so, I would like on behalf of all of my
Afghan, United Nations, and national and international
colleagues, and frankly of the whole international
diplomatic community in Kabul, to pay tribute and to
pay our respects to the memory of Ambassador Richard
Holbrooke. I was told by someone that his last words
to an Afghan doctor who started treating him when he
went to the hospital were “Please work for peace in
Afghanistan”.
We are grateful to him and we thank him for his
passionate commitment to assisting the Afghan people
in seeking their own political stability. I would like to
conclude this reflection with a few seconds of personal
prayer and silence.
Thank you, Madam President.
My presentation, which will be short as the report
has already been issued, will focus on the following
topics: the security situation and its linkage to the
NATO summit in Lisbon, transition, aid coherence/
realignment, human rights, reconciliation, regional
engagement, the serious issue of the drugs affecting
Afghanistan and neighbouring countries, the elections,
and some brief remarks on the budget.
With regard to the security situation, the
combined increased activities by Afghan and
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) forces
are intensifying and are showing results. At the same
time, we are detecting from anti-Government elements
attempts to show on their side some spectacular attacks
in order to dilute the feeling of a change of momentum.
What does that mean?
It means that we should be expecting and should
be ready for, I am afraid, a tense security environment
10-70462

S/PV.6464

over the next few months. Our assessment is that the
situation may get worse before it gets better. And the
proof of that was the attack on the United Nations
centre at Herat, where 21 of our colleagues were
stationed. They all survived, thanks to luck, good
preparation, strong support from the Afghan security
forces around them and our own private security
company linked to the Gurkha support. But it is a
signal; it is a message.
The Lisbon NATO summit, in our view, was very
successful. The linking of the two dates — 2011 and
2014 — as a long beginning of a long end contributed
to establishing a much clearer perspective for all
international, regional and national players about
mutual commitment to Afghanistan.
With regard to transition, the message is clear,
and I am sure that we are all hearing it: allow a more
rapid delegation of responsibility and ownership to the
Afghan authorities. In other words — to use a slogan
that we heard in Lisbon and which I think is a very
good one — to help, support and assist the Afghan
authorities to stand on their own, but not to stand
alone.
The United Nations system and I myself, on
behalf of the Secretary-General, are planning — as we
are expected to do by this Council and, above all, by
the Afghan authorities — to increase, security
permitting, our own capacity in the areas where
transition is expected to take place and also in areas
where security is improving, in order to do what we
should be doing — doing much more to assist in
capacity-building and support for Afghan ownership of
Afghan territory.
We believe that, with the leadership of the
Afghan authorities and Mr. Ashraf Ghani, together with
the teams that have been established, we are moving in
the right direction on transition, and the United
Nations, as I said, will, with the blessing of the
Council, be doing its part.
On aid coherence, since the Kabul Conference we
have been talking about aid realignment, which then
leads to aid coherence. Aid realignment means,
basically, what we heard at the Kabul Conference,
which calls for a stronger and more effective
realignment of all bilateral and multilateral aid along
the lines of the priorities set by the Afghan authorities,
according to clear benchmarks set by both sides.

10-70462

The United Nations, that is, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
working closely in partnership and as co-Chair of the
Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board, which is the
institution that was created jointly by the Afghan
authorities and the international community to actually
assist, monitor and support the realignment, will be
increasing its activities in that field. I have new teams
coming in. One senior colleague, in particular, will join
me, who has been assigned particularly to support the
enhancement.
Human rights are crucial. Everybody recognizes
that, and we are working on that issue. The priority for
us is to be able to continue to issue reports that are
seen as significant because they are considered to be
objective and frank — sometimes too frank — but they
nonetheless help everyone to realize that the civilian
rights in human rights in Afghanistan are important for
the Afghans.
The issue of civilian casualties has been an issue
included in our report, and we will continue to include
that issue, hoping to improve that situation further with
fine-tuning. We have heard from President Karzai
several times, as well as from many other partners,
how important it is to actually address the issue of
civilian casualties in the best possible way; hopefully
we will not see repetitions of the figures we have seen
so far. There has, however, been an increase, as the
Council knows.
On the issue of women, reports are coming out —
and more will come out — about the violence affecting
women in particular. I must say, the results of the
election so far have been very encouraging regarding
the engagement and the involvement of women in the
future parliament. But we will continue to play our role
in that area. That has been requested by everyone, and
it is, frankly, required by our own moral compass.
On reconciliation and reintegration, everyone
recognizes that there is no military solution. Frankly,
even the Taliban do so, even if they will not say so
publicly. There is no military solution to the conflict in
Afghanistan — hence the importance of initiatives
such as the Peace Jirga and the establishment, by
President Karzai, of the High Peace Council. The
United Nations, through its own newly established
Salaam Support Group, in which everyone will be
invited to participate, depending on their level of
competence and the requirements by the Afghan

3

S/PV.6464

authorities, has been put at the disposal of the High
Peace Council. That participation will be based on
competence, the preparation of reports, visions and
substantive and substantial support for what could
suddenly become an important and accelerated level of
dialogue. Additionally, that support will come in the
form of logistics. What the Council is helping us with,
by asking for a strong logistical capacity, is being put
at the disposal of the Afghans, who are going to talk to
each other, both inside or outside Afghanistan. That has
already been requested three times, and we have
provided it on the Council’s behalf.
Then, of course, confidence-building measures
represent an area where the United Nations, the
Security Council and the Mission can help in
eventually facilitating or explaining how to better
implement such measures, if and when they are
required.
On regional engagements, everybody again
recognizes that if there is — and when there is,
insha’allah — actual involvement in a dialogue, it will
be possible to sustain national dialogue only through a
long-term constructive engagement by all regional
players, and that means not only the immediate
neighbours, but also the distant and concerned
neighbours. In that sense, many initiatives are taking
place. As we speak, if I am not mistaken, President
Karzai is in Ankara for discussions facilitated by the
Turkish Government on a trilateral basis. I think many
more meetings are likely to take place in that context in
the coming year. I understand that even in Washington,
D.C., there is the possibility of a trilateral opportunity
sometime early next year. All those bilateral, trilateral
and regional initiatives are welcome and should be
supported in the right direction.
The United Nations in Kabul is doing its part in
the Kabul Silk Road initiative and is supporting other
initiatives by regional players. We understand that, by
the end of next year, in November, another Bonn
conference will possibly take place, as announced at
the NATO summit, and it will probably be — and I do
not want to prejudge here the decision by the Turkish
authorities — preceded by another regional opportunity
and discussion of the type we have had in the past.
Whatever the case, we will play a role, because we
recognize that all members of the regional context are
also Members of the United Nations.

4

On the issue of drugs, which is linked to the
question of regional issues, there has been a substantial
increase in drug production in spite of a disease
affecting drug production that we hope was sent by
God. It has also, unfortunately, contributed to an
increase in price and therefore also to an increase in
interest in producing, selling, transporting and storing
drugs. That is affecting 900,000 Afghans and major
neighbours, both close and distant. We welcome the
visit to Kabul of the new Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, who has
been very engaged and has been giving renewed energy
to the initiatives at the regional and national levels in
that context.
On elections, allow me to make a few points —
actually eight, but each of them short — on behalf of
the diplomatic community in Kabul and myself.
First, although it is late, we can never stress
enough how proud all of us are and should be and must
congratulate the Afghan people, the Afghan National
Security Forces and President Karzai for having held
elections in a country that, we know, is in a conflict
and is facing very challenging circumstances.
Second, at the end of the day, 4.2 million
Afghans, out of 10.5 million eligible voters, voted
despite the security situation and in spite of two serious
warnings from the Taliban to not go to vote.
Third, we recognize the diligent, committed and
intense work carried out by the two Afghan
independent electoral commissions nominated by the
President.
Fourth, the United Nations, the Russian
Federation, the United States, the European Union,
Japan, Canada and Turkey have all welcomed the
announcement — I repeat, the announcement — by the
electoral commissions on 24 November, and finally on
30 November, of the certification of the results of the
18 September Wolesi Jirga elections.
Fifth, the elections of 18 September, like all other
previous elections, included substantial numbers of
cases of fraud and irregularities. That is regrettable, but
we are dealing with a young democracy in a very
difficult environment. Both the Independent Electoral
Commission
and
the
Electoral
Complaints
Commission, the two electoral commissions, working
together, tried and did a lot of work, we have to
recognize, in trying to remove those cases of fraud that

10-70462

S/PV.6464

they were able to detect. By doing so, they sent a
signal against impunity, which might have been an
important message for all Afghans to hear.
Sixth, we have to recognize the independence of
all Afghan institutions, both electoral and judiciary,
and that they act within their clearly defined areas of
competence and in accordance with the relevant
Afghan laws and the Afghan Constitution.
Seventh, with the certification of all results by the
bodies mandated by the law, the two Electoral
Commissions, the electoral process is now
procedurally concluded. Notwithstanding whatever the
judiciary system will have to do, following its own
procedures, the expected next steps are the
inauguration of the new Parliament, pursuant to the
electoral law.
Finally, we welcome the announcement by
President Karzai’s spokesperson that the President
intends to inaugurate the new Parliament by the end of
January.
Now that we have gone through the electoral
process, we must look into electoral reform. We have
been discussing the issue with all Afghan authorities
and members of Parliament. The feeling is that there is
a need for the sort of electoral reform that will help to
prevent some of the problems that have been
encountered in the latest election and in previous
elections. That is the task that we will have to take on
together. We are confident that the Afghan capacity for
bringing an inclusive political approach to solving
some of the pending issues will bring about inclusive
participation — despite the previous exclusion of some
ethnic groups in the elections — hopefully before
January.
In conclusion, I wish to thank the Afghan
authorities, members of the Security Council, our
friend and colleague who is the European Union
representative in Kabul, and our friends and colleagues
representing the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) in Kabul for the support that we have
consistently received in implementing the UNAMA
mandate, which can only be fulfilled — and
incrementally so — if the necessary resources are
allocated to it in the next budget.
The President: I thank Special Representative de
Mistura for his briefing and I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.

10-70462

Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): First of all, allow me to
congratulate you, Madame President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of December. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his latest report (S/2010/630)
and Special Representative Staffan de Mistura for his
informative briefing and his dedicated and very able
leadership of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would also like to join my
good friend, Mr. de Mistura, in paying tribute to the
memory of the late Ambassador Holbrooke, whose
tireless efforts for peace and security in Afghanistan
will be remembered for many years to come.
We have arrived at the end of an eventful and
historic year in Afghanistan. The year began with the
London Conference, which was followed by the Peace
Jirga, the Kabul Conference, the second parliamentary
elections and the NATO Summit in Lisbon. This year,
we made momentous strides towards defining and
strengthening our relationship with international
partners, and sought to re-engage the Afghan people in
all efforts to bring peace and security to our country,
enhance collaboration with regional partners and reach
out to the armed opposition.
The Lisbon Conference was a milestone on the
road towards reassuring an enduring partnership
between Afghanistan and NATO. Among the key
outcomes of the meeting was the framework that we
adopted for the transition to increased Afghan
leadership over the next four years through a provinceby-province approach. High-level mechanisms, which
include key national and international stakeholders,
have been established to oversee the transition.
In 2011 we will see the launch of the transition
process. Practical preparations are under way to that
end. The commitment of our international partners to
sustained and expedited recruitment, training and
resourcing of the Afghan national army and police will
constitute a key component of their redefined mission.
The Lisbon NATO Summit sent three key
messages: first, a message to the Afghan people that
the international community will not abandon
Afghanistan and will remain engaged with the Afghan
people for the long haul; secondly, a message to
terrorists and extremists that they will fail in their
efforts to take Afghanistan back to the days of tyranny
and oppression; and thirdly, a message for the region
that cooperation is vital and that our neighbours have a

5

S/PV.6464

role to play and a stake in the security and stability of
Afghanistan.

many votes by election bodies. As has been announced,
the new Parliament will be inaugurated in late January.

Improving security, which remains a top priority
of the Afghan Government, has been a key focus of the
Afghan and International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) forces. Despite isolated incidents of attacks and
suicide bombings by the Taliban and other extremists,
overall security has improved. The latest assessments
show that ISAF and Afghan forces have for the first
time in the past two years begun to regain the military
initiative. That is particularly the case in the southern
provinces, which once saw high levels of insecurity.
The zone of security has expanded, with Afghan
security forces exerting greater presence and control in
areas previously held by enemy combatants.

The Afghan Government continues to focus on
enhancing the country’s relationships with its
neighbours in the region. Effective regional
cooperation is indispensable for solving the many
challenges that Afghanistan and countries in the region
face. We maintain high-level communications with the
Government of Pakistan with a view to broadening
cooperation in the fight against terrorism and order to
promote peace, stability and economic development in
both our countries.

Such success has a direct effect on public
perception. In Afghan villages, specifically in the
south, people acknowledge the progress being made
and have begun to engage with local authorities and the
Afghan and international forces. Consolidating the
support of the local populace is vital for successful
international engagement in Afghanistan. In that
context, emphasis must continue to be placed on
ensuring basic services for Afghans, as well as on
avoiding civilian casualties during military operations.
We welcome strengthened measures to foster
coordination among international forces and the review
of tactics, so that harm to local communities may be
prevented.
It is now clear to all that an end to the sanctuaries
in the region is crucial to the success of the
international campaign to stabilize the region and
eliminate the threat of terrorism. We cannot
underestimate the importance of addressing the
sanctuaries and safe havens in the region, which
operate as command and control headquarters for
terrorists and extremists. Without progress on that
front, all our efforts will have been in vain.
Our recent parliamentary elections, the second
since the fall of the Taliban in 2001, reaffirmed the
commitment of the Afghan people to the democratic
process. Millions of Afghans braved security threats to
cast their votes to elect members of the National
Assembly. Nobody expected a perfect election process.
Indeed, the circumstances under which the elections
took place gave rise to certain irregularities, including
the closing of polling stations and the discounting of

6

We continue to strengthen cooperation with all
our neighbours in the region. Afghanistan holds a
unique position in the region, in which it is
increasingly able to serve as an economic hub or an
Asian crossroads in the greater region.
An historic event occurred on 11 December in
Ashgabat at the Turkmenistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan
and India (TAPI) summit meeting, where important
agreements for the implementation of the gas pipeline
project were signed. The summit was a key step
forward in the realization of a regional framework for
cooperation in providing energy and energy security.
Once the transition process begins, reintegration
and reconciliation will be pursued as a matter of high
priority in Afghanistan. In fact, reconciliation is
becoming an essential political dimension of the
transition strategy. For reconciliation to work, the
Taliban must be ready to engage sincerely in peace
talks; but for reconciliation to succeed, the Taliban
must put down their arms, renounce violence and
choose the path of peace. Success lies in maintaining
our key asset: Afghan leadership and ownership of the
reconciliation process. There is also a role for others —
the international community, the region and the United
Nations — to support the Afghan Government to
succeed in its reconciliation efforts.
The Afghan Government has worked diligently
toward implementing our goals in security,
development and governance. Recent progress in all
three of those areas is outlined in the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board’s Progress Report
on the Afghanistan National Development Strategy,
released in November. The results overall were highly
encouraging, particularly in the areas of governance,
national transparency and accountability. In the first
100 days since the Kabul Conference, 95 per cent of

10-70462

S/PV.6464

planned activities for creating an efficient and effective
government were completed, including recruitment of
24 new district governors and the drafting of new
anti-corruption laws.
The Afghan Government will continue to pursue
effective and timely implementation of all national
priority strategies. In that regard, we are monitoring
progress and challenges in relation to all programmes
through
the
recently
established
monitoring
mechanism.
The most important assessment of the situation in
Afghanistan comes from Afghans themselves. Public
opinion in Afghanistan, according to recent surveys,
reflects that the majority of Afghans continue to
positively assess their Government and support
national reconciliation efforts, and most importantly,
they share the perspective that the country is heading
in the right direction.
As transition begins, there are clear roles for both
the Afghan Government and the international
community. In the four years ahead, the measure of
success will be determined by the strength of the
partnership of the international community and
Afghanistan. The focus of this partnership must be on
building the Afghan Government’s capacity to take
responsibility. The transition process goes far beyond
the training of Afghan security forces; our partnership
must actively address not only security, but
development and governance.
A stable and prosperous Afghanistan requires
unity of understanding, unity of efforts and unity of
action. And I assure the Council that we will spare no
effort to do our part.
The President: I will now call on members of the
Council.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, I wish to
thank you, Madam President, for your kind words
about me and my delegation.
Given the topic of our discussion today, I would
like to start by remembering Ambassador Holbrooke
and his vast legacy. At the time of his passing he was
doing his utmost to help yield a stable and prosperous
Afghanistan. His loss will be deeply felt, and the world
will miss this outstanding diplomat, who worked
tirelessly for international peace and stability.

10-70462

Turning to the subject of our meeting, I wish to
warmly salute Ambassador Tanin. It is always a pleasure
to see him. I also would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2010/630) and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, for his valuable efforts and his comprehensive
and insightful briefing.
Let me emphasize once again that we very much
appreciate the efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and Mr. De Mistura
in Afghanistan, in particular the assistance provided
during the elections. We are heartened that the United
Nations is determined to do its utmost, even in the face
of attacks.
Turkey condemns in the strongest terms the
terrorist attack on the United Nations compound in
Herat on 23 October. Such deliberate terrorist attacks
should not deter us. They should only strengthen our
determination to assist the Afghan people in
establishing lasting peace and stability. We salute the
courage of the UNAMA staff and assure them of our
continued support and solidarity.
The year 2010 was an important year and a
milestone for Afghanistan. Although the situation
continues to be serious and requires constant intensive
and coordinated efforts, we believe that the Afghan
Government and the international community are on
the right track in Afghanistan. At the London and
Kabul conferences earlier this year and at the NATO
summit in Lisbon more recently, the international
community and Afghanistan have sealed the process of
sustainable transition to Afghan ownership and
responsibility.
All along, we have believed that ensuring the
durability of the achievements made so far in
Afghanistan is directly linked with cementing Afghan
ownership and empowering the Afghan people. In that
regard, we are glad to see that the Afghan Government
is showing strong political will to take that process
forward and is doing its part to implement the Kabul
process. At the same time, transition should in no way
be interpreted to mean “exit”. It is a gradual and
irreversible process that will be defined by the needs
and requirements of Afghan institutions. Therefore, the
international community should be steadfast in its
commitments and should align its assistance to
conform to the conditions, priorities and requirements
of the Afghan Government.

7

S/PV.6464

We believe that the United Nations in general and
UNAMA in particular have an important role to play in
the civilian aspects of transition. For transition to be
effective and irreversible, Afghan institutions will need
to be strong and capable, and in that the support of the
United Nations is critical. Therefore it is incumbent on
us to make sure that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and UNAMA have the means and
resources they need to provide the assistance that will
be required.
Lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan
ultimately require political reconciliation. That process
should seek to embrace all segments of society, give
them fair opportunities to serve the Afghan cause and
enable their representation. Thus we welcome the
creation of the High Peace Council by President Karzai
and the implementation of the Afghan peace and
reintegration programme. We also welcome the setting
up of the Salaam Support Group within UNAMA to
provide support to that process as required.
We believe that elections are another requirement
for peace and stability and the normalization of the
political space in Afghanistan. In that regard, the
holding as planned of the second parliamentary
elections since 2001, on 18 September, in spite of the
difficult security conditions, was an important stage in
the vital political process. Turkey commends the
Government of Afghanistan for its determined efforts
under the effective leadership of President Karzai to
make that possible, with the support of the
international community.
We also commend the Afghan people on their
active interest and participation in the elections. We
condemn all the attacks and attempts to undermine the
election process by violence. We offer our condolences
with regard to those who have lost their lives.
While recognizing that there were irregularities,
we appreciate the critical role played by the Afghan
electoral bodies to make sure that the election results
were as transparent and credible as possible. It is our
sincere wish that the results of the parliamentary
elections announced by the Independent Election
Commission will benefit the people of Afghanistan.
The swift commencement of the work of the new
parliament will directly contribute to the success of the
process by which Afghan authorities are assuming
responsibility in their own country. It will also

8

reinforce national unity and solidarity, which are
imperative for lasting peace and stability.
While the support of the whole international
community for the process in Afghanistan is essential,
many of the challenges Afghanistan faces require, first
and foremost, the constructive support of its regional
partners. That is why Turkey has been particularly
active in ensuring cooperation between Afghanistan
and its neighbours, as well as across the region, with a
view to encouraging the countries involved to jointly
address the challenges that affect them as a whole. In
this regard, we hosted the fourth Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan (RECCA) in
Istanbul in November, and held in its margins a
meeting of the Academic Platform for Afghanistan,
with the participation of academics from RECCA
countries.
The fifth summit-level meeting of the TurkeyAfghanistan-Pakistan Trilateral Summit Process will
take place in Istanbul on 24 December. The Trilateral
Summit Process, launched in 2007, has evolved into a
vibrant platform that permits the development of
multidimensional cooperation on a wide spectrum of
areas.
Turkey is confident that Afghanistan’s stability,
as well as its social and political harmony, will grow
stronger in the future. The implementation of the
process requires determined leadership on the part of
the Afghan authorities, and close coordination by
Afghanistan’s partners. For its part, Turkey is ready to
its utmost and to support Afghanistan as long as is
required.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
thank the Secretary-General for the comprehensive
report before us (S/2010/630), and of course our thanks
go to his Special Representative, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, for his informative briefing. I also thank
Ambassador Tanin for his statement.
Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomed the holding of
the Afghan parliamentary elections on 18 September
and commends the Afghan people for their
participation in that important democratic exercise,
despite a challenging political, security and geographic
environment that saw an increased number of incidents
and civilian casualties on polling day. We commend the
Afghan electoral institutions and bodies for their hard
work. Despite all the difficulties, the accomplishment
of the election represents an important foundation for

10-70462

S/PV.6464

building Afghanistan’s future. We fully agree with the
Secretary-General’s view that the international
community and the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) need to continue lending
their technical and political support to the pursuit of
long-term electoral reform aimed at improving the
capacity of Afghanistan’s electoral authorities.
Bosnia and Herzegovina considers the promotion
of peace and reintegration to be a very important tool
for building a brighter future for Afghanistan. We
welcome the inauguration of the High Peace Council
by President Karzai on 7 October, as well as UNAMA’s
decision to establish an internal capacity for
responding to specific requests from that Council for
technical and practical assistance. We expect that such
practical steps will continue to multiply and help create
a firm path to the process of reconciliation in general.
It is also encouraging that the Afghan
Government has achieved targets for increasing the
size of the Afghan National Army and the Afghan
National Police, and adopted anti-corruption action
plans. We were particularly pleased to learn that the
Cabinet has approved a budget line in the State budget
for the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission. That is a hopeful sign for the future work
of the Commission, which we hope will continue to
make the protection of human rights a central issue in
the future development of Afghanistan. In addition, we
welcome positive measures taken in the area of access
to justice with the opening of Ministry of Justice legal
aid offices in several provinces. This represents an
encouraging concrete step that should give the Afghan
people more confidence in their country’s justice
system.
With regard to aid coherence, Bosnia and
Herzegovina welcomes UNAMA’s efforts to support
the coordination of development activities at the subnational level. We share the Secretary-General’s
opinion that aligning provincial development councils
and donors with Government-led processes is essential
to future development.
Regarding
humanitarian
assistance,
reconstruction and development, we strongly support
refugee return and welcome the return of more than
112,000 Afghan refugees in 2010, nearly double the
number of returns in 2009. This would not have been
possible without the valuable assistance of the United
Nations and its agencies. We commend the work of all

10-70462

the parties concerned in creating the conditions
necessary for the returns, including improved security
in some parts of Afghanistan, the provision of
employment
opportunities
and
the
Afghan
Government’s land allocation schemes. We reiterate
our call on all actors to continue their valuable work to
create the conditions necessary for economically
sustainable returns.
We are encouraged by the development of
regional cooperation between Afghanistan and its
neighbours, and in that context we welcome the role
played by Turkey in facilitating and advancing regional
engagement in Afghanistan. We hope that the
recommendations on priority investment issued by the
most recent Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan, held in Istanbul, will
encourage further regional economic cooperation and
produce concrete results on the ground.
We also welcome the progress made in the area of
mine clearance, which will help the country on its path
to economic development, especially in rural
communities. The concrete benefits of these actions
include improved security for the Afghan people, as
well as the opening of land for the new railway system.
Bosnia and Herzegovina notes with concern that
the human rights situation in Afghanistan has
deteriorated significantly compared with previous
years. We remain particularly alarmed about civilians
who continue to suffer from deadly attacks across the
country. They remain the most vulnerable targets, and
we call on all relevant parties to redouble their efforts
in the area of the protection of civilians. We must
engage all our resources to protect this innocent
population.
Regarding the mission support and operational
issues of UNAMA, we welcome the signing on
28 November of an agreement between the United
Nations and Kuwait establishing a UNAMA support
office in Kuwait in order to help maintain its vital
technical and administrative functions in a secure
environment.
In conclusion, our thanks go to the staff of
UNAMA and to all United Nations personnel in
Afghanistan for their dedicated work to improve the
everyday life of the Afghan people.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his

9

S/PV.6464

thorough analysis of the situation in Afghanistan. We
greatly value the work of Mr. De Mistura and the
Mission he heads.
The Kabul process is at a watershed point in the
continuing tense conditions in the country’s military
and political situation. The main source of the threat to
Afghanistan and the region as a whole remains the
terrorist activity of the Taliban and Al-Qaida,
witnessed by the increase in their targeted acts of
violence against the civilian population and United
Nations personnel.
We note the successes of the international
military presence in southern Afghanistan. So far,
unfortunately, they are not part of a long-term positive
trend. At the same time, extremists have been
considerably more active in the north and north-east of
the country. The Afghan security forces and the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) must
step up their activity to counter the spread of instability
to the north of the country and across its borders,
jointly resolving the complex tasks involved in
normalizing the situation in Afghanistan.
The withdrawal of ISAF will be possibly only
once it has discharged its Security Council mandate.
That will require the formation of multilaterally trained
national armed forces capable of combating terrorism,
banditry and drug-related crime on their own and of
stabilizing the overall situation in Afghanistan.
We support the policy of the leadership of
Afghanistan aimed at national reconciliation. Its
cornerstone is the recognition by anti-Government
forces of the Afghan Constitution, the cessation of their
armed struggle, and their cutting ties with Al-Qaida
and other terrorist groups. Any other interpretation of
national
reconciliation
would
be
perceived
unequivocally by extremists as a signal of the
international community’s readiness to compromise on
the conditions. We reaffirm the imperative need to back
the effective sanctions regime imposed under
resolution 1267 (1999).
We view the very holding of parliamentary
elections as an achievement of the Afghan Government
and expect the country’s new Parliament, in
cooperation with the President and other branches of
authority, to promote the building of a peaceful,
independent, prosperous and neutral State in
Afghanistan.

10

One pressing issue on the agenda is the
intensification of international counter-narcotics
efforts. We note the growing attention devoted to that
problem in the report. Drugs proceeds fuel the Taliban
war machine, corrupt Government structures and
impede the building of a healthy economy. Having
merged with terrorism, Afghan drug trafficking now
threatens international peace and stability.
It has so far proven impossible to reverse the
trend of growing volumes of opiates emanating from
Afghanistan. The sharp reduction in this year’s harvest
of opium poppies was the result of crop disease.
According to the recent data of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the surface area
of drug crops eradicated in 2010 was the lowest of the
past five years.
On the basis of the Secretary-General’s data on
the growing divide between the prices for opiates and
other agricultural products, one can conclude that the
attraction of investing in drug manufacturing and
trafficking is growing. We again underscore the need
for more active steps to physically eradiate drug crops
and laboratories. At next year’s third international
conference on combating Afghan narcotics within the
framework of the Paris-Moscow process, we expect the
adoption of serious decisions that will allow the
deployment of comprehensive efforts along the entire
chain of narcotics manufacturing and supply, from the
eradication of drug crops and infrastructure and the
marking of precursors to including drug lords on
sanctions lists.
The Russian Federation intends to substantially
increase its contribution to implementing UNODC’s
special narcotics programme for Afghanistan. At the
Russia-NATO summit held in Lisbon, President of the
Russian Federation Dmitry Medvedev again drew
attention to our long-standing proposal to establish
cooperation to counter Afghan narcotics between
NATO and the Collective Security Treaty Organization,
which is actively combating drug trafficking in the
framework of Operation Channel. Indeed, many NATO
members are participating as national observers in the
Operation.
Russia lends the international military presence
real support in its efforts to stabilize the situation in
Afghanistan. At the Russia-NATO summit in Lisbon,
agreement was reached whereby transit conditions
provided by Russia to NATO for shipments of cargo to

10-70462

S/PV.6464

Afghanistan will also now cover return transit. We
intend to expand the training of personnel of law
enforcement structures in Afghanistan, Central Asia
and Pakistan, first and foremost in the field of counternarcotics. A so-called helicopter package has been
approved to train Afghan pilots and to supply and
service Russian helicopter hardware to meet the needs
of Afghanistan’s security forces.
We also assist Afghanistan bilaterally. We supply
small arms and light weapons and related ammunition
to law enforcement authorities. We are currently
training Afghan police and civilian affairs specialists,
including by increasing the number of our grants. We
stand ready to rehabilitate facilities that were built with
the assistance of the Soviet Union and are extremely
necessary to rehabilitating the Afghan economy.
We endorse the Secretary-General’s intention to
assist in developing effective regional cooperation to
resolve Afghanistan’s problems. Contributions to that
common effort are made by many regional
organizations and configurations, including the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization. We generally
endorse the report’s conclusions and proposals, but
should like to see the analysis of the impact of the
situation in Afghanistan on international peace and
security become more substantive.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Let me associate
myself with Ambassador DiCarlo’s words of
appreciation for our colleagues who will leave the
Council at the end of this year. I should like also to join
others in paying tribute to Richard Holbrooke, an
outstanding diplomat who will be greatly missed.
Adding to the condolences expressed by the British
Foreign Secretary, I convey the condolences of the
British delegation to Ambassador Holbrooke’s family,
the United States delegation and the United States
Government and people.
We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2010/630) and to the Special Representative
for his briefing.
The United Kingdom is committed to working
with the Afghan Government, the United Nations and
the wider international community towards a more
secure and more stable Afghanistan. While substantial
challenges remain, it is important that we recognize
that progress is being made. This progress is being
achieved in partnership with the Afghan Government.

10-70462

Increasingly, the solutions to the challenges we face
are Afghan-led and Afghan-owned.
We welcome the announcement of the final
certified results of Afghanistan’s 2010 parliamentary
elections and look forward to the inauguration of the
new Parliament as soon as possible. We applaud the
courage displayed by Afghan voters, officials and
candidates before, during and after polling day. The
United Kingdom condemns in the strongest possible
terms the attempts made by insurgents to undermine
the polling process and violence directed against
polling stations and voters. The elections were held
under challenging circumstances. The Independent
Electoral Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission should be congratulated on the
improvements that were made in the conduct of these
elections and their efforts to minimize electoral fraud.
It is important now to focus on longer-term
electoral reform. At the Kabul Conference, the Afghan
Government committed itself to strengthening
Afghanistan’s electoral framework. We welcome the
efforts of the United Nations to build support and
momentum for an Afghan-led and realistic reform
agenda, and stand ready to assist where we can,
alongside the wider international community.
Afghanistan was a central theme of NATO’s
November summit in Lisbon. The United Kingdom
welcomes the continuing commitment of all 48 nations
contributing to the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) and to the cause of a secure and stable
Afghanistan. For its part, the United Kingdom will
work alongside our ISAF partners and the Afghan
Government to realize President Karzai’s objective of
transferring lead security responsibility to the Afghan
National Security Forces in all provinces by the end of
2014. The transition process will, of course, be
dependent on conditions in each district and province.
We welcome the proactive approach of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to supporting the civilian aspects of transition through
the prioritization of staffing and the support it provides
to provisional authorities. We look forward to receiving
further details on this subject from Special
Representative De Mistura in due course.
Transition will see ISAF’s role evolve away from
combat and towards increased training, mentoring and
support. It is encouraging to see the commitments that
contributing countries have already made to the NATO

11

S/PV.6464

Training Mission to Afghanistan. Our training efforts
are critical to increasing the capacity of the Afghan
National Security Forces and making transition
possible. Although pledges have been made to meet
immediate shortfalls in priority trainers, the United
Kingdom will continue to press our international
partners to ensure that the NATO Training Mission
continues to have the resources it needs to fulfil its
objectives.
Civilian casualties are of deep concern to the United
Kingdom. We feel it important to restate the fact that the
large majority of such casualties are the consequence of
actions by insurgents, not pro-Government forces. We
welcome the continued efforts of ISAF and the Afghan
National Security Forces to minimize civilian casualties.
An Afghan-led political process is necessary to
underpin the military progress being made by ISAF
and the Afghan National Security Forces. We welcome
the steps that the Afghan Government has taken in this
regard, including the inauguration of the High Peace
Council to lead peace and reintegration efforts and the
development of an effective and sustainable
reintegration programme. We support this political
process for all Afghans who meet the Afghan
Government’s conditions, cut ties with Al-Qaida,
renounce violations and agree to live within the Afghan
constitutional framework.
As the Secretary-General recommends in his
report, it is imperative that the international community
support the Afghan Government in taking forward that
vital work. We look forward to UNAMA’s Salaam
Support Group playing an important role in that regard.
Finally, Afghanistan is and will remain a priority
for the United Kingdom. While the challenges we face
are considerable, we are fully committed to the
objective of a secure Afghanistan and will continue to
support UNAMA in its efforts, and Staffan de Mistura
in his very effective leadership, to realize that goal.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would first like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Staffan de Mistura for his very comprehensive and
informative briefing. I would also like to express my
gratitude to the men and women of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), who
have demonstrated a deep commitment to this very
difficult mission. Of course, I also value the presence
and statement of our friend Ambassador Tanin.

12

At the outset, I wish to express my deep sadness
on the loss of Ambassador Richard Holbrooke, the
United States Special Envoy for Afghanistan and
Pakistan. His life-long dedication to the international
community will be remembered. I would like to extend
my most sincere condolences to his family.
Japan welcomes the certification of the final
results of the election for new members of the Afghan
Parliament through an election process managed by
Afghans themselves, although we recognize that the
recent report (S/2010/630) of the Secretary-General
indicates that there was widespread fraud and
irregularities. We praise Afghan citizens for
participating in the elections so that they themselves
could decide their own future. We also pay tribute to
the Afghan authorities concerned, including the
Independent Electoral Commission and the Electoral
Complaints Commission. We expect the reconstruction
and development of Afghanistan to proceed smoothly
under the newly elected Parliament. We also hope that
the Afghan Government will make the utmost efforts
for longer-term electoral reform to initiate a freer and
more transparent electoral system through strong
support from UNAMA and the international
community.
The Japanese Government welcomes the
significant achievement of the NATO Summit in
Lisbon in November. It was an important step that
NATO allies and partners confirmed their commitment
to creating conditions that would enable Afghan forces
to take the lead for security in the country by the end
of 2014. Japan is determined to provide assistance for
strengthening the capacity of the Afghan National
Security Forces by fully cooperating and coordinating
its work with UNAMA and other international donors.
The Japanese Diet recently passed a supplementary
budget to provide $540 million in assistance as part of
a package worth up to $5 billion over five years. Japan
is providing assistance for the salaries and equipment
of the Afghan National Police. In addition, we plan to
cooperate with Turkey in the training of police and we
will enhance our contribution to the Afghan National
Army trust fund. It is our sincere desire to contribute to
strengthening the security capability of the Afghan
Government. In that regard, Japan has been positively
considering the possibility of sending medical and
sanitation personnel of the Self-defence Force for
medic education and the training of the Afghan
National Army.

10-70462

S/PV.6464

At the successful Kabul Conference in July,
important progress was made towards the country’s
development when the Afghan leadership presented its
national priority programme, to which the international
community committed to align its assistance.
Improving governance in Afghanistan is essential for
the future development of the country. In that regard, it
is of critical importance that the Afghan Government
tackles corruption.
We welcome the inauguration of the High Peace
Council. It is important that the Afghan peace and
reintegration programme — created at the Kabul
Conference — is steadily implemented by the Afghan
Government in order to achieve tangible results and
further progress in the reintegration process, which
must be led by the Afghan Government with support
from the international community. It is important that
the international community, including Japan, not only
provide the necessary funding to the Afghan peace and
reintegration programme but also concrete ideas and
advice for development projects.
Having entered a new phase in the transition to
Afghan responsibility, UNAMA is now playing an
increasingly significant role in support of the Afghan
Government and people. The coordinating role of
UNAMA is important for progress in the Kabul
process. We highly appreciate the tireless efforts of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Staffan de Mistura. We will continue to cooperate with
him and with UNAMA.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that even
after we leave the Security Council, Japan’s
contribution to Afghanistan will remain unchanged.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Staffan de Mistura and Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for
the briefing and statement they have made,
respectively.
The Independent Electoral Commission recently
published the results of the parliamentary elections in
Afghanistan. The holding of those elections was a
major event in the political life of Afghanistan this year
and represented another significant step towards the
Afghan people governing their country themselves. It
is our sincere hope that the Afghan people will seize
this opportunity to further consolidate unity and

10-70462

consensus and push ahead for the early achievement of
peace, reconciliation and development.
Achieving
durable
peace,
stability
and
development in Afghanistan is in the common interests
of the international community. The Afghan peace and
reconstruction process is currently undergoing a
critical period of transition in which it still faces
numerous challenges. That process must be effectively
Afghan-owned and -led.
China supports the Afghan Government in its
efforts to strengthen its national capacity-building to
effectively exercise its authority over the whole of its
territory. Balanced efforts are needed to advance all
sectors — including economic development, security
and stability, national reconciliation, governance, the
rule of law and drug control — in order to make
continuous progress in the Kabul process. We
encourage the Afghan Government to take effective
measures to expedite its economic development and
improve its people’s livelihoods.
China supports progress in building up Afghan
police and security forces, thereby upgrading the
country’s own capacity to maintain national security.
The transfer of security responsibility to the Afghan
Government should be conducted in an orderly manner
on the precondition of ensuring security and stability.
We support the Afghan Government in advancing
the peace and reintegration programme. We hope that it
will seriously consult its people and different political
factions to steadily expand the political base for
reconciliation.
In order to achieve durable peace, stability and
development, Afghanistan still needs the sustained
attention and support of the international community.
The international community needs to respect the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Afghanistan, deliver in earnest and fulfil its
commitment to aid the country and respect its priorities
in that process.
The United Nations is an important partner in the
Afghan peace and reconstruction process. China
supports the United Nations and UNAMA in
continuing to play a leading and coordinating role in
the Afghan peace and reconstruction process, and
hopes that UNAMA will make a greater contribution to
coordinating aid to Afghanistan.

13

S/PV.6464

Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I too would like to thank
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for the
clarity of his briefing on the situation in that country.
We also welcome Ambassador Tanin’s participation
and the perspective he has presented to us.
Madam President, Nigeria offers its deep
condolences on the demise of Ambassador Holbrooke,
whose pioneering work in Afghanistan cannot be
forgotten. Our greatest regret is that he did not live to
see the success of the work that he started in
Afghanistan. What we owe Ambassador Holbrooke is
to continue, so that the Afghans may realize his dreams
for the development and security of the country.
Nigeria welcomes the successful conclusion on
18 September of elections to the Lower House of the
parliament, the Wolesi Jirga, despite the huge
challenges endured, including the intimidation of
voters by insurgents, and reported cases of electoral
fraud. The certification of the final results has
enhanced the credibility of the country’s electoral
process and should serve as the foundation for further
progress in electoral reform. We commend the Afghanled Independent Electoral Commission for its efforts
and contributions, and UNAMA for providing the
requisite technical support for the elections.
The parties that have filed complaints with the
Electoral Complaints Commission should now allow
the legal process to take its course. The Complaints
Commission’s obligation to expeditiously and
transparently deal with all pending complaints cannot
be overstated. Both the Independent Electoral
Commission and the Complaints Commission should
take advantage of the ongoing discussions with the
United Nations to further strengthen their capacities.
We welcome the formal inauguration of the High
Peace Council by President Hamid Karzai. The
responsibility placed on its members is crucial to
national peace and unity. They should therefore create
a platform for reconciliation, as envisaged, and
promote peace and unity through confidence-building
measures. That is particularly relevant to the attempts
to reintegrate some armed groups that have expressed
their commitment to disarming, renouncing violence
and supporting the Government’s development efforts.
The volatile security situation in Afghanistan
continues to hinder the country’s political and

14

economic development. The persistent attacks by
insurgents and terrorists on innocent civilians and on
the personnel of non-governmental organizations and
the United Nations deserve our strong condemnation,
particularly the one on the United Nations multiagency compound on 23 October. Our focus and
priority should be on continuing to strengthen
Afghanistan’s security capacity and on implementing
the Government’s security framework. These
conditions are unquestionably vital to reinforcing the
Government’s
preparedness
to
assume
full
responsibility for law enforcement by 2014. UNAMA’s
technical and military training and capacity-building
support remain important and will make the difference.
By fulfilling its pledges, the international community
will also be helping the process.
The international community must continue to
support Afghanistan’s fledgling democratic structures
and show solidarity with the Government. Threats and
attacks must not be allowed to hinder efforts to foster
peace within the country and the entire region. We
welcome Afghanistan’s regional policy, emphasizing
political dialogue with neighbouring countries. The
policy’s benefits are already evident in Afghanistan’s
improved and enhanced relationships with its
neighbours.
Nigeria welcomes UNAMA’s role in generating a
coherent approach to donor assistance in support of the
Afghan Government’s anti-corruption agenda. We
support the strengthening and expanding UNAMA’s
field offices and the efforts for greater coordination
among United Nations partners through the
development of the Integrated Strategic Framework,
which is currently under way, as key steps towards
UNAMA’s effective delivery on its development
coordination mandate.
Nigeria notes with concern the limited access for
humanitarian activities, despite the increasing demand
for such assistance. More concerted efforts are needed
to address the situation. However, we appreciate the
tremendous work of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in facilitating the return a
number of Afghan refugees.
Nigeria welcomes the announcement that the new
parliament will be inaugurated in early January 2011. It
is our expectation that the Afghan people and
Government will seize this opportunity to deepen
confidence- and nation-building efforts in order to

10-70462

S/PV.6464

address in a concrete manner the issues of security and
governance in the country. We also thank those who
continue to provide training, mentoring and support to
the Afghan military and police, as well as those who
made financial commitments during the donor
conference.
In conclusion, Nigeria expresses its appreciation
to the staff and personnel of UNAMA for their
dedication, and to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his continuing commitment to
peace efforts in Afghanistan.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his informative
briefing on the situation in Afghanistan. I welcome the
participation in this meeting of the Afghan Permanent
Representative, Ambassador Tanin.
Uganda joins other members of the Council in
paying tribute to Ambassador Richard Holbrooke for
his tireless service and efforts in the pursuit of peace,
security and stability in Afghanistan. We once again
offer our sympathy and condolences on his passing to
his family and to the Government and people of the
United States.
Uganda congratulates the people of Afghanistan
on the completion of their elections, despite the
irregularities that were reported. We consider the
elections a positive step in the democratization and
healing process of the country. Now that elections are
over, we would like to encourage the Government to
reach out to all Afghans in the quest for peace and
stability in the country. There is no doubt that all sides
in the political spectrum will have to make efforts and
compromises in order to achieve a just and durable
political settlement.
We are concerned that the security situation in
some parts of the country has continued to deteriorate,
in spite of the efforts of the Government, supported by
the international community. Uganda condemns the
terrorist attacks by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other
extremist groups, which are aimed at disrupting peace
and security in the country. We welcome the efforts by
the Afghan Government to forge ahead with their
programmes for improving security, reintegration and
the formulation of a framework by which security
responsibilities will be handed to over to Afghan forces

10-70462

in 2014. We commend UNAMA for providing support
in this transition period.
We welcome the improved bilateral and regional
relations between Afghanistan and its neighbours. We
are convinced that the stability and prosperity of
Afghanistan are inextricably linked to those of its
neighbours. We therefore encourage Afghanistan to
strengthen even further cooperation with neighbouring
countries on the basis of the mutual desire to respond
to security concerns and enhance economic
cooperation.
We also welcome the progress that the Afghan
Government and people are making by increasingly
taking leadership and responsibility for the
development of their country. That is, in our view, a
prerequisite for building sustainable peace and
development.
Afghanistan will continue to require international
support and partnership. We welcome the Kabul
process agreed upon by the Afghan Government and its
international partners. We call upon development
partners to align their support to priorities set by the
country.
Finally, we would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the staff
of UNAMA for the work that they continue to carry out
under very difficult and challenging circumstances.
Since this may be the last formal meeting of the
Security Council in which I participate as the
representative of Uganda, I wish to say, as we approach
the end of our two-year tenure on the Security Council,
how much of an honour and a pleasure it has been for
me and my delegation to work with all Council
delegates. I wish to express our sincere appreciation to
you, Madam President, and the Council’s respective
delegations for the valuable cooperation and support
that the Ugandan delegation has received.
I also wish to express our appreciation and thanks
to the Security Council secretariat team and all other
staff members of the United Nations Secretariat who
have worked behind the scenes for their
professionalism and unwavering support during this
period.
Let me conclude by expressing our best wishes to
the delegations of Colombia, Germany, India, Portugal
and South Africa as incoming members of the Security
Council.

15

S/PV.6464

Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, for presenting the report (S/2010/630) and for
his strong commitment to the peace, stability and
development of the country. We would also like to
thank the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Tanin. We paid the greatest attention to
his statement, as usual.
We associate ourselves with the remarks
honouring the memory of Ambassador Holbrooke.
Over these past two years during which we have
had the honour and privilege to participate in the
Security Council, the greatest concerns of my
delegation regarding Afghanistan have focused on the
impacts of the conflict on the precarious security
situation of the population and the alarming number of
civilian casualties, including attacks against United
Nations personnel, and the building of an inclusive
political process that can lead to stability and
reconciliation in Afghanistan.
We have stressed that stability in Afghanistan
does not depend only on the success of military and
security operations, but rather on a process of dialogue
and genuine reconciliation, as well as on addressing the
real causes of violence by promoting development,
respect for human rights and the strengthening of the
rule of law. We share fully the position of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General that there is no
military solution in Afghanistan.
The support given to the strategy whereby
Afghan forces will resume lead responsibility for
security from 2014 has demonstrated the shared
resolve to tackle the remaining challenges. However,
we agree with the position of the Secretary-General
that this strategy should be guided by progress on the
ground and not implemented according to a rigid
timeline.
Here, we commend the efforts of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
and encourage them to continue assisting the Afghan
authorities to establish conditions that will enable them
to gradually take on full responsibility for governing
the country and for its security and economic
development, in keeping with the Kabul process. We
reiterate that the prospects for the success of this
process will be improved by an inclusive approach that

16

incorporates
minorities.

women

and

ethnic

and

religious

My delegation reiterates its serious concern at the
number of civilians, including women and children,
who have been killed or injured in acts of violence
linked to the conflict, which has risen sharply since
2009. We also want to express our concern at and
rejection of the recruitment of children by Taliban
forces and violence specifically targeting girls. We
urge all parties to fulfil their obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law and to
do everything possible to guarantee the protection of
civilians pursuant to Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 1882 (2009).
We also reiterate our total rejection of terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, and we condemn all
attacks against civilians and humanitarian and United
Nations personnel. We hope communication and
coordination between the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Afghan and ISAF forces will
continue to be strengthened in order to reduce civilian
casualties and improve the security situation in the
country.
Although the last elections, held on 18 September,
showed a clear strengthening of Afghanistan’s electoral
institutions since the preceding elections, the high
number of irregularities and complaints submitted to
the Electoral Complaints Commission is a reflection of
the challenges still to be faced in Afghanistan in the
area of institutional capacity-building. Transparency
and legitimacy in electoral processes are among the key
elements that will enable the Government to better fight
corruption and impunity.
It is important to take this opportunity to plan an
electoral reform for the long term, a reform that would
be designed by the Afghan Government itself, with the
support of UNAMA and the international community,
with a view to strengthening the capacities of the
electoral authorities.
As regards the rule of law, we reiterate that the
implementation of justice and accountability processes
is necessary to building a sustainable peace in
Afghanistan. That would include the fight against
corruption and organized crime. We commend the joint
initiatives, undertaken in particular by the
Governments of Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan, to
combat the production, trafficking and consumption of
drugs in the region. That cooperation, which is based

10-70462

S/PV.6464

on the concept of shared responsibility, will contribute
to promoting mutual trust and common strategies to
combat that phenomenon, which clearly has a direct
impact on the security situation in the region.
Finally, we reiterate our support and gratitude to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
his commitment and leadership in the pursuit of
dialogue and reconciliation, as well as the personnel of
UNAMA and the international presence in Afghanistan.
We are confident that the country’s leaders will remain
committed to their national priorities and take
advantage of the support provided to them by the
United Nations to ensure the stability, well-being and
development of the Afghan people.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. De Mistura for the
presentation he has just made on the situation in
Afghanistan, and I would associate myself with the
statement to be delivered in a little while by the
representative of the European Union.
I would also like to join all those who paid
tribute, in their statements, to Ambassador Richard
Holbrooke and his work in the service of peace and
security in Afghanistan.
The elections of 18 September 2010 were far
from perfect. They did, however, allow the Afghan
people to express themselves, and they allowed Afghan
institutions to prove that they were capable of
preparing, carrying out and ensuring, on their own, the
follow-up to those elections, which, let us remember,
were held in very difficult conditions. The results
announced on 24 November and 1 December 2010 by
the independent electoral entities must be respected,
and the new parliament must be convened as soon as
possible. I echo the Secretary-General’s warning
against calling into question the entire election process
under the pretext of carrying out a judicial inquiry.
I would like to reiterate my country’s support to
the independent electoral entities. Their role should be
at the heart of the new undertaking that awaits all of
us, that is, the reform of the electoral framework in
Afghanistan, a necessary reform that has been put off
for too long, as highlighted in resolution 1917 (2010).
By turning out to vote for their representatives,
Afghans of all ethnicities, religions and political
persuasions expressed the hope that their collective
future would be decided by a debate within their

10-70462

institutions, and not by weapons. This is a powerful
message, and one that calls for inter-Afghan
reconciliation. There will be no military victory
without a political solution, just as there will be no
successful reintegration without true reconciliation. We
continue to support the efforts of President Karzai in
that respect, and we welcome the establishment of the
High Peace Council. The hostile statements by certain
Taliban leaders should in no way deter Afghans who
are acting in good faith from the goal of peace.
That process must, of course, be led by the
Afghans themselves. But we must continue to highlight
the fact that they must respect the conditions that were
clearly reiterated at the Kabul Conference, namely,
renunciation of violence; absence of links to
international terrorism; respect for the Constitution;
and protection of human rights and the rights of
women. We trust that the Special Representative will
transmit that message, and we welcome his enhanced
engagement in that process.
The sanctions regime established by resolution
1267 (1999) will, when the time comes, be a useful
tool, combining incentives for and pressure on the
armed opponents to join the democratic process.
Finally, an end to the crisis in Afghanistan and
the country’s stability will depend on the strengthening
of regional dialogue, a dialogue that the United Nations
is best suited to support.
Since our most recent meeting, in September,
joint efforts by the International Security Assistance
Force and the Afghan National Security Forces have
allowed us to take the initiative with respect to the
Taliban and to strengthen the presence of the Afghan
State in some areas of the country. Little by little, the
Afghan army and police force are increasing in power.
Our efforts, whether in the military or training areas,
are thus starting to bear fruit, including in the Surobi
district and the Kapisa province, where the French
forces are serving. That is encouraging news for the
future of Afghanistan.
Our efforts are now aimed at implementing a
strategy to transfer all responsibility for security
matters to Afghans between now and 2014. That is one
of the main outcomes of the NATO Summit, which was
held in Lisbon on 19 and 20 November and at which
the Secretary-General and President Karzai were
present. That transition is in the same direction as the
path that we have been pursuing since the Bucharest

17

S/PV.6464

summit of 2008, namely Afghanization. It must be
carried out on the basis of security and governance
criteria, so that the transfer is lasting and irreversible
and takes into account the conditions on the ground.
That process will gradually redefine the outlines of our
civil and military engagement in Afghan. It is
important that UNAMA prepare for it.
Despite those encouraging developments, we do
not underestimate the difficulty of the challenges that
await us. The security situation remains a matter for
concern. In that respect, it is worrisome to note that
civilians are increasingly bearing the brunt of the
security problem. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/630) unfortunately confirms that the decrease
in the number of victims resulting from operations by
pro-Government forces, which was achieved through
the hard work of our soldiers and the increased risks
they assumed, is more than cancelled out by the
increase in the number of victims of the Taliban, whose
attacks target civilians and military personnel,
indiscriminately.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
gratitude to the staff of UNAMA and France’s full
support for the work of the Special Representative.
United Nations personnel have accomplished
remarkable things in very difficult conditions, as
recalled by the attack in Herat on 23 November. It is
crucial that, in the period ahead, the United Nations
stay actively engaged in Afghanistan, with financial
means and a mandate adapted to the challenges that it
will have to face.
Mr. Assaf (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his
efforts and his briefing. Allow me also to thank
Ambassador Tanin for his statement.
Let me express once again our sadness at the loss
of Ambassador Richard Holbrooke, the special envoy
of the United States to Afghanistan.
Allow me to make the following observations. The
mere holding of parliamentary elections on 18 September
2010, in a very difficult political, security and
geographical situation, is a positive step towards
entrenching democracy. It is indeed appropriate for us to
welcome the encouraging participation by candidates and
voters in such circumstances, particularly women.

18

However, widespread fraud and violations, as
reported by the Secretary-General, and the
deteriorating security situation, did not allow the
Afghan people to express their will in the desired
manner. We believe that there ought to be
accountability for those proven to have committed
violations or acts of fraud, in order to prevent such acts
in the future.
We would like to reiterate our condemnation of
the terrorist acts that have targeted innocent civilians
and international forces. We view the lack of
improvement in the security situation in many parts of
the country with concern, as security is a sine qua non
for economic and social development. Perhaps the
International Committee of the Red Cross’s description
of the security situation as being worse than ever is a
warning that the Security Council ought to heed.
Perhaps it should lead the Council to approach the
situation in Afghanistan in a more holistic manner.
Based on our belief that a political solution that
ensures the genuine participation of key parties in
governance is the way to end the crisis raging in
Afghanistan, we support the reconciliation and
reintegration process with a view to reaching a historic
settlement between all sectors of Afghan society. We
welcome the steps being taken to implement the
commitments of the Kabul process, particularly in
improving security, administration and development
and gradually transferring all security responsibilities
to Afghans.
On the other hand, we welcome the decision by
the Organization of the Islamic Conference to appoint a
representative in Afghanistan, as such a representative
could play a positive role in the service of the
country’s security, stability and reconstruction. We also
express our appreciation for the decision of the State of
Kuwait to sponsor a support office for UNAMA staff,
as well as for the offer of the Netherlands to set up an
office to provide safe haven to staff in Kabul.
We stress the need for continuing regional
cooperation and support from neighbouring States, for
the situation in Afghanistan and surrounding countries
is clearly interlinked. That has economic and security
consequences, in particular in the fight against drugs.
Drugs are a fundamental means for financing terrorist
activities. Surely, the establishment of peace in
Afghanistan serves the interests of all neighbouring
States.

10-70462

S/PV.6464

Let me conclude by renewing our appreciation to
the United Nations and its specialized agencies in
Afghanistan for their efforts to achieve development by
providing health, education, food assistance and
capacity-building and by improving the status of
women, promoting human rights and encouraging the
return of refugees. After a year of significant
international interest in Afghanistan, Lebanon hopes
that such efforts will continue next year so that the
Afghan people may finally enjoy security, stability and
prosperity.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I wish to thank Special
Representative Staffan de Mistura for his briefing and
for the work he and his team have been carrying out in
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). I also thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin for
his statement. I would also like to join my colleagues
in expressing our condolences and our appreciation for
Ambassador Holbrooke’s diplomatic work. Brazil also
expresses its gratitude for the work done by the
countries that will end their terms in the Council at the
end of December.
As 2010 comes to a close, today’s debate
provides a good opportunity to take stock of an
eventful year, in particular with respect to the relations
between Afghanistan and the international community.
The overall balance is positive, despite the need for
further progress.
The Summit between NATO and the Government
of Afghanistan last November completed the
framework for the process of transition to increased
Afghan responsibility for its security that was initiated
with President Karzai’s second inaugural speech and
the London Conference. The message of the
declaration signed in Lisbon is clear from its very title:
Enduring Partnership. The transition process,
consistent with the London and Kabul commitments, is
to be carried out consistent with NATO’s long-term
commitment to a sovereign, independent, democratic,
secure and stable Afghanistan. The challenge now is to
translate that commitment into concrete realities on the
ground.
The fact that Afghanistan has been exceeding the
force-generation targets for its army and police is
encouraging evidence of its determination to assume
greater responsibility for its own security. Afghans
deserve continued international support for such
efforts, including through the provision of necessary

10-70462

equipment and capabilities. Such cooperation is crucial
for bringing down today’s record high number of
civilian casualties, more than three-quarters of which
were caused by armed opposition groups as well as by
pro-Government forces. Although important progress
has been made to protect civilians, more should be
done to spare them further suffering. Redoubling
efforts towards peace and reintegration is vital in that
regard, as it is quite clear that a durable solution will
not be possible exclusively through military means.
My delegation is encouraged that a number of
alleged combatants from the rank and file of armed
opposition groups have already approached Afghan
authorities to express their intention to lay down arms
and return to their communities. We hope that this
development can become a consistent and firm trend
that paves the way for substantive peace talks at the
senior-official level.
Another important development was the
participation of High Peace Council and Government
officials in the conference on justice and reconciliation
convened by civil society organizations and UNAMA.
Increasing consultation with civil society regarding
Afghan peace, reconciliation and reintegration efforts
can contribute significantly to ensuring peace and
strengthening the achievements of recent years,
especially with respect to human and women’s rights.
The parliamentary elections showed that Afghan
authorities could learn the lessons of the past and move
forward towards consolidating democracy. Even
though there were a number of allegations of
irregularities and despite security, logistical and
political challenges, the electoral institutions were able
to investigate and address complaints effectively. The
will of the Afghan people and the decisions of the
independent electoral institutions are to be respected
by all without undue interference. However, as always,
improvements can be made, including some that
actually depend on the security situation, such as
increasing voter turnout and making progress in longterm electoral reform.
Brazil welcomes the progress that the
Government of Afghanistan has made in its Kabul
process commitments. We appreciate in particular the
establishment of a monitoring and reporting framework
to track progress on the implementation of the national
priority programmes, the achievement of more than 70
per cent of the October benchmarks and the detailing

19

S/PV.6464

of short- and medium-term implementation plans for
the programmes. As the Afghan Government shifts its
focus to their implementation and delivery,
international support will be all the more critical and
urgent.
In that connection, we note the paucity of
information regarding the international community’s
progress in keeping its commitments to the Afghan
Government. One possible measure to fill that gap
could be to set up a monitoring and reporting
mechanism on the fulfilment of international
commitments to increase budget aid and realign offbudget aid.
The Fourth Regional Economic Conference on
Afghanistan, in Istanbul, and the progress on the
Afghanistan-Pakistan Transit and Trade Agreement
were important milestones in regional cooperation with
Afghanistan. The implementation of the Agreement
and of the conclusions of the Conference can make a
significant contribution to the social and economic
development of Afghanistan and to its full integration
in its sub-region. We also commend the holding of the
Afghanistan International Investment Conference, in
Dubai.
The response to the attack against the United
Nations compound in Herat showed the Organization’s
ability to learn from past misfortunes. We commend
the enhancement of security arrangements for United
Nations facilities in Afghanistan and the increase in
secure accommodation. The establishment of the
support office in Kuwait and the acquisition of the
Alpha compound have helped to reduce the deficit of
international staff in UNAMA, although the vacancy
rate remains high. We encourage the Secretary-General
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to continue their efforts in support of
UNAMA’s ability to carry out its mandate.
In closing, allow me to express Brazil’s
expectation that, as 2010 was the year when
Afghanistan and the international community renewed
their partnership and set out a framework for a
responsible transition, 2011 will become the year when
we deliver on our mutual commitments and help bring
about the prosperity, the stability and the peace the
Afghan people rightly deserve.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): First, I thank
Special Representative De Mistura for his briefing and
for his work under truly challenging circumstances. We

20

wish to pay tribute to the women and men working
with the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and all the United Nations
personnel who are in Afghanistan to support a better
future for that country. Everything must be done to
enable them to carry out their work effectively and to
ensure their security. I also wish thank Ambassador
Tanin for his important contribution to the debate
today.
Let me join previous speakers in expressing our
condolences to the United States delegation in view of
the passing away of United States Special Envoy for
Afghanistan and Pakistan, Ambassador Richard
Holbrooke. I had the privilege and experience of
working with him on matters of reconciliation and
issues of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), and I was deeply impressed by
his commitment and his stamina.
Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
made later by the European Union delegation on behalf
of the European Union. Austria wishes to make several
additional points.
The past
year has brought
important
developments for Afghanistan. The holding of the first
international conference in several decades in Kabul
was a particularly significant milestone. We welcome
the progress made by the Afghan Government in the
implementation of the London and Kabul conference
commitments, including the elaboration of a
framework to track progress for each of the priority
programmes. The strengthening of the mechanisms of
the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board is
another important step to provide for the necessary
policy dialogue and effective implementation of the
Kabul process.
In order to succeed, the Kabul process needs to
include all segments of Afghan society. Maximum
ownership and empowerment on the part of the Afghan
people will be critical for the country’s long-term
stability. We furthermore agree with the SecretaryGeneral’s view that the process of transition must be
guided by realities on the ground and should yield a
peace dividend for the Afghan people. Improvement of
livelihoods and the creation of sustainable income
opportunities — including for women and girls — will
be an important part of that effort.
We welcome the inauguration of the High Peace
Council last October, as well as the establishment of

10-70462

S/PV.6464

the Saalam Support Group within UNAMA to support
the Peace Council’s work. We urge the Afghan
Government to consider the recommendations made by
civil society groups regarding the peace process and to
further enhance the inclusiveness of the peace and
reconciliation programme through broad representation
of religious and ethnic communities and women.
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and
succeeding resolutions on women, peace and security
remain of direct relevance.
We also wish to acknowledge here the important
work done by UNAMA in the field of human rights.
UNAMA’s recent report on the implementation of the
2009 Law on the Elimination of Violence against
Women documents harmful traditional practices
violating the rights of women and girls and contains
recommendations that should be built upon to improve
the situation of the female population in Afghanistan.
In view of the recent completion of the electoral
process, we wish to commend the Afghan electoral
institutions for their dedicated work under very
challenging circumstances. We hope that the newly
elected Lower House of Afghanistan’s National
Assembly will be convened speedily in order to take up
its important legislative functions. We welcome the
announcement by President Karzai that the new
parliament will be inaugurated in late January.
Comprehensive and long-term electoral reform needs
to be pursued as a matter of priority.
The difficult security situation in Afghanistan
continues to be of great concern, in particular in view
of the significant increase in civilian casualties. The
vast majority of civilian deaths and injuries,
particularly the deplorable rise in casualties among
women and children, were clearly linked to the antiGovernment elements. We strongly condemn their
direct targeting of the civilian population, including
public officials and international staff. It needs to be
stressed once again that that kind of warfare violates
the most basic principles of international humanitarian
law.
Let me further touch upon the drug situation in
Afghanistan, which has been documented in the annual
Opium Survey issued by the United Nations Office on
Drug Control (UNODC). The Survey raises concerns
about the continued cultivation and production of
narcotic drugs in Afghanistan, mainly concentrated in
areas where the Taliban and Al Qaida are active, as

10-70462

well as about ongoing drug trafficking. In that light, we
encourage the Government of Afghanistan to increase
its efforts against opium cultivation and drug
trafficking in close cooperation with the international
community and with the assistance of UNODC. A
comprehensive approach tackling the areas of security,
governance, rule of law and human rights is key for
effectively addressing the drug problem in Afghanistan
and in the region.
I wish to thank the Afghan authorities and
UNAMA for the excellent cooperation I have enjoyed
with them as Chairman of the 1267 Committee and
would like to underscore the importance of continued
cooperation, particularly in regard to de-listing
requests. The consolidated list needs to remain a living
document. Therefore we to continue to ensure that the
list reflects the actual threat, which means that entries
that are no longer relevant are removed and new threats
are reflected by appropriate new entries. I am satisfied
that, only last Friday, the Committee was able to take
another positive decision on a de-listing request. At the
same time, I would draw the attention of the Afghan
authorities to the possibility for listed individuals to
address the new 1267 ombudsperson.
As this is most likely the last public meeting of
the Council in which I will have the honour to
participate as representative of Austria in the course of
my country’s term on the Council, I would like to
thank you, Madam President, for the kind words
expressed by the United States delegation at the
beginning of the meeting. I also wish to thank you and
all other members of the Council, as well as the
Council secretariat, for the excellent cooperation we
have enjoyed during the last two years.
My country has always believed that serving on
the Council is primarily a service that an elected
member offers to the world Organization and to its
membership. As we now return to the ranks — to our
natural habitat as a permanent member of the General
Assembly — we will continue to serve the United
Nations family as best we can, based on the very same
principles that have guided us during these two years.
Our best wishes accompany the five new incoming
members.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): Allow me in my turn to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Staffan de
Mistura for the clarity and concision of his briefing on

21

S/PV.6464

the situation in Afghanistan. I take this opportunity to
praise the courage, commitment and professionalism of
Mr. De Mistura and his team in discharging the
mandate entrusted to them by the Security Council.
I should also like to extend my condolences on
the death of Ambassador Holbrooke, who strove to
promote reconciliation and peace in Afghanistan.
Having listened to Mr. De Mistura’s statement,
my delegation notes an overall positive evolution in the
situation in Afghanistan, which has been marked since
the London and Kabul Conferences by some progress
at the institutional and political levels, judging by the
satisfactory conduct of the recent legislative elections
and the national reconciliation process in a very
difficult security context.
My delegation wishes to discuss in particular the
following two points: progress made and the
persistence of some challenges that contrast with the
achievements made in the transition process.
With regard to progress, my delegation welcomes
the outstanding work done by the Afghan electoral
institutions to ensure the satisfactory organization of
elections to the Lower House of the National
Assembly. Despite certain shortcomings, the elections
demonstrated the capacity of the Afghan people to
assume control of their own destiny and the importance
they attach to the institutional and democratic
development of their country in a peaceful and united
environment. The new Parliament must now begin its
work to confirm its momentum towards democracy,
which is a prerequisite for peace and stability in the
country.
Such progress should not make us forget the
scope of the challenges ahead. The security situation
remains a source of concern, given the numerous
ongoing terrorist acts affecting the daily lives of
Afghan civilians, humanitarian workers and United
Nations personnel. Rampant corruption also persists,
fuelled by drug trafficking and impunity. We urge the
Government of Afghanistan to do its utmost to
effectively combat these phenomena, which constitute
a real threat to the country’s peace and stability. Such
action would undoubtedly contribute to creating a
climate of trust between the Government and the
people of Afghanistan, on the one hand, and the
international community, on the other.

Regional cooperation is an important link in the
political, security and economic development process
in Afghanistan. In that regard, we welcome closer
diplomatic and trade ties between Afghanistan and its
neighbours, especially Pakistan and Tajikistan. Such
cooperation can also be promoted in the fight against
drugs by improving law enforcement.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our support for the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in
its contribution to the effort to stabilize Afghanistan.
I wish to add my voice, Madame President, to the
tribute you paid to our colleagues who are leaving the
Security Council. We have appreciated all their efforts
and contributions to the Council’s debates.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.
I welcome Special Representative Staffan de
Mistura. I should like to begin by thanking the Special
Representative and colleagues here today for their
kinds words about Ambassador Richard Holbrooke. As
Vice-President Biden said here in the Council last
week, Ambassador Holbrooke was one of the United
States greatest warriors for peace and served so ably
here in this Chamber and far beyond. We will all miss
him very much.
We continue to be impressed by Special
Representative De Mistura’s strong and effective
leadership of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). We also deeply appreciate the
work of all United Nations staff in Afghanistan, who
operate under difficult conditions on behalf of the
international community and in support of the Afghan
people.
At last month’s NATO summit in Lisbon, the
Afghan Government and its international partners
committed themselves to a clear plan to move forward.
Together, we agreed that early 2011 will mark the
beginning of a transition to Afghan-led responsibility
for security, and we established a goal of having
Afghan forces take the lead in security across the
country by the end of 2014. Our ultimate goal in
Afghanistan is to help Afghans build a State that can
stand on its own, with support from the international
community, and never again be a sanctuary for
terrorists.
This transition of security responsibility, coupled
with an enduring commitment to Afghanistan beyond

22

10-70462

S/PV.6464

2014, is key to the success of our long-term efforts.
The transition will be a gradual, conditions-based
process, not a single event. Just as the NATOAfghanistan partnership agreed at the Lisbon summit
affirms the international community’s broader enduring
support to Afghanistan, so too will the United States
continue to support Afghanistan’s development and
security as a strategic partner.
Training is the critical ingredient to making
transition possible. Our allies and partners
demonstrated their sustained commitment to this
mission in Lisbon by meeting International Security
Assistance Force requirements for Afghan National
Security Forces trainers. Our actions prove that we are
implementing a transition strategy, not an exit strategy.
As transition progresses, we will look to UNAMA to
play an important and growing role in supporting local
governance, monitoring the human rights situation, and
supporting Afghan-led efforts to reintegrate former
combatants who seek to return to the fold of Afghan
society.
The United States welcomed the Afghan
Independent Electoral Commission’s certification of
the final results of the 18 September Wolesi Jirga
elections. These important elections, administered
under challenging circumstances, were the first
parliamentary elections run entirely by Afghan
institutions since the fall of the Taliban in 2001. We
look forward to the formation of the new Parliament so
that it can begin taking up its important constitutional
role on behalf of the Afghan people.
As we move beyond this year’s election, it will be
important for UNAMA to remain engaged with Afghan
electoral institutions to press forward with long-term
electoral reform. We commend UNAMA’s plans in this
regard.
As we are meeting at the height of the Fifth
Committee’s consideration of United Nations budget
issues, let me briefly underscore the importance of
meeting UNAMA’s resource requirements. This
Council has given UNAMA an extensive mandate, and
its ability to fulfil it while ensuring its staff’s security
requires adequate resources. The United States urges
all Member States to carefully consider the recent
budget request for UNAMA and to offer their full
support to fund that vital Mission.
Despite many challenges, real progress has
occurred in Afghanistan this year. Together with the

10-70462

Afghan National Security Forces, we have broadly
arrested the Taliban’s momentum, and even reversed it
in some important areas. In many places, the gains we
have made are still fragile and reversible, but we are
unquestionably clearing more areas of Taliban control
and more Afghans are reclaiming their own
communities.
Civilian development assistance has been critical
to those advances. We must press forward in 2011 with
even greater energy and determination. This will be a
critical year. To sustain those gains and security over
time, political and economic progress in Afghanistan
are urgently needed. Going forward, we must all
continue to focus on the delivery of basic services,
transparency and accountability. We should also not
lose sight of the tremendous challenges facing Afghan
women, and we must continue to support their efforts
to further advance their security-related, political,
economic and social gains.
The United States will continue to stand with the
Afghan people as they work to build a stronger
Afghanistan for the benefit of all its citizens.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered later on behalf of the
European Union. I should like to make a few remarks
in my national capacity.
First of all, however, I would like to remember
Richard Holbrooke. I had a chance to know him at the
time when his diplomatic skills and determination were
devoted to the Balkans. His passionate contribution to
the cause of a free and democratic Afghanistan is an
important legacy for all of us.
Italy welcomes the report (S/2010/630) prepared
by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) on the situation in that country.
We reiterate our strong support for UNAMA’s work to
assure coherence in the international effort and to help
Afghanistan in its transition towards full ownership.
That process, designed by Afghan authorities and
endorsed at the NATO Summit in Lisbon, shall be
steady, gradual and condition-based. The Summit
decided that the transition would start in 2011, with
2014 set as a realistic target for a credible transfer of
responsibility in the areas of security, governance and

23

S/PV.6464

development. At the same time, we all are committed
to assisting Afghanistan as an equal partner beyond
2014, within a joint and coherent framework in which
UNAMA maintains a pivotal role.

widest possible participation of civil society. Each
phase should be geared towards the primary target of
establishing a functional economy and an accountable
and efficient Government.

The Afghan Government and the international
community now need to make a concerted and
sustained effort to address obstacles to the achievement
of a sustainable and irreversible transition. All the
components of that process are interdependent and
mutually reinforcing. In other words, progress in
security, governance and development should go handin-hand with a constructive dialogue among all of the
political and ethnic parties of Afghan society.

While security is gradually improving, thanks to
better training and mentoring of the Afghan Security
Forces,
Italy’s
action
is
shifting
towards
civilianization, with a focus on capacity- and
institution-building and encouraging dialogue between
Afghan citizens and their representatives. We are
committed to fostering a balanced relationship among
different levels of Government through enhanced
coordination, increased administrative capacities and a
predictable flow of resources from the centre to the
periphery.

Political reconciliation must be an Afghan-led
process that complies with national laws and
fundamental rights and is supported by regional
partners. Inclusiveness and participation should be the
High Peace Council’s guiding principles. Consensus on
full respect for core national values will lay a strong
foundation for Afghan institutions.
A successful reintegration process will contribute
to reconciliation by building mutual confidence and
curbing the influence of insurgency. That is why we
welcome the Afghan peace and reintegration
programme approved at the Kabul Conference as the
expression of a balanced and Afghan-owned process.
However, the programme should remain within the
agreed red lines and be closely tied to the security
agenda. To be sustainable, it should follow a
community-centred approach and be gradually finetuned to meet local needs and realities. Improving
living conditions, creating job opportunities and
harmonizing traditional decision-making and disputesettlement mechanisms with a modern decentralized
administration are fundamental to a positive outcome
in the reintegration efforts.
From that perspective, our endeavour is aimed
primarily at ensuring that the Kabul process does not
lose momentum. Notable progress has been made in
conceiving a procedural and monitoring framework.
Now we have to encourage the Afghan Government to
translate national priority programmes into concrete
action, so that tangible results will be directly
perceived by Afghan communities throughout the
country.
At the core of the implementation phase is the
idea of Afghan potential for sustainable development,
in terms of human and natural resources, and of the

24

Justice and the rule of law deserve more attention
and international support. We remain committed to a
sound reform of the Afghan public administration and
justice systems, to which we would provide our
expertise while supporting the European Union’s
growing efforts.
Scarred by decades of warfare, Afghanistan has
the opportunity to break the vicious cycle of poverty
and dependence. That is why we are committed to
helping to create an enabling climate for investment by
improving
financial
services
and
local
entrepreneurship. Our aim is to trigger a self-sustaining
process that is rooted in the people and the resources
available to them. Such a process will provide
otherwise unattainable technical assistance, investment
opportunities and modern processing systems while
keeping the main focus and responsibility on the
Afghan people.
In conclusion, it is urgent for us to start working
with the Afghan Government, the newly-elected Wolesi
Jirga and civil society, with the crucial support of
UNAMA. A long-term electoral reform must be
initiated that builds on lessons learned from the 2009
and 2010 elections. Comprehensive reform is
indispensable to a balanced relationship between the
Government and its people, within the framework of
the Afghan Constitution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
thank you, Madame President, for scheduling today’s
debate on the situation in Afghanistan. We are also

10-70462

S/PV.6464

grateful for the latest report (S/2010/630) of the
Secretary-General and appreciate the briefing by his
Special Representative Staffan de Mistura. We also
thank
Ambassador
Zahir
Tanin,
Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for his statement.
I join others in expressing sincere condolences on
the passing away of Mr. Richard Holbrooke, the United
States Special Envoy to Afghanistan and Pakistan. An
accomplished diplomat, Ambassador Holbrooke served
his country and the cause of international peace and
security with great distinction in difficult conditions in
various parts of the world. He will be missed by us all.
As the year draws to a close, today’s meeting
offers us a timely opportunity to comprehensively
review the goals and commitments that we have been
able to achieve and fulfil in Afghanistan, as well as the
tasks that remain unaccomplished on the long road to
lasting peace, prosperity and stability in that country.
The overarching objective of the efforts of the
international community has been to create an enabling
environment for the Afghan Government to eventually
assume full responsibility and take charge of its own
destiny. The London Conference in January, the Kabul
Conference in July and the parliamentary elections in
September were significant political milestones in that
direction.
The Kabul Conference marked the beginning of
Kabul process, a new phase in the partnership of the
Afghan Government with the international community.
I am happy to note that the focus of the Kabul process
has now shifted from planning to implementation and
delivery. That is an important step on the road to a
transition to greater Afghan ownership. The SecretaryGeneral’s latest report also highlights that a framework
for detailing implementation plans for the short- and
medium-term in all 22 national priority programmes
has been put in place.
The holding of National Assembly elections in
September, despite threats by the Taliban and other
illegal armed groups, was an important step in the
consolidation of the democratic framework in
Afghanistan. We are particularly encouraged by the
robust participation and campaigning by some 2,500
candidates, including 396 women. We hope the
uncertainty regarding the results of the elections is
settled sooner rather than later.
In our shared pursuit of sustained and tangible
improvements
in
security,
governance
and

10-70462

development, the unity of purpose of efforts is indeed
imperative to enhance the efficiency and overall
coordination of the international community’s presence
in Afghanistan.
I am pleased to note that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) is
assuming a greater role in generating a coherent
approach to coordinating donor assistance and the
alignment of provincial reconstruction teams, donors
and other implementation partners to the Governmentled processes, including at the sub-national level. I
could not agree more with the observation in the
Secretary-General’s report that, as the process of
transition to full Afghan leadership and ownership
advances, both the Government and the international
community should be guided by realities rather than
schedules.
We need to guard against the impulse to consider
the peace process a shortcut to facilitating transition.
Going down that path without respecting the red lines
for the process laid out at the London Conference and
endorsed at the Kabul Conference would risk
Afghanistan backsliding into being a safe haven for
terrorists and extremist groups. The international
community must bear in mind the lessons learned from
past experiences in negotiating with fundamentalist
and extremist organizations, and ensure that the
process remains Afghan-led, inclusive and transparent.
India supports the Afghan Government’s efforts to
reintegrate those individuals who abjure violence, give
up armed struggle, do not have links with terrorist
groups, and are willing to abide by the values of
democracy, pluralism and human rights as enshrined in
the Afghan Constitution.
As the International Security Assistance Force
prepares to gradually withdraw from Afghanistan, there
is a need for adequate capacity-building of Afghan
security forces, along with adequate enablers, before
security responsibility transitions to them. The
necessity of dealing with the terrorist sanctuaries and
safe havens beyond Afghanistan’s borders is equally
important in this context. The adequate capacity of
Afghanistan’s security forces and other institutions is a
sine qua non for protecting the country’s sovereignty,
plurality and democracy.
The security and stabilization of Afghanistan will
remain a distant goal unless we are able to isolate and
root out the syndicate of terrorism, which includes

25

S/PV.6464

elements of Al-Qaida, the Taliban, Lashkar-e-Toiba and
other terrorist and extremist groups, operating from
within and outside Afghanistan’s borders. As we have
discussed today, though we appreciate the gains made
in the southern provinces of Kandahar and Helmand
against Taliban strongholds, it is worrisome that a
deteriorating security environment, especially in the
north, has been an ongoing trend this year. The
Secretary-General’s report notes that there has been a
66 per cent increase in security incidents in
Afghanistan compared to the same period in 2009.
Afghanistan’s
stability
and
economic
development depend a lot on its neighbours and the
region as a whole. The country’s greatest economic
potential resides perhaps in its immense potential as a
trade, transport and energy hub, and as a bridge linking
Central, West and South Asia, given Afghanistan’s
traditional cultural and economic moorings in South
Asia. Growing economic interdependence will also
help in weaning disaffected youth away from
insurgency and militancy and in promoting regional
cooperation. We support the wishes of the Government
of Afghanistan to take the lead in this direction.
In India’s efforts towards the stabilization of
Afghanistan, the focus has been on development and
humanitarian work to assist the Afghan people as they
build a peaceful, stable, democratic and pluralistic
nation. We have sought to assist Afghanistan within our
means. Our $1.3-billion assistance programme is aimed
at building infrastructure, capacity-building in critical
areas of governance, health, education, agriculture and
so forth, and in generating Afghan capacity and
employment.
At the dawn of the new year, it is our earnest
hope that the international community will remain
steadfast in its commitment to supporting Afghanistan.
Enhanced synergy and coherence of efforts on the part
of the international community are critical for creating
an enabling environment that can facilitate transition to
greater Afghan ownership and put Afghanistan firmly
on road to peace, progress and stability. We support the
good work done by UNAMA.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to start by expressing our gratitude to Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations

26

Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and to
the other United Nations staff in that Mission, for their
firm commitment and valuable dedication to
strengthening peace and stability in Afghanistan. The
central role of the United Nations in coordinating
international efforts in Afghanistan is of paramount
importance and enjoys our full support.
We are very glad of the political progress
achieved by the Government and people of
Afghanistan, including the recent successful Afghanled and -managed parliamentary election. Those
achievements and progress are attributable to the
people and Government of Afghanistan, who want to
freely take their destiny into their own capable hands
and bring to an end the past sombre years under the
presence of foreign forces in their homeland.
Nine years have passed since American and
NATO forces entered Afghanistan with the aim of
establishing peace and security and reconstructing the
country. The main justification for the military
excursion was, of course, eliminating the threat of
terrorism. However, it is very hard to assess the
achievements attained so far or the prospects for the
future. Even the newly unveiled military strategy
review issued a few days ago by the United States
Government casts some doubt on the possibility of
attaining the desired goals, as originally set forth, for
the so-called Afghan war.
What is clear is that the suffering of Afghan
civilians not only has not diminished, but is even on
the rise. For instance, a few days ago the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) issued a warning
about the dire situation on the ground. The Red Cross
says that conditions for delivering aid in Afghanistan
are at their lowest point in the 30 years since the ICRC
first entered the country under Soviet occupation. In
this regard, a Red Cross official said in an interview:
“Our assessment is that we are worried. We are
worried about more displacement, we are worried
about more civilian casualties, we are worried
about more difficulties with people to access
health care, and we are worried about more armed
groups being around. If you say that we are
expecting more of the same for 2011, that would
be putting it mildly.”
I doubt that we can call this situation an
achievement for the military forces in Afghanistan.
Putting the lives of innocent people at the mercy of

10-70462

S/PV.6464

drone attacks — yes, prima facie, there have been
some achievements in that regard. In one instance
alone, which took place on December 18, more than 50
civilians were massacred. How can we justify such
wild and indiscriminate attacks as counter-terrorism
operations? As a result of the foreign military
operations in Afghanistan, we should stress that not
only has the threat of terrorism not been curbed, but its
evil effects have rather spread to other parts of the
region, including my own country. The recent suicide
bombing on 15 December at a mosque in Chabahar, a
city in southern Iran, left scores of people dead and
many more injured. We consider this abhorrent terrorist
act the result of wrongful policies deploying foreign
military forces in our region. Such policies have
exacerbated tension and violence in neighbouring
countries, with frequent spillover to our own.
Our approach should be based on true knowledge
of the realities on the ground, as well as on an
understanding of the social, political and cultural
structures and historical experiences of the region. It is
now clear that the hearts and minds of the Afghan
people, who have undergone many hardships and so
much suffering in recent decades, cannot be won by
relying on the operations of an increased number of
foreign military forces. Instead of dispatching more
troops and increasing the number of private
contractors, there is an urgent need for foreign forces
to leave Afghanistan, for seriously continuing to
strengthen the capacity of the Afghan National Army
and National Police with a view to enabling them to
take charge of security in the country and for handing
over control and management of Afghan affairs to the
people and Government of Afghanistan.
The narcotic drugs problem is still one of the
most serious challenges facing Afghanistan. That
menace has hindered the advancement of the country
towards development and has put the security of
Afghanistan and that of the region in real danger.
Moreover, narcotic drugs, as the financial source of
terrorism in Afghanistan, have served to create a
breeding ground for terrorists, extremists and illegal
groups that attempt to destabilize the Afghan
Government. For decades, Iran has been at the
forefront of a full-scale war against narcotic drugs
smuggling. Thousands of Iranian law enforcement
personnel have lost their lives or been injured. Billions
of dollars have been spent to combat drug traffickers.
We have shouldered a great burden in that fight. We

10-70462

again call strongly on those who bear the responsibility
to combat narcotic drugs on behalf of the international
community to take firm and measurable steps to curb
this threat as soon as possible.
In the area of regional cooperation, Afghanistan’s
neighbouring countries share critical interests in that
country’s security and long-term stability. They should
therefore play a more active role in promoting
Afghanistan’s socio-economic development. In recent
years, we have undertaken a number of developmental
projects aimed at rebuilding the country that have been
focused on infrastructure, including road and railway
development.
In conclusion, we are willing to continue to hold
our well-established joint meetings with the
representatives
of
Afghanistan’s
neighbouring
countries in order to elaborate more concrete measures
that are necessary for strengthening a regional
framework in helping Afghanistan in the areas of
development projects and security issues. The support
of the international community in that endeavour could
help us to strengthen this approach. In that regard,
UNAMA’s involvement in encouraging countries of the
region to cooperate in halting the illegal trade in
narcotics and the illegal movement of people, as well
as in supporting Afghanistan in its efforts to achieve
security and stability, are very much welcomed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Thank you, Madam
President, for convening today’s meeting.
As I begin my speech, on behalf of my country, I
should like to recall the tremendous contributions of
Ambassador Holbrooke. We offer our condolences to
his family and to the people and Government of the
United States.
I would like to thank Staffan de Mistura for his
immense work and contributions to the SecretaryGeneral’s
quarterly
report
(S/2010/630)
on
Afghanistan, which is a credible compendium of
political and security developments in that country.
There were some important milestones in December in
Afghanistan’s march on the road towards peace and
security. The report also provides useful insights into
the international community’s efforts. I believe that the
report is factual and substantive.

27

S/PV.6464

The report rightly underscores the importance of
the need for effective follow-up to the Kabul
Conference in terms of transition to full Afghan
leadership. Before I continue, I should like to
recognize that two important regional players — India
and Iran — have made much the same point. I also
believe that the report has emphasized that strong
partnership between the Afghan Government and the
international community is the keystone to a successful
transition, which must have tangible benefits for the
Afghan people. Accordingly, no matter what else we
say, our collective support to the Afghan Government
should be unwavering and tailored to its indigenous
needs.
The Secretary General’s report has documented a
66 per cent increase in security-related incidents in
Afghanistan during reporting period, as compared to
the same period in 2009. That cannot be overlooked. It
is a matter of grave import, as it threatens
Afghanistan’s stability, and requires dispassionate
political analysis.
The security problem in Afghanistan has vexed us
during three decades of war. The capacity of Afghan
security agencies, political dispensation, issues of
governance and the exploitation of all those factors by
criminals and drug traffickers have been part of a
continuing refrain. The problem of security cannot be
simplified by just externalizing it.
The Secretary-General had rightly noted the
importance of the Afghan Government’s peace and
reintegration programme in the context of security. The
London and Kabul Conferences also emphasized that
point. A reconciled Afghanistan at peace with itself is
the best guarantor of its own security. But in the
process, I fear, it has tended to overlook the important
aspect of democracy.
Elections to the Wolesi Jirga were recently held,
with some strange results. In the completely Pashtun
province of Ghazni, 11 members elected were Hazara
tribesmen. Let me tell the Council, that is a very rare
occurrence for Afghanistan. If any members of the
Council have read The Kite Runner, they will know
that is an impossibility in terms of racial pride. I think
we will have to rise above this and be a little more
integrated. I say this because it reflects upon the
capacity of the Afghan nation to rule and defend itself
and its sovereignty. We must not forget that democracy
is an essential aspect. When it all began in Athens, the

28

democrats were those who fought voluntarily without
pay for the defence of their nation. The founding of
democracy in Athens was based upon the military
needs of that society. That is something that cannot be
overlooked in Afghanistan. If the democracy is correct,
it will bring people forward who will take their
sovereignty and defence into their own hands. That is
what needs to happen in Afghanistan.
Pakistan supports an Afghan-led and inclusive
reconciliation process, with a view to bringing the
opposition groups into the political mainstream. We
have welcomed the establishment of the High Peace
Council in Afghanistan, as well as the initial reaching
out of important regional countries, such as Saudi
Arabia, towards that process.
The sustained engagement of the Peace Council
with the United Nations and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference for support to and facilitation of
the reconciliation process will be important. We
support that engagement. The Security Council should
also be a willing partner of the Afghan people in that
important and delicate process.
Pakistan wants durable peace and stability in
Afghanistan. Stability and development in Afghanistan
is in our national interest. In that regard, I would like
to highlight three areas of vital significance that we
feel must be pointed out.
First, the safe return of over 1.5 million
registered Afghan refugees living in Pakistan is
possible, I believe, only in a peaceful and stable
Afghanistan. We have paid an enormous economic,
social and security cost in housing refugees for three
decades. The prospect of housing them indefinitely
owing to a prolonged conflict in Afghanistan creates a
severe burden upon us, and no amount of international
help really takes the burden off our back.
Secondly, the stability and security of
Afghanistan is indispensable for us after the recently
concluded Afghanistan-Pakistan transit and trade
agreement. Our commercial and industrial sectors
suffered previously, owing to the smuggling of goods
from Afghanistan into Pakistan and vice versa, despite
the transit trade agreement of 1963. As state
institutions in Afghanistan regressed in the 1980s and
1990s, smuggling increased greatly. We therefore need
a peaceful Afghanistan, with a strong customs and
border security apparatus, to partner with us in
ensuring smooth implementation.

10-70462

S/PV.6464

Thirdly, a stable Afghanistan can guarantee the
successful completion of important energy projects that
benefit not just Pakistan but the entire region.
Preliminary work on some of those projects has already
started. We greatly value such progress. Those transregional economic projects are conceivable only in a
secure and stable Afghanistan, which explains our
position on the matter.
The quest for peace and stability in Afghanistan
is driving our bilateral relations into a long-term
cooperative partnership, which is highly desired. We
are committed to strengthening ties in all areas. The
recent visit of our Prime Minister to Afghanistan and
the visit of President Karzai to Pakistan in September
have reaffirmed and cemented our commitments.
We have pledged to continue with the ongoing
assistance programmes in Afghanistan, and, in the
framework of those projects, Pakistan will construct
another 50 schools and basic health units across
Afghanistan, despite the fact that, as the Council well
knows, we need them desperately ourselves.
Pakistan is also ready to assist in the capacitybuilding of the Afghan National Security Forces. We are
also engaged in security and intelligence cooperation
with Afghanistan, including through the Tripartite
Commission, which includes the United States and the
International Security Assistance Force. We do not want
Afghanistan to become a theatre for proxy wars.
Pakistan greatly values the positive contributions
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), under the dynamic leadership
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Staffan de Mistura. We cannot praise that leadership
enough. It is just the right sort of leadership. In March
2011, the Council will consider the Mission’s mandate.
We align ourselves with the objectives of UNAMA and
call upon the Security Council to provide it with the
necessary resources to meet the challenges if faces.
I avail myself of this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Apakan of Turkey and his delegation for
his able guidance of the Council’s work on Afghanistan
this year.
I also wish to compliment all the outgoing
members of the Council for their important work
during the past two years and congratulate all the
incoming members on the assumption of their
membership next month.

10-70462

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Berger (Germany): First of all, let me join
my colleagues and extend my special thanks to the
Secretary-General for the report on the situation of
Afghanistan (S/2010/630), to Staffan de Mistura for his
comprehensive briefing and to Ambassador Tanin for
his remarks. We commend Mr. De Mistura for his able
leadership of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and would like to extend our
sincere thanks to the entire UNAMA team for their
tireless efforts. At the same time, we would like to
commend Turkey for its constructive contributions as
lead nation for Afghanistan in 2010.
On the occasion of the tragic passing of
Ambassador Richard Holbrooke, I would like to offer
once again my sincere condolences to the United
States. I would like to pay tribute to Richard
Holbrooke, who, as special envoy for Afghanistan and
Pakistan, forcefully and tirelessly pleaded for a
political solution.
Germany fully aligns itself with the statement of
the European Union to be delivered later in the debate.
I would like to add some remarks from our
national perspective. Germany is a major contributor to
the International Security Assistance Force and a major
international donor of development aid and assistance
to Afghanistan. In 2010, in the perspective of preparing
the process of handing over responsibility for security
to the Afghan Government, we have substantially
increased our civilian engagement to $580 million.
I would like to focus in my statement on the
following three aspects: first, the political dialogue and
reintegration; secondly, the evolution of international
engagement in Afghanistan; and thirdly, the future role
of UNAMA during the process of transition and
beyond.
The German Federal Government has presented a
comprehensive report to the Bundestag, our
Parliament, regarding the situation in Afghanistan and
the progress made since the beginning of the
international community’s engagement in 2001. The
report does not hide certain setbacks, but also stresses
some encouraging positive trends, such as the facts that
the training of Afghan security forces is progressing at
a greater speed than expected; access to medical
services across the country has significantly improved;

29

S/PV.6464

and infrastructure development projects in border areas
in northern Afghanistan are starting to make a positive
difference in the lives of the local population.
When presenting the report to the Bundestag,
German
Foreign
Minister
Guido
Westerwelle
underscored Germany’s continued strong support for the
Kabul process and the concept of the transition of
responsibilities. He reaffirmed Germany’s unaltered
commitment to assist the Government and the people of
Afghanistan in their endeavour to rebuild their country.
We remain strongly convinced that military means alone
cannot and will never lead to a sustainable resolution of
the conflict. In the end, only a comprehensive political
process can lead the way to sustainable peace and
stability in Afghanistan and the region.
Based on the mandate of last summer’s Peace
Jirga, the Afghan Government initiated the Afghan
peace and reintegration programme. We all know that
that process will need skilful diplomatic handling and
patience, and we should provide the time necessary for
it. The international community must also continue to
financially support the Afghan Government in offering
options for the reintegration of those who have
renounced violence.
In 2010, Germany provided approximately $13
million in assistance to the reintegration programme,
and we have earmarked more than $50 million for the
same purpose within the next four years.
In the year 2010, at the international Conferences
in Kabul and London and at the NATO summit in
Lisbon, the principle of Afghan ownership and the
framework for transition were put into place. A lot has
been achieved in favour of security and political
stability. The High Peace Council, representing key
groups of Afghan society, has become operational. The
Afghan peace and reintegration programme has been set
up, and the Government is working on implementing
the substantial commitments made. Democratic
elections have been held, and we join others in urging
all parties involved in outstanding issues concerning the
elections to address them in a way consistent with
Afghan institutions’ responsibilities as defined by law
and the Afghan Constitution.
The year 2011 will be crucial. The first steps of
the transition will have to be made. And although
transition does not mean immediate withdrawal, as the
Lisbon NATO summit put it very clearly, the
international community, together with the Afghan

30

Government, will have to define the terms of reference
for the transformation of its own engagement after
2014, namely, an international engagement in
Afghanistan beyond combat troops.
At the NATO summit in Lisbon, Afghan President
Karzai officially suggested that Germany should
consider hosting an international conference on
Afghanistan at the end of 2011 — 10 years after the
Petersburg Conference — again in the former capital of
the Federal Republic of Germany, the city of Bonn.
The German Government responded positively to the
Afghan President’s request.
In the light of developments in 2011, that
conference could provide a useful platform for
evaluating the progress achieved in the process of
transition of responsibilities. The international
community might wish to use the conference to discuss
the next steps to take on the road that remains to
transition and the parameters of the long-term
engagement beyond 2014. Finally, the conference
could also provide an additional positive momentum to
the political process in Afghanistan and the region.
With the transition of security responsibility
progressing, the international community and the
Afghan Government need to constantly reconsider their
priorities and adjust them accordingly. That includes
UNAMA. With the environment in Afghanistan
changing, and the set-up of the international presences
gradually evolving towards transition, the Security
Council will need to reconsider UNAMA’s priorities,
competences and resources. The discussion process
needs to start in 2011. The members of the Council will
have to develop a common understanding of the future
role of UNAMA in a changing environment in
Afghanistan. The Council will need to provide clear
guidance and appropriate financial means for
UNAMA’s role within the international network of
mutually reinforcing civilian institutions for assistance
in Afghanistan.
As an incoming member of the Council, Germany
is prepared and willing to live up to its new
responsibility and contribute constructively to this
process. We are ready to further strengthen the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and to
contribute to a peaceful, strong and prosperous
Afghanistan.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.

10-70462

S/PV.6464

Mr. McNee (Canada): Before I begin, Canada
wishes to join others in expressing our deepest
condolences to the United States delegation on the death
of Ambassador Richard Holbrooke who, as others have
said, worked with such great dedication and skill to bring
a better future to the peoples of Afghanistan and
Pakistan. I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. De Mistura,
for his very clear and penetrating report and for his
extremely dedicated and effective work in Afghanistan.
As 2010 draws to a close, it is natural to look
back and evaluate progress in Afghanistan over the
past year. To be very honest, the results have been
mixed. There has been significant progress, but also
some setbacks. One of the most worrying trends in
2010 was the increased level of civilian casualties in
Afghanistan. As the Secretary-General has indicated in
his report (S/2010/630), total civilian deaths and
injuries rose by 20 per cent in the first 10 months of
the year, as compared to the same period last year. The
overwhelming majority of those deaths and injuries, of
course, were caused by insurgent forces.
The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan also
continues to deteriorate. In particular, we remain
concerned about the increasing number of internally
displaced persons as a result of conflict and about the
potential effect of volatile regional grain markets on the
food security of millions of Afghans. These issues —
civilian casualties caused by the insurgency, risk of
displacement and food insecurity — are clear obstacles
to a stable Afghanistan.
Central to combating the insurgency is for the
Government of Afghanistan to provide security and
basic services to its citizens. However, the
Government’s credibility and effectiveness are
impeded by persistent corruption. Although the Kabul
Conference commitments to combating corruption are
a positive step forward, much is needed for their
implementation, including the establishment of a legal
committee to ensure Afghan laws comply with the
United Nations Convention against Corruption, the
drafting and adoption of an audit law, and the provision
of a statutory basis for the Major Crimes Task Force
and the Anti-Corruption Tribunal.
Furthermore, credible representation in their
Government will also help give Afghans the confidence
to support that Government. Canada is pleased with the
work of the Independent Election Commission and the

10-70462

Electoral Complaints Commission in delivering the
recent parliamentary elections. We encourage all
parties to move forward in a collaborative manner that
aims to ensure a Parliament that reflects the will of the
Afghan people. So that the Wolesi Jirga can move
ahead with its important work, an early date for the
inauguration will be critical.
Despite the setbacks and challenges, 2010 was
marked by successes as well. The Kabul process was
launched to guide Afghanistan’s transition towards the
full exercise of its sovereign authority. The process
thus far has been positive; the Government of
Afghanistan presented an update on progress at the last
month’s Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board
meeting; Afghan ministries with mutual areas of
interest have come together to address common
overarching issues; and drafts of the national priority
programmes are now being consulted in concert with
the international community. Much work remains to
finalize these plans so that they will address the most
pressing needs that exist in Afghanistan.
At the NATO summit in Lisbon, Afghanistan and
the international community affirmed their commitment
to the transition of security responsibility to the Afghan
National Security Forces by 2014. In this context,
UNAMA will continue to play the very important role
of coordinating the international engagement. It is
therefore essential to provide UNAMA with the
necessary resources to fulfil its important mandate.
(spoke in French)
We are encouraged by the progress and believe
that Canada’s continued engagement is important and
worthwhile. As Canada’s combat mission ends in 2011,
a new country-wide engagement based out of Kabul
from 2011 to 2014 will focus on four priorities:
investing in the future of Afghan children and youth,
especially girls, through programming in education and
health; advancing security, the rule of law and human
rights; promoting regional diplomacy; and delivering
humanitarian assistance. An important part of Canada’s
engagement will be a Canadian Forces training mission
of up to 950 members, in addition to a civil police
training component.
Canada’s overall objective in Afghanistan
remains the same — to help build a more secure and
stable Afghanistan that is no longer a safe haven for
terrorists. We look forward to working in partnership

31

S/PV.6464

with Afghans and the international community
throughout 2011 towards making it a reality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): I thank you,
Madame President, for convening this important debate
and for inviting us to participate. It has been a busy
year for the Council, but nothing more important than
the subject of this debate has been discussed. We thank
everyone very much for their contributions.
I should also like to thank, as others before me
have done, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, both for his briefing
and, more importantly, for the extraordinary work he is
doing in Afghanistan on behalf of all of us.
I would also like to acknowledge and thank
Ambassador Tanin for his important remarks.
Since the last Security Council debate on
Afghanistan (see S/PV.6395), we have seen a number
of important steps towards our shared goal of a stable
and secure Afghanistan. We welcome the findings of
the recent United States strategy review, and agree with
the assessment that progress is being made. We also
strongly support the review’s key themes of ensuring
that the gains of stabilization are irreversible.
In October, Australia held its own full
parliamentary debate on Afghanistan — the first of its
kind, actually. While a range of different perspectives
were aired, the consistent message was one of support
for Australia’s continuing civil and military
contribution to international efforts in Afghanistan.
In the past 18 months, Australia has increased its
civilian commitment in Afghanistan by 50 per cent. Our
work continues to be focused on Uruzgan province,
where we are assisting the provincial Government to
improve service delivery and increase its accountability.
This financial year, our development assistance
expenditure there is expected to reach $20 million, and
our total development assistance in Afghanistan this
year will be approximately $106 million. We are
committed to channelling at least 50 per cent of our
development assistance through Afghan Government
systems.
These civilian enhancements build on Australia’s
military contribution in Afghanistan, which is
approximately 1,550 troops. Australia will continue to
assign high priority to efforts to building the

32

capabilities of the Afghan National Security Forces
through both our mentoring and training of the Afghan
National Army’s Fourth Brigade in Uruzgan province
and our substantial contribution to the Afghan National
Army Trust Fund. Our military is also involved in
providing force protection for civilian efforts and in
conducting and supporting operations more broadly
across the southern region.
Australia is under no illusions that the decision to
begin transition in 2011 will be an easy task. Transition
will be a gradual process, to be achieved when the
conditions are right, on a province-by-province and
district-by-district basis. We look forward to ongoing
consultations with the Afghan Government and our
partners in the International Security Assistance Force
on the transition process.
Importantly, as you yourself said, Madame,
transition does not mean a withdrawal from
Afghanistan. After transition to Afghan security lead,
we must recognize that Afghanistan will continue to
require support in training, defence cooperation, aid
and development. The Australian Government has
made clear our commitment to continuing supporting
Afghanistan well beyond transition. The United
Nations also, of course, has a key role to play in the
international civilian effort to enabling greater Afghan
capacity and leadership in support of transition.
Australia fully supports the United Nations civilian
mission in Afghanistan, and will continue to do so.
The conflict in Afghanistan will not be won
without a strong political strategy. Australia welcomes
the Afghan-led progress on reconciliation and
reintegration, aimed at winning over supporters of the
insurgency through targeted programmes. The Afghan
national Consultative Peace Jirga, held in June, and the
inaugural session of the High Peace Council in October
were important steps towards this goal. Australia has
committed $25 million to the Peace and Reintegration
Trust Fund. Additionally, we are consulting with the
Afghan Government about providing support for a
deputy chief executive officer of the joint secretariat
for the Afghan peace and reintegration programme.
Australia, like others, welcomes the release of the
final results of the Wolesi Jirga elections. Although the
elections were far from perfect and the extent of fraud
has been well-documented, it is important not to lose
sight of the positives. This was the first Afghan-led
election in the post-Taliban era, and the Afghan

10-70462

S/PV.6464

electoral authorities did a good job in very difficult
circumstances. Around 400 women stood for office,
and millions of Afghans voted across the country
despite the risks. This showed how much the Afghan
people value democracy. And while it is true that
Taliban intimidation did affect voter turnout in some
districts, the insurgency clearly failed to make good on
its threat to derail the elections, thanks in part to the
solid performance of the Afghan security forces. Now
that the results are final, it is time for the international
community and the Afghan Government to return their
focus to long-term electoral reforms that will pave the
way for successful elections in the future.
We cannot lose sight of the fact that sustained
progress in Afghanistan depends critically on the
engagement of Afghanistan’s neighbours in the region,
from whom we have heard today. All of Afghanistan’s
neighbours share critical interests in Afghanistan’s
security and long-term stability, and can play a
constructive role in promoting Afghanistan’s social and
economic development. In this regard, the efforts of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
to encourage regional countries to cooperate in halting
the narcotics trade and the illegal movement of people
and to support Afghanistan in its efforts to achieve
security and stability are extremely welcome.
As I said at the beginning, this has been a critical
year for Afghanistan, and 2011 will be equally
important. But we have a real opportunity to build on
the progress we have made in Afghanistan over the
past 12 months. This progress could not have occurred
without the dedication of all those involved in
Afghanistan, in both civilian and military roles. We
thank them sincerely for their efforts in 2010 and pay
tribute to those who have paid an extremely high price
in terms of loss of life and limb.
As a final note, I would like to take a moment to
acknowledge the passing of Ambassador Richard
Holbrooke, United States Special Envoy for
Afghanistan and Pakistan. I did not know Ambassador
Holbrooke, but I did have the honour of meeting him.
As President Obama said during his remarks to launch
the review on Afghanistan and Pakistan, Ambassador
Holbrooke’s memory will be honoured and his legacy
will be long-lived.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Peter
Schwaiger, Deputy Head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations.

10-70462

Mr. Schwaiger: Like others before me, may I
first pay tribute to the late United States Special Envoy
for Afghanistan and Pakistan, Richard Holbrooke.
European Union High Representative Catherine Ashton
has praised him as a remarkable man, a true diplomat
and a champion of peace and reconciliation.
The candidate countries Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; the European Free Trade
Association country Norway, member of the European
Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova and Georgia align themselves with this
declaration. I will shorten my statement somewhat, but
I refer interested parties to the full written version
distributed.
Let me first join others in expressing our support
for the Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/630) on the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and in thanking Special Representative
Staffan de Mistura and his team for their determination
and the important work they carry out on the ground,
under difficult circumstances. I also thank Ambassador
Tanin for his statement.
The Afghan Government, supported by the
international community, is embarking on a crucial
period of transition in which strong leadership will be
essential to making the necessary tangible progress in
the fields of security, governance, justice and
reconciliation, and socio-economic development. The
European Union hopes that new political momentum
for reform and implementation can be generated now
that the electoral process has been completed. We again
pay tribute to millions of Afghan women and men who
exercised their right to vote in the face of many serious
security incidents.
Like the Secretary-General, we would like not
only to commend the Afghan electoral institutions for
their integrity and intense efforts to investigate and
address fraud and other irregularities, but also to
underline the need for long-term electoral reform,
which should start as soon as possible. The European
Union took a lead role in supporting the electoral
process over the last years and remains strongly
committed to assisting with the reform of the electoral
process and institutions, in close cooperation with
UNAMA and UNDP/ELECT. The European Union

33

S/PV.6464

generally believes that more checks and balances in the
political system would serve to enhance its credibility,
legitimacy and inclusiveness, as well as its efficiency
and accountability.
The continuing deterioration of the security
situation and the high number of civilian casualties
caused by anti-Government elements are of utmost
concern to the European Union. We are particularly
worried about targeted attacks against the civilian
population, Government officials and international staff
in Afghanistan. In light of that, we welcome progress
made in the build-up of both the Afghan National Army
and Police, and also the mitigating measures taken to
prevent casualties among United Nations staff.
We all know that there can be no sustainable
transition of security responsibility without a civilian
framework for stability that makes the country
functioning and secure. Better governance, access to
basic services, justice, rule of law and human rights are
just as important as “hard security” and thus already a
focus of EU assistance. The EU will henceforth
reinforce its efforts in strengthening Afghan capacity
and will work with the Afghan Government to foster
effective and accountable State institutions, especially
at the subnational level, with appropriate institutional
links between the centre and the provinces. We will put
even more emphasis on promoting the rule of law,
civilian policing — both through the European Union
Police Mission in Afghanistan and the continued
support for police salaries — and civil service reform.
This year’s international conferences have
defined the framework for transition and development
so that the focus can now be on implementation and
delivery. The EU is pleased to see the Kabul process
gain momentum and commends that, in November, the
Government could present a first 100-day progress
report on the implementation of the London and Kabul
conference commitments, as well as a monitoring and
reporting framework. That speaks to its growing ability
to take ownership and responsibility. We would like to
emphasize in this context that tangible development
gains are necessary on provincial, district and local
levels.
The EU, for its part, is on track regarding the
commitment to align with Government priorities and to
channel more assistance through Afghan Government
structures and multi-donor trust funds. At the same
time, in the spirit of mutual commitments, we hold the

34

Government to its undertakings and urge progress in
combating corruption and strengthening financial
management. In light of that, the EU welcomes steps to
further strengthen the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board in its support role for the Kabul
process.
The European Union commends the Government
of Afghanistan for the work done in the area of peace
and reconciliation. The establishment of the High
Peace Council was an important development in that
respect. We welcome the diversity of representatives
but could still see greater scope for the participation of
women and minorities, the inclusion of civil society
and the integration of considerations of human rights,
truth and justice into the process. As Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security
recognizes, women can and should play an important
role in peace processes.
The EU will continue to back an Afghan-led,
inclusive and transparent peace and reconciliation
process and commends the role played by UNAMA,
including through the Salaam Support Group. We fully
subscribe to the Secretary-General’s assertion that any
political settlement must respect the Afghan
Constitution
and
Afghanistan’s
international
commitments, including human rights. It must not
undermine the achievements made in recent years. We
also encourage the regional actors to play a supportive
role.
The situation in Afghanistan continues to concern
the whole world and remains a key priority for the
European Union. Just last week, High Representative
Ashton addressed European parliamentarians and
citizens to confirm that the EU’s commitment is for the
long term, and as the Council knows, it is very
substantial. We call on everyone to make their
contribution to a better, more secure and prosperous
future for the people of Afghanistan.
The President: I would now like to make a further
statement as the representative of the United States.
The representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran
stated today that the recent terrorist attack at a mosque
in Chabahar, Iran, was “the result of the wrong policy
of deployment of military foreign forces in our region”.
President Obama condemned the mosque attack after it
occurred and extended his condolences. The assertion
of the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran is
totally without foundation.

10-70462

S/PV.6464

I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to Special Representative De
Mistura to respond to comments and questions raised.
Mr. De Mistura: I think the only thing I can say
at this stage is that on behalf of all my colleagues in
Afghanistan — both in Kabul and in all our different
locations — I would like to express deep appreciation
for the strong and clear support I have been hearing for
the work of UNAMA and for the joint venture that
UNAMA and the Afghan authorities are trying to carry
out in order to improve the situation in the country.

10-70462

The year 2011 will be very challenging. Seeing
the Security Council united, as I saw it today, in
supporting the work of the United Nations and the
work of the Afghan authorities to stabilize the country
will give us a lot of strength to get through next year.
The President: I thank Special Representative
De Mistura for his comments today.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 2.30 p.m.

35
