2007th

United Nations

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

11
--?~

TWENTY-SIXTH SESSION

Official Records

PLENARY MEETING
Thursday, 9 December 1971,
at 12.15 p.m.
NEW

the Arabian Gulf, the American quarterly review, Foreign
Affairs, pointed out the following:

CONTENTS
Page
Agenda item 25:
Admission of !1ew Members to the United Nations (concluded)

YORK

"Hopes of a package deal have been dashed, and the
Shah seems adamant in 1'is determination to take possession of these islands"-that is, Abu Musa and the
Tunbs-"wuly-nilly. The Iranians point out that it will be
easier for him to do so before the British leave than
afterwards, for Britain-as a final act of penitence for the
'sins' of the Raj perhaps? -can easily bear the Arab
odium that may be involved in handing them to Iran."1

.

President: Mr. Adam MALIK (Indonesia).

AGENDA ITEM 2S
6. The Iranian Government did exactly that on 30
November last and the rulers of the so-called United Arab
Emirates and ilieir patrons reacted passively in complete
apathy and utter comlivance. This selling out of part of the
territory of the Arabian Gulf is therefore one of the notable
achievements of the new so-called United Arab Emirates.

Admission of new Members to the United Nations
(continuedj*
1. The PRESIDENT: The Assembly has before it document A/856l containing a unanimous recommendation of
the Security Council concerning the admission of the
United Arab Emirates to membership in the United
Nations. In this comlexion, a draft resolution submitted by
several countries has been circulated in document A/L.649.

7. How can my Government vote for the admission of
such an entity, disregarding the wishes and interests of the
people of the Arabian Gulf? We cannot, after all, condone
the selling out of an integral part of the soil of the Arabian
Gulf and extend the courtesy of voting for the admission of
the Trucial States to the United Nations.

2. 1 call on the representative of the People's Democratic
Republic of Yemen, who wishes to speak in explanation of
his vote.

8. May I make it clear once more that by voting against
the admission of those flimsy entities we are only voting for
the people of the Arabian Gulf, who are waging an heroic
armed struggle against both the Britisll colonialists and their
agents.

3. Mr. DHALEE (People's Democratic Republic of
Yemen): For the fourth time d1Jring this session of the
General Assembly my delegaticil finds itself obliged to vote
against the request for admission to the United Nations of
yet another so-called independent an1 sovereign entity. My
delegation is casting its negative vote for the same reasons
that motivated it to vote against the admission of Bahrain,
Qatar [1934th meeting] and Oman [1957th meeting].

9. My delegation requests a recorded vote on the draft
resolution now before us.

10. The PRESIDENT: The Assembly will now vote on
draft resolution A/L.649 concerning the admission of the
United Arab Emirates to membership in the United
Natio:ls.

4. It is the earnest conviction of the People's Democratic
Republic of Yemen that the declaration of the so-called
independence of the United Arab Emirates is a great farce.
Whether it is called the United Arab Emirates or the Trucial
States, or by any other name, the undeniable fact is that it
is still under British colonial domination. For one thing, the
inalienable right of the people to dispense with its
British-appointed rulers has not been established; its wisll to
unite with the rest of the people of the Arabian Gulf in a
popular and viable state has been undermined; and its right
to utilize its natural resources in the most appropriate way
has been totally curtailed. As a result, tt'1e British colonial
hegemony of the whole Arab Gulf area is legalized by fake
declarations of independence.

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Chile, China, Costa
Rica, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia,
Iran, Ireland, Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kenya, Khmer Republic, Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon, Lesotho,
liberia, Libyan Arab Republic, Luxembourg, Madagascar,

5. As if to underline the package deal concocted by the
United Kingdom,· Iran and the British-appointed rulers of

1 David Holden, "The Persian Gulf: After the British Raj",
Foreign Affairs, vol. 49, No. 4 (July 1971), p. 733.

* Resumed from the 1957th meeting.
1

A/PV.2007

,

-

TIT'

2

P

General Assembly - Twenty-sixth Session - Plenary Meetings

Malawi, Malaysia, Mau.itania, Mexico, Mongolia, Nepal,
Netherlands, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey , Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Upper Volta, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zaire, Zambia.

Against: People's Democratic Republic of Yemen.
The draft resolution was adopted hy 93 votes to 1
(resolution 2794 (XXVI)).2

11. The PRESIDENT: I declare the United Arab Emirates
admitte d to membership in the United Nations.
The delegation of the United Arab Emirates was escorted
to its place in the General Assembly hall.

12. The PRESIDENT: As Preside,lt of the General Assembly, I take pleasure in welcoming the United Arab Emirates
to membership in the United Nations. I am sure that it will
make a valuable contrib ution to the work of the Organization.
13. In view of the limited time before us, it has been
suggested that, with the excepti on of Kuwait , only the
chairmen of the regional groups should take the floor,
beginning with the representative of the Arab States. Other
representatives too, I am sure, would like to congratulate
the new Member. With their permission I should like, on
behalf of the General Assembly, to extend to the Government and people of the new Member State our sincere
congratulations on this great occasion and our best wishes
for their happiness and prosper ity.

14. I call on Mr. Geglunan of Yemen to address the
General Assembly on behalf of the Arab States.
15. Mr. GEGHMAN (Yemen): In these trying times,
through which the United Nations and the world at large
are passing, it is indeed comfor ting to find a momen t to
welcome l!.mongst us a new Member to this family of
natioY'.3. On behalf of the Arab States, I wish to express the
warmest welcome to the United Arab Emirates and to
assure It of our great optimism and hope that it will
contrit ute greatly to the work of the United Nations.
16. It is a particular pleasure for me, personally, that the
man who comes here today to represent the new State is
Mr. Adnan Pachachi. He is well known to many of us and
has made a very constructive contrib ution to the work of
the United Nations during the many years that he was here
with us. Thus, to Mr. Adnan Pachachi I wish to extend a
welcome on his return. And to the new State, the United
2 The delegations of Egypt, Mauritius, Morocco, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Panama and Rwanda subsequently informed the Secretariat
that they wished to have their votes recorded as having been in
favour of the draft resolution. The delegations of Peru and Ceylon
subsequently indicated that they wished to have their votes
recorded as having been in favour of the draft resolution (see below,
paras. 30 and 56, respectively).

Arab Emirates, I wish to extend a most hearty welcome and
to wish its people peace, prosper ity and greater unity,

17. The PRESIDENT: I call on Mr. Mwaanga of Zambia to
speak on behalf of the African States.
18. Mr. MWAANGA (Zambia): On behalf of the African
States I should like to extend a wann welcome to the
United Arab Emirates as the one hundre d and thirty-second
Member of the United Nations. The admission of a new
Member is always an occasion for rejoicing and it is
therefore a source of great satisfaction to see the delegation
of the United Arab Emirates seated in this General
Assembly hall.
19. I also extend a personal word of welcome to
Mr. Adnan Pachachi, who has come to represent this new
State. I knew him personally for a number of years when he
served in a different capacity and I had the opportu nity to
co-operate with him on several occasions.

and

cuI
the
U
Sta
ad
the

26.
spe
27.
of
gol
an
th

20. The African countries have always believed in the
principle of universality, and the step which the General
Assembly has just taken is undoub tedly in keeping with this
importa nt principle. The history and culture which the new
Member brings with it will enrich the internat ional order
which we are trying to build. Time and again small
countries have amply demons trated that they are more than
capable of acting as custodians of the conscience of the
international commu nity. It is with this in mind that we
express our confidence that the United Arab Emirates will
make a worthy contrib ution to the work of the United
Nations in its never-ending search for world peace.

21. We wish the Government and people of the United
Arab Emirates peace and prosperity.

22. The PRESIDENT: I call on Mr. Ghorra of Lebanon to
speak on behalf of the Asian States.
23. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): On behalf of the Asian
States as well as of the Lebanese delegation, I wish to
extend a warm welcome to our sister State, the United
Arab Emirates. I am equally pleased to welcome its
delegation, headed by Mr. Adnan Pachachi, Minister of
State, who has established for himself an outstan ding
reputati on as a statesman here at the United Nations and in
international circles.
24. The entry of the United Arab Emirates further
enhances the principle of universal representation of the
United Nations. This year the contine nt of Asia has been
fortunate in having an additional five of its States join the
family of the United Nations. With these additions, and
with the participation of the People's Republic of China,
our contine nt will certainly increase its contrib ution to the
promot ion of the purposes and principles of the Charter
and to the service of peace and progress in the world.
25. The Emirates which now constitu te the United Arab
Emirates have played through their history an importa nt
role in developing fruitful personal and trade relations
between Asia and the rest of the world. The United Arab
Emirates now enters an era in which it can play an
importa nt role in promot ing internat ional understanding

s
tl

3
I'

f

a

o
d

»

2oo7th meeting - 9 December 1971
and co-operation and in applying its vast resources for the
cultural and material progress of its people. I wish,
therefore, to extend to the Government and people of the
United Arab Emirates the congratulations of the Asian
States on their accession to complete independence and
admission to the United Nations ana our sincere wishes for
their prosperity and progress.
26. The PRESIDENT: I call on Mr. Szarka of Hungary to
speak on behalf of the Eastern European States.
27. Mr. SZARKA (Hungary): On behalf of the delegations
of Bulgaria, the Byelorussian SSR, Czechoslovakia, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, the Ukranian SSR, and the USSR,
and of my own, I wish to extend our sincere welcome to
the Government and people of the United Arab Emirates
on the admission of that State to the United Nations. The
addition of this young, independent State, which has
recently achieved its independence, to the membership of
the United Nations is a further step towards the complete
universality of our Organization. We express our conviction
that it will not be long until all States willing and able to
work for the realization of the purposes and principles of
the Charter will be able to join our ranks.
28. With the independence and membership in the United
Nations of the United Arab Emirates a further step has
been taken in the emancipation of the peoples of the Arab
East, a region of peoples with an ancient culture and a rich
heritage. While welcoming the delegation of the United
Arab Emirates, the delegations on whose behalf I have the
honour to speak express their readiness to co-op~rate with
it towards stn~ngthening peace and security all over the
world in the .~lrit of the noble ideals of our Charter.
29. The PRESIDENT: I call on Mr. Molina of Costa Ri"a
to speak on behalf of the Latin American States.
30. Mr. MOLINA (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): First of all, the Peruvian delegation has asked me
to state that it was unable to be present when the vote was
taken on the admission of the United Arab Emirates to our
Organization as a new Member State. Had that delegation
been present it would have been pleased to cast its vote in
favour.
31. The entry into our Organization of new Members
which accept the obligations of the United Nations Charter
and undertake solemnly to comply with those obligations
confirms mankind's desire to live in peace, to ensure respect
for human dignity and to see that we fight actively to
secure in future a better life for the people on our planet
than they have today.
32. The presence of a new nation or group of nations thus
reaffirms the fight against colonialism, against discrimination in all its forms and against under-development, as well
as the struggle for human rights, the application of the right
of peoples to self-determination, the peaceful settlement of
disputes and the achievement of general and complete
disarmament. In the last analysis it expresses the universal
desire of man to make effective progress, to obtain better
living conditions.
33. Therefore, on behalf of the Latin American group, I
offer our welcome to the representatives of the United

~.

~

3

Arab Emirates as new colleagues in the United Nations, and
I express our conviction that their presence here will
contribute not only to the attainment of the objectives that
I have just stated but will also help us to continue to make
progress in the attainment of the principle of universality
for our Organization.
34. The PRESIDENT: i call on Mr. Patricio of Portugal to
speak on behalf of th", Western European and other States.
35. Mr. PARTRICIO (Portugal): On behalf of the Western
European and other States, it gives me great pleasure to
welcome to this Assembly today the newest Member of the
United Nations, the United Emirates, whose application for
membership, unanimously endorsed by the Security Council yesterday, is recommended to the General Assembly in
document A/8561. In doing so, I wish to offer the
constituent member States of that union-Abu Dhabi,
Dubai, Sharja, Dmm a1 Quaiwain, Ajman and Fujaira-our
felicitations on their emergence into full sovereign status
'vith the termination of the special treaties that have linked
them in close collaboration with the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland since 1820. The fact
that all of them have decided to combine their will and
their resources and to constitute this Union of Emirates
should be a matter of good augury for the region of the
Persian Gulf, so rich in traditions, to which they belong.
36. V'e wish the Government of the United Arab Emirates
a.,d also the Governments of each one of them all the
success and prosperity they deserve in the years ahead. In
particular we offer our greetings of welcome today to their
delegation.
37. The fact that the peoples of these States are famed for
their great and legendary industry and accomplishments in
trade, in difficult circumstances, dating from the fifteenth
century, is of special significance to us. Their once
legendary splendour in pearl-fishing, which became a
byword among the nations of the world down the
centuries, entitles them to pride of place in the community
of nations. The spurt towards accelerated progress and
advancement provided for them by the spurt of oil
production in more recent times should be an encouragement for the future of their nation. We all trust that they
will be able to achieve to the full the promise of their early
years and to make a fruitful and constructive contribution,
with their ancient wisdom, to the activities of this
Organization.
38. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Kuwait.
39. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): Mr. President I am very
grateful to you indeed for allowing me this opportunity to
convey my congratuJations to the United Arab Emirates
despite the limited time available. The special relations
between the Emirates and Kuwait necessitate my brief
intervention.
40. Kuwait rejoices today as we see the United Arab
Emirates seated in our midst. The historic ties between the
Kuwaitis and the people of the Gulf go back to the
eighteenth century. Side by side, the Kuwaitis and the
people of the Gulf crosse~ V1e Arabian Sea to the shores of

-

4

General Assembly - Twenty-sixth Session - Plenary Meetings.

India and the eastern coast of Africa. The two peoples
co-operated, in harmony, on the surface of the Indian
Ocean and at the bottom of the Arabian Gulf. They dived
for pearls, when pearls were the only source of income.
Together, they revolted against the scarcity of their lands
and discovered new areas, through pain and fortitude, in
their unparalled :idventure and sacrifices in trading with
India and Africa.
41. In February 1968 the Dubai agreement, which had the
effect of establishing a federation of nine Emirates, was
signed. Kuwait demonstrated unmatched patience in its
endeavours to assist the Emirates to lay down the foundation of ilie federation. The Foreign Minister of Kuwait
went to ilie Gulf Emirates many times to co-operate with
the rulers of the Gulf in order to bring about a solid basis
for a strong federation. Fortunately, ilie United Arab
Emirates federation was recently born, and my Government
was one of the fIrst States that recognized it and pledged its
support to it. The United Arab Emirates is a small State in
populatkn, but it has all the values the United Nations
embodies. It is a peace-loving State, with an abundance of
goodwill and dedication to the purposes and principles of
the United Nations enshrined in its Charter.
42. If the Kuwaitis of yesterday shared with the people of
the Gulf the fortitude of the past, we today share with
them the progress of the present and the aspirations of the
future. On behalf of the Government of Kuwait and its
people, I extend my warmest felicitations to the President
of ilie United Arab Emirates and the rulers of the six
sheikhdoms and ilie people of the Gulf. I am sure that the
presence of tllis small State will enhance the voice of
justice, peace and progress.
43. Mr. pmLLIPS (United States of America): It is my
privilege to speak as representative of the host country in
extending a very wann welcome to the United Arab
Emirates upon its assumption of membership in the United
Nations.
44. The United States, which has enjoyed cordial and
friendly relations for many years with the Governments of
the component members of the union, welcomes their
presence in this hall and in our Organization as the one
hundred thirty-second Member of the United Nations. We
congratulate the rulers of the Emirates of Abu Dhabi,
Dubai, Sharja, Umm al Quaiwain, Ajman and Fujaira, on
the wise manner in which they and the Government of the
United Kingdom terminated their former treaty relationship in a spirit of mutual co-operation.

the assembled representatives of the nations of the world
the gratitude of the people and Govemment of the United
Arab Emirates on the admission of their young State to
membership in the United Nations. I am sure the historic
significance of this moment will not be lost on those who
have been closely following the course of recent Arab
history. The United Arab Emirates is the last part but one
of the Arab nation to emerge from foreign tutelage to
sovereign and independent statehood. All our people
throughout the Arab world-with that single exception to
which I shall refer presently-are now free to manage their
own affairs and contribute their share in your collective
endeavour to maintain world peace and promote economic
and social progress. We assure you all of our full co-operation in your efforts to translate into living reality the lofty
purposes and pri11ciples of the Charter, which we have
solemnly undertaken to respect and observe.
48. I said at the beginning of my statement that the
United Arab Emirates is the last area but one in the Arab
world to regain its freedom from foreign rule. The
exception to which I refer is, of course, Palestine and I take
this opportunity to declare on behalf of the new Member
State our support for the struggle of the people of Palestine
to restore their rights in ilieir ancestral homeland. As an
integral part of the Arab nation, the United Arab Emirates
fully identifIes itself with the other Arab countries in
upholding the right of ilie people of Palestine to selfdetermination. We also support all the efforts to secure the
withdrawal of Israel's forces from the Arab lands occupied
in the aftermath of Israel's aggression of June 1967.
"I

49. In taking tllis stand we share with the overwhelming
majority of the Members of this Organization the unshakable conviction, clearly manifested in the last few days,
that under the Charter no ~erritorial annexation through
military conquest can be allowed and no interference in the
domestic affairs of sovereign States can be accepted,
whatever the cause or provocation. If we permit these two
fundamental principles of the Charter to be repeatedly
flouted with impunity, then the whole international o:der
which the Charter has envisaged and which this Organization has striven over the years to establish will disintegrate
into a state of lawlessness, in which the weak and small
countries, like the one in whose name I now speak, will be
the main sufferers.

46. The PRESIDENT: I now take pleasure in inviting the
Minister of State of the United Arab Emirates, Mr. Adnan
Pachachi, to address the General Assembly.

50. As we enter tllis new life of independent statehood,
we are not unaware of the great challenges awaiting us. A
small country which for centuries has lived in the shadow
of poverty and isolation has how assumed responsibility for
its own destiny and is determined to play its part in the
world and provide for its people, long deprived and
neglected, those basic necessities of life which are the
inalienable right of every human being. Endowed with rich
resources and a small population, the country which I have
the honour to speak for is generously sharing its bounty
with the other Arab people and has opened its gates for
thousands of our fellow Arabs and many other nationalities. Together, we are endeavouring to create a society free
of the scourge of poverty and want, a society in which
fundamental human rights are guaranteed and respected
and all basic human needs are satisfied.

47. Mr. PACHACHI (United Arab Emirates): I am deeply
conscio,,!s of the great honour and privilege of expressing to

51. The progress so far achieved has been truly spectacular
and has few parallels in modem times. This is especially the

45. May the spirit of co-operation which resulted in the
promulgation of their joint Constitution be a good omen
for their future in the United Nations. In extending our
welcome to the representatives of the United Arab Emirates, we ask them to convey our hearty congratulations
and best wishes to the Government and peoples whom they
represent.

•

I
;11

"

- ~'".'

"I

,I

2007th meeting - 9 December 1971
case of Abu Dhabi, which in the short period of five years,
under the leadership of Sheik Zayd, has been transformed
from II backward tribal society into a vigorous and
progressive modern country . While achieving its rapid
progress, Abu Dhabi has not forgotten its neighbours and
Arab sisters. We have initiated programmes to assist Arab
and other developing countries of Asia and Africa which we
hope will contrib ute to their efforts to accelerate their
social and economic development. It is recognized, however, that economic and social progress, v.mch remains our
first concern, cannot be entirely meaningful withou t political freedom and the enjoym ent of fundamental human
rights. That is why the Constitution of the United Arab
Emirates, which was promulgated on the day of independence, contains a bill of rights and provides for representative institutions. It is the first time in the lower part of the
Gulf that such representative institut ions have been established and we are certain that this novel and bold
experiment will help to restore to this ancient birthplace of
the Arab nation the position of prominen-;e in the Arab
world to which it is entitled.

.'1 I

•

5

55. May I, in conclusion, extend my thank~ to all the
representatives whom have spoken before me in welcoming
the new State to membership in the United Nations,
espedaTIy to those who were kind enough to refer to me
perso:lally. And may l assure them and you all that the
United Arab Emirates will spare no effort to make its
contrib ution to this Organization and work hand in hand
with the rest of the membership of the United Nations.
56. MI. AMERASINGHE (Ceylon): The delegation of
Ceylon regrets very much that, owing to other commitments, it was unable to be present when the vote was taken
on the draft resolution in docume nt A/L.64 9, regarding the
admission of the United Arab Emirates to membership in
the United Nations. We wish to have it placed on record
that we would have support ed that draft resolut ion-as
indeed is quite clear from our sponsorship of that text.
57. I should like to take this opportu nity to offer our
warm felicitations t·') the new Member and to express our
very sincere good " shes to it. Striking a personal note, I
wish to say how happy I am to see an old and distinguished
friend- old in experience, but not in years-h ere leading the
delegation of the United Arab Emirates.

52. Politically, the United Arab Emirates is a new experiment in federalism in the Arab world. Its success, we hope,
will herald a new era which ",viII witness the reversal of the
disastrous trend towards fragmentation and division of the
Arab nation.

58. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Iran
in exercise of the right of reply.

53. I cannot end this brief stateme nt without expressing
the deep regret felt by the people and the Government of
the United Arab Emirates at the ~ction taken by Iran in
forcibly occupying some Arab islands in the Gulf. We were
looking forward to a relationship of friendship and cooperation with Iran, a neighbour with which the Arab
nation has had long historic and deep spiritual and cultural
ties. The action of the Iranian Government in using force to
settle a territorial dispute arising out of a claim untenable
both historically and jUridically is not only contrar y to the
Charter of the United Nations, but is also incompatible
with the traditional friendship that has bound togethe r the
Arab and Iranian peoples. I am sure the Iranian Government will realize before long that it is far more importa nt
to maintain good relations with its neighbours than to take
possession of those Arab islands.

59. MI. RAHNEMA (Iran) (interpretation from French): I
h.ave asked to exercise my delegation 's r~t of reply in
regard to the comments that the repre.~~ntative of tht:
People's Democratic Republic of Yemen thought it necessary to make on the independence of the United Arab
Emirates and its admission to the United Nations. I believe
the unanimous vote of this Assembly has provided the most
striking rebutta l to his comments. Accordingly, withou t
wishing to take the time of the Assembly. I should merely
like to take this opportu nity to extend my congratulations
to my friend Mr. Pachachi on his return to the United
Nations as the representative of a new State. He well knows
that I also have many reservations about some of }ljs
comments, but I think that when the time comes a reply
will be made to him in the appropriate forums. He knows
our position and I need not take up the Assembly's time to
explain it further.

54. I think what I have said is an adequate reply to, or
comment on, any discordant voice or doubt regarding the
viability or the authent ic national direction of the policy of
t.l-te United Arab Emirates and its position in the Arab
world.

60. The PRESIDENT: The flag of the United Arab
Emirates will be raised at a ceremo ny which will take place
at 12 noon tomorro w opposite the delegates' entrance.

Litho in United Nations, New York

The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

77001-J anuary 1974-2, 200

, ,
I
,;
....
''

~
W

f~"

n
