S/PV.8946

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8946

th meeting
Wednesday, 12 January 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Juul. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Norway)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-22847 (E)
*2222847*

S/PV.8946

The situation in the Middle East

battlefield. I will therefore continue to stress that the
warring parties can, should and, indeed, must talk,
even if they are not ready to put down their arms.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hans
Grundberg, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen; Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Acting Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs; and Ms. Ola
Al-Aghbary, co-Founder and Chief Executive Officer
of the Sheba Youth Foundation for Development and a
local mediator in the city of Taiz.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Before we begin with our speakers list
today — recalling the Security Council’s latest
note by the President (S/2017/507) on its working
methods — I wish to encourage all speakers, both
members and non-members of the Council, to deliver
their statements in five minutes or less. Note 507 also
encourages briefers to be succinct and focus on key
issues. In that spirit, briefers are further encouraged
to limit their initial remarks to seven to 10 minutes.
Everyone is also encouraged to wear a mask at all
times, including while delivering remarks.
I now give the floor to Mr. Grundberg.
Mr. Grundberg: Let me first welcome the newly
elected members of the Security Council. I look
forward to close cooperation with them, as with all
other members of the Council.
The year 2022 is starting on a challenging note. The
military escalation I described here in the Council last
month (see S/PV.8929) has accelerated as the parties
double-down on military options. Seven years down
the road of war, the prevailing belief of all warring
sides seems to be that inflicting sufficient harm on the
other will force them into submission. However, there
is no sustainable long-term solution to be found on the
2/21

12/01/2022

Before I turn to my core task of finding a way for
political talks to sustainably end the conflict, I am
compelled to highlight some of the military escalations
in recent weeks, which have been among the worst we
have seen in Yemen for years and which are taking an
increasing toll on civilian lives.
Ansar Allah remains determined to continue its
assault of Ma’rib, and there is renewed fighting in
Shabwah, where three districts have been captured
from Ansar Allah. We have seen an increase in air
strikes, not only around front lines but also in Sana’a,
including in residential areas. Air strikes and shelling in
Taiz have increased, and fighting continues in southern
Al-Hudaydah. Similarly, attacks on Saudi Arabia have
also increased. All those events have led to civilian
casualties and damage to civilian infrastructure.
Beyond my repeated calls for de-escalation and
restraint, I also reiterate my appeal to the warring
parties to respect and uphold their obligations under
international humanitarian law, which include the
protection of civilians and protected objects. I also
call on all sides to preserve the civilian character of
public infrastructure.
We appear to once more be entering an escalatory
cycle, with predictable devastating implications for
civilians and for the immediate prospects of peace. I am
worried that battles could intensify along other fronts.
The recent seizure by Ansar Allah of an Emirati-flagged
ship is another matter of concern. In addition, I regret
to express yet again my concern over the continued
detention of United Nations staff members in Sana’a
and Ma’rib. The United Nations should have immediate
access to those staff members and be provided with
official information pertaining to the arrests.
As the tempo of the war increases, the already severe
restrictions on the movement of people and goods into
and within the country could worsen. The accusations
of a militarization of the ports of Al-Hudaydah are
worrisome, and the threats of attacking them are equally
disturbing, given that those ports are a lifeline for many
Yemenis. The United Nations Mission to Support the
Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) is closely monitoring
the situation in the ports and has requested, as part
of its mandate, to undertake an inspection. Following
the withdrawal of the joint forces on 12 November,
22-22847

12/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

the Mission continues to engage the parties and other
interlocutors on the way forward.
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome
the appointment of Major General Michael Beary as
the new Head of UNMHA. His appointment offers
an opportunity to build on those efforts, to address
the parties’ concerns and to advance the Hodeidah
Agreement in this shifted context.
Let me reiterate that restrictions on the movement
of goods and people are a challenge throughout
Yemen. The continued imposition of road closures
and checkpoints across the country, as well as the
impediments to imports and the domestic distribution
of goods essential for civilians, including fuel, is
harming the population in unjustifiable ways. In that
regard, I am concerned that the last fuel ship clearance
was issued on 20 November 2021. As always, it will
be Yemeni civilians who will be most affected by
fuel shortages.
I am glad that Ms. Ola Al-Aghbary is briefing the
Council today. As I previously reported to the Council, I
was in Ms. Al-Aghbary home city of Taiz in November.
There I experienced first-hand the severe impact of road
closures and checkpoints on the population. Similarly,
the fact that the closure of Sana’a airport has prevented
Yemenis in the north from travelling, including to seek
life-saving medical care abroad for almost six years, is
unsustainable.
As
Acting
Assistant
Secretary-General
Rajasingham will elaborate on, the multilayered
challenges surrounding the operations of Sana’a airport
also have critical implications for United Nations
operations. Yemeni, regional and international leaders
all have a responsibility to address those matters for
the sake of the entire Yemeni population. They have
suffered enough from those restrictions.
One part of the population that suffers particularly
from such restrictions are Yemeni women. Moreover,
despite their tireless efforts, women broadly continue
to be excluded from decision-making in war and peace.
My Office will continue to convene consultations with
women leaders from political parties, civil society and
the private sector. Those diverse women are all actively
involved in sustaining and improving life in Yemen
in different ways, from supporting their families
and communities to working for peace or providing
valuable services and goods. Unfortunately, many are
harassed and targeted for their work, and I therefore

S/PV. 8946

urge all actors to respect the rights and work of women
peace actors and women human rights defenders. I
welcome the focus of the Council’s presidency on the
crucial women and peace and security agenda, but we
all need to do more.
While developments on the ground pose significant
challenges to peace efforts, my work continues along
the path that I have set out before in the Council. I have
explored tangible ways to address the parties’ stated
priorities and to unlock a nationwide ceasefire to end the
fighting. Unfortunately, but unsurprisingly, the efforts
have faced the same obstacles that hindered similar
efforts in the past, that is, the parties’ disagreements
over sequencing, competing priorities and a lack
of trust.
I remain convinced that part of the challenge is that
the parties’ preconditions are linked to broader political
and governance questions. As such, a comprehensive
political solution is necessary to achieve sustainable
results. That will require difficult discussions with and
among the warring parties and those who have been
left out during the war. I will nevertheless continue to
explore options for fast-tracking de-escalation, if and
when the parties are ready to pursue those options.
I have been focusing on developing a comprehensive,
inclusive multitrack approach that covers political
security and economic issues. The framework will
he aimed at facilitating incremental progress in those
different areas in parallel. The overall process will be
geared towards reaching a durable political settlement.
In the coming period, I plan to deepen consultations,
both with the conflict parties and with a wider range
of Yemeni stakeholders, to identify and develop the
short-, medium- and long-term priorities that need to
be addressed in each of the three areas. As the country
is increasingly politically, economically and militarily
fractured, Yemenis must be supported in reversing the
trajectory through a serious, sustained and structured
process backed by the international community.
We have been far too long without a political
process that can produce options for improving
immediate conditions and that can prepare the ground
for a realistic and durable settlement. Consultations
with me and my Office are a start, but they will not be
enough to settle the conflict. Eventually, Yemenis of
opposing views will need to meet to discuss solutions
and determine their shared future.

22-228473/21

S/PV.8946

The situation in the Middle East

I am keenly aware of the political and military
context in which my Office is attempting to initiate
a political process. Yemen’s war, like many others, is
littered with missed opportunities driven in part by
combatants oscillating between feeling too weak to
accept or too strong to settle for compromise. Genuine
political will, responsible leadership and adherence
to the interests of the entire population are needed to
sustainably put Yemen on a different trajectory. In
addition, I am convinced that, in order to have a chance
of breaking the cycle, we need to establish an inclusive,
internationally backed political process that can provide
a viable foundation for peace.
As I convene and consult with Yemenis on the way
forward, clear and consistent support from the Council,
Member States and, especially, regional States will
continue to be vital.
The President: I thank Mr. Grundberg for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Rajasingham.
Mr. Rajasingham: I had hoped to deliver some
good news at the start of the new year. Unfortunately,
recent developments do not give us, or the people of
Yemen, much cause for optimism.
Today I want to focus on three main points: first,
the civilian toll of the crisis, especially on women
and girls; secondly, the constraints limiting the
humanitarian operation; and, thirdly, how we can deliver
a more effective and inclusive response, including by
strengthening the economy to reduce people’s needs.
Let us start with the impact of the crisis on
civilians. Since our previous briefing (see S/PV.8929),
fierce fighting has continued along dozens of front
lines. Clashes in Al-Jawf, Ma’rib and Shabwah
displaced more than 15,000 people over the past month.
Hostilities have also resurged in Al-Bayda, while air
strikes have escalated in Sana’a and other parts of the
country. Civilian casualties continue to be reported
at alarming rates. In December 2021, 358 civilians
were reportedly killed or injured as a direct result of
hostilities — a statistic that is tied for the highest in
three years. I once again urge all parties to take constant
care to spare civilians and civilian objects, as required
by international humanitarian law.
As we have reported many times, the war is also
causing hunger, displacement, economic collapse and
the deterioration of basic services. As in many crises,
4/21

12/01/2022

women and girls are bearing the brunt. Even before
the conflict, Yemen consistently ranked at or near
the bottom of global gender equality indices, but the
war has made the situation far worse for women and
girls. That manifests itself in myriad ways, including
restrictions on basic rights, such as the freedom of
movement, reduced access to education and higher
rates of illiteracy and poverty.
Access to health care is more limited owing, in
part, to a lack of female health-care workers in conflict
areas and long distances to health facilities. Access to
reproductive health care is particularly precarious, with
one woman dying every two hours during childbirth
from almost entirely preventable causes. Risks of
exposure to sexual and gender-based violence have also
increased, with some groups particularly vulnerable,
including those who are displaced, impoverished, have
disabilities or are part of the Muhamasheen community.
As people struggle to survive, the humanitarian
community is doing everything it can to help. In 2021,
aid agencies assisted more than 11 million people every
month, but that work is being continuously hampered
for entirely avoidable reasons.
That brings me to my second point. The
humanitarian response in Yemen faces far too many
constraints. The biggest constraint right now is funding.
Last year’s response plan was 58 per cent funded,
making it the lowest-funded appeal for Yemen since
2015. In December 2021, the World Food Programme
announced cuts in food assistance for 8 million people,
owing to funding shortages. Other vital programmes,
including water, protection and reproductive health
services, have also been forced to scale back or close in
recent weeks for lack of funds.
We expect this year’s aid operation to need roughly
as much money as last year — about $3.9 billion — to
help 16 million people. Nationwide assessments are
under way now to provide evidence for the 2022 response
plan. I call on all donors to sustain and, if possible,
increase their support this year.
But funding is far from the only constraint.
Humanitarian access and security also remain
challenges. Bureaucratic impediments persist and
include significant delays in approving aid projects,
issuing staff visas and facilitating movement. Importing
necessary equipment is also harder than it should be.
22-22847

12/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Attempts at interference are also rife — mostly by
local authorities in Ansar Allah areas — and include
efforts to change beneficiary lists, determine geographic
locations or influence the selection of partners. Many of
those constraints can disproportionately affect women
and girls. Protection programmes, for example, face
especially difficult challenges. Female humanitarian
workers also face restrictions that limit their movement
and impact their participation in the response. Security
challenges have also persisted.
Despite assurances to the contrary, Ansar Allah
authorities have not provided access to the two United
Nations staff detained in Sana’a in November. Access
to a third detained United Nations worker who was
arrested in Ma’rib in December is currently being
arranged with Government officials. We will keep
the Council informed as those situations develop, and
we renew our call for full respect for United Nations
privileges and immunities.
I also want to reiterate the central importance
of safe, predictable passage into and out of Yemen,
both for humanitarian workers and supplies, as well
as for commercial imports that Yemenis need to
survive. On 19 December, Ansar Allah authorities
suspended humanitarian flights through Sana’a airport,
citing technical issues with airport communications
equipment. Flights resumed on 27 December. Those
kinds of disruptions risk undermining the aid operation
and staff safety. I call on Ansar Allah authorities to
avoid unilateral flight cancellations in the future. I
also request the Government to authorize the import
of equipment to repair the faulty communications
infrastructure at Sana’a airport.
On a related note, I wish to recall that the continued
functioning of all points of entry for humanitarian
cargo and commercial imports, including Al-Hudaydah
port, remains crucial to prevent further suffering and a
worsening of humanitarian needs.
Regarding the FSO SAFER tanker, I wish to note that
the United Nations continues to engage all stakeholders
to find a pragmatic, workable solution. Everyone is
aware of the grave danger posed by the tanker, and we
appreciate the recent constructive engagement of the
parties, Member States and other stakeholders on that
important issue.
My last point focuses on what we can do, beyond
increasing funding and improving access, to strengthen
the aid operation and reduce people’s suffering.

S/PV. 8946

Improving the way aid agencies work is one place to
start. An inter-agency evaluation of the humanitarian
response in Yemen is now under way. The evaluation is
an important opportunity, and initial findings are being
integrated into the 2022 response plan. Final results
should be available in March.
One area where we are already seeking to improve
is in creating a more inclusive response. That means,
among other things, a more enabling environment
for women and girls, promoting gender parity among
our staff and supporting more investments in gendersensitive programming. It also means amplifying
women’s voices at all levels. Today’s meeting is a good
example of that approach, so I am very pleased to be
briefing alongside Ms. Al-Aghbary.
But humanitarian aid — no matter how effective or
inclusive — cannot solve the crisis in Yemen by itself.
As I have said before, economic collapse, accelerated
by the conflict, is the biggest driver of people’s needs.
The United Nations economic framework lays out
a way to strengthen the economy and deliver lasting
improvements to people’s lives right now. That
requires a mix of financial and political commitments
that, together, could quickly reduce the scale of
humanitarian needs.
Those commitments include resuming foreignexchange injections through the Central Bank.
Foreign-exchange injections worked in the past and are
especially urgent now to protect a recent and fragile
partial recovery in the Yemeni rial exchange rate. As
members know, the exchange rate is key to people’s
ability to afford food and other essential goods, nearly
all of which must be imported.
Those commitments also include policy decisions
to lift import restrictions and use import revenues to pay
for basic services delivered by public institutions. That,
too, will help bring down prices and improve people’s
lives. We must also do more to strengthen livelihoods,
skills development and financial services. Ensuring
access for women to those kinds of programmes is
especially important to boost household incomes,
improve food security and reduce needs.
But the most transformative change will come only
with an end to the fighting that is supported by a lasting
and just peace agreement. That is what Yemenis want
above all else, and I strongly support everything the
Special Envoy is doing to help them achieve that.

22-228475/21

S/PV.8946

The situation in the Middle East

The President: I thank Mr. Rajasingham for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Al-Aghbary.
Ms. Al-Aghbary (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to start by thanking the Norwegian presidency of the
Security Council for giving me the opportunity to deliver
this briefing on behalf of the Sheba Youth Foundation
for Development — a local youth-led foundation where
I work with many young people and women to restore
peace and security to my country, Yemen, which has
been devastated by war for over seven years.
My name is Ola Al-Aghbary, and I am a young
woman from Yemen. Like thousands of Yemeni young
people and women on the ground, my life is threatened
by missiles and air strikes. Nevertheless, we remain
determined to persevere in our daily work to promote
community coexistence and establish security and
peace in Yemen. I am here to brief the Council on
behalf of the women and young people who are working
in favour of Yemen’s peacebuilding process, about the
situation in my city, Taiz. Our mediation efforts there
have made a real difference to the lives of local citizens,
whose suffering only worsens as they remain without
any support.
Our Foundation believes in the role of young people
and women in resolving community conflicts. Because
local authorities are in a weak situation due to the war,
we have established community councils to solve daily
disputes among the population. Those councils, in
which young people are participants, became important
in resolving disputes and ease tensions.
The role of young people is not limited to local
action, but also extends to the national level. Young
people participate in peace negotiations among various
armed parties. That is why we have recently created, in
cooperation with a large number of youth organizations,
the first youth support group that attempts to raise
young voices at the national level and exert pressure to
establish youth consultative council, which is in contact
with the office of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen. The aim is to ensure the participation
of young people in the peace negotiations as we believe
that peace negotiations must not be limited to armed
warring parties but must include unarmed groups such
as young people, women and civil society.
If the daily work carried out by women and young
people on the ground were to cease, then the problems
6/21

12/01/2022

we face would be exacerbated, and we would lose
even more friends and loved ones to the war. Our
efforts do not enjoy the attention of the media, which
is interested only in the war and the destruction it
causes. Nonetheless, our efforts prove that young
people, women and civil society in Yemen are capable
of contributing to the peacebuilding process. In that
connection, we need the support of the Council and
the international community so that our efforts will be
more effective and in the right direction with a view
to implement Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 1325 (2000) and resolution 2250 (2015).
I am from the city of Taiz. I travelled 120 kilometres
south, a trip that took eight hours, so that I could brief
the Council today. It would have taken far less time had
the main roadways not been closed. I was forced to take
narrow mountain routes and passes that are dangerous
and often blocked due to accidents involving vehicles
and trucks or due to floods and landslides during the
rainy season. Such road accidents usually leave behind
civilian casualties.
Another road to the east of the city, which used to
take 10 minutes and was used by many residents of Taiz
before the war, is now blocked. We must undertake a
trip of at least six hours to go from one side of city to
the other. The alternative roads are truly perilous, but
must be taken by trade caravans, humanitarian workers,
travellers, patients seeking care, students, workers and
all those who live on one side of the city in order to get
to the other side. This casts an even darker shadow to
an already bleak existence.
Taiz has become a place that lacks those who have
medical expertise, those with big capital, even local
and international organizations, which relocated to
Sana’a and Aden, leaving this city to die for the past
seven years.
Taiz still faces roadblocks with no services. This
is the worst phase that we have experienced, and yet
more than 3 million people suffer on a daily basis. Taiz
is not in the spotlight. Politicians ignore it, as does
the world’s conscience, although the Security Council
adopted memorandum of understanding on Taiz
through Stockholm Agreement, pursuant to resolution
2451 (2018).
Women, young people and civil society in Taiz
are sparing no efforts to reopen the main roads. Since
2015, we have launched numerous campaigns for their
reopening, but none has been successful. Women and
22-22847

12/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8946

children continue to live for a seventh year in a besieged
and uninhabitable city.

The President: I thank Ms. Al-Aghbary for
her briefing.

With regard to basic services, in particular the
supply of water, we as local mediators, with the
assistance of various local stakeholders, have reclaimed
a number of wells that had been under military control.
We have therefore now enabled inhabitants to supply
themselves with water, which had been interrupted for
seven years. We are continuing those mediation efforts,
and other parties have responded to our call. That
cooperation must continue to find solutions to ensure
water supply to our citizens. If successful, it will be one
of the most important successes by civil society since
the beginning of war.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

Once again, as a young person working on the
ground, I am grateful to the Security Council for this
invitation. I reiterate to the Council that we will not
stop making efforts to achieve our objectives. In that
context, I would like to share with the Council and
international actors a number of recommendations.
First, it is important to ensure the active
participation of youth, women and civil society, by
helping to establish a consultative council for youth to
cooperate and coordinate with the Office of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen.
Secondly, there must be greater support for
civil society organizations led by young people and
women by letting them participate effectively in the
peacebuilding process.
Thirdly, there should be a focus on young
women — a category that does not appear clearly or
tangibly in the various classifications and categories of
people receiving international support at the moment.

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
Allow me to start by thanking Mr. Hans Grundberg
and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham for their briefings. In
addition, I would like to thank Mr. Grundberg for his
visit to London earlier this week. We reiterate our full
support for his efforts towards a sustainable, long-term
solution to the conflict, with short-term and mediumterm priorities along the way. We share his realism
about the challenge ahead and see great value in his
inclusive approach, which engages with a broad range
of Yemenis. And we wholeheartedly agree with both
him and Mr. Rajasingham and Ms. Ola Al-Aghbary
about the importance and value of the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women in peace
negotiations and peacebuilding.
But as they have depicted in their briefings today,
in the past few weeks the conflict has escalated,
particularly around Ma’rib, Shabwah, Al-Hudaydah
and Sana’a. Houthi drone attacks have also increased.
And as Mr. Rajasingham notes, the consequence is that
December saw a significant uptick in civilian casualties.
At a time when de-escalation is critical, therefore,
the United Kingdom would like to extend its welcome
to Major General Michael Beary, who takes on the
leadership of the United Nations Mission to Support the
Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA). We look to his vast
experience and leadership at this critical time.

Fifthly, a focal point between the various local
mediators and the Office of the Special Envoy must
be created.

As Mr. Rajasingham highlighted, the conflict
continues to drive deterioration in the humanitarian
situation. The World Food Programme has issued
a new warning of worsening food insecurity, and
Ms. Al-Aghbary’s comments about her drive to get to
the briefing point today underline that. In that context,
aid workers must be able to operate without the threat of
detention, and access must be granted for humanitarian
flights to Sana’a airport. The international community
must do all it can to prevent needless suffering and death.

Finally, I hope that Taiz and its humanitarian and
political dimensions will be on the international agenda
in the future, because it can help to resolve the crisis in
Yemen. I also emphasize the importance of supporting
our role as young people, women and civil society in the
process of achieving security and stability in Yemen.

The deteriorating humanitarian situation, as
Mr. Grundberg said and Ms. Al-Aghbary underlined,
has a disproportionate impact on women. All parties to
the conflict and the international community must work
towards a long-term solution that supports equality
between women and men. In the immediate term,

Fourthly, support must be provided for the holding
of meetings by the committee on the memorandum of
understanding on Taiz.

22-228477/21

S/PV.8946

The situation in the Middle East

there is an urgent need to protect women from genderbased violence and tackle insufficient protections
in many camps. Women will never be safe unless
there is adequate provision of sex-separated facilities
for women, including toilets. And peace will not be
sustainable without the full inclusion of women.
Finally, the Houthi seizure earlier this month of
an Emirati-flagged vessel brings about worrisome
escalation at a time when ordinary Yemenis desperately
need the parties to focus on the path to peace. The United
Kingdom calls on all parties to resolve the issue quickly
and for passage rights and freedom of navigation at sea
to be respected.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Grundberg, Mr. Rajasingham and Ms. Al-Aghbary
for their briefings. France fully shares their concerns.
The deteriorating situation on the ground poses
a risk of regional destabilization. Yemen continues
to be ravaged by war. The parties to the conflict are
clashing on several fronts, and each side is convinced
that it can defeat its opponent. But we all know that the
military option is a dead end. We call once again for
a nationwide ceasefire without delay. The discussions
within the Redeployment Coordination Committee,
provided for in the Stockholm Agreement, must also be
resumed. I welcome the appointment of Major General
Beary.
Tensions on the ground are fuelling instability in
Yemen and in the region. I am thinking of the Houthi
attacks on Saudi territory and the capture by the Houthis
of an Emirati ship off the west coast of Yemen. This
interception is worrying, and we condemn it. France
calls on all parties involved to reach a solution that will
allow the release of the vessel and its crew and recalls
its commitment to freedom of navigation, as well as to
regional security and stability.
The Yemeni population continues to pay a high
price for this conflict. The number of civilian casualties
last month was one of the highest in recent years. The
protection of civilians is an obligation for all parties.
Humanitarian needs continue to grow. The risk of
famine is increasing. It is therefore essential to allow
United Nations and humanitarian personnel to move
around without fear of being targeted or arrested.
In this regard, we strongly condemn the arbitrary
arrest of three United Nations personnel. We call for
their immediate and unconditional release. It is essential
8/21

12/01/2022

to remove all bureaucratic obstacles and speed up the
issuance of visas for United Nations and humanitarian
personnel so that the delivery of aid can be carried out.
At a time when the economic situation is the subject
of growing concern, we welcome the Government’s
recent decisions to take over the Central Bank for the
benefit of the population.
France supports the efforts of the Special Envoy to
relaunch the political process. It calls on all stakeholders
to engage constructively and without delay. The
international parameters, including the resolutions
adopted by this Council, are well known. It is also
essential that women be involved in the decision-making
process concerning the future of their country.
Finally, the FSO SAFER oil tanker continues to be an
environmental time bomb. It is crucial that the Houthis
stop their blackmailing and authorize immediate access
to the vessel without preconditions. France and its
partners remain committed to the Special Envoy and
will continue to support his efforts to end this conflict.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I would like to thank the Special Envoy
for Yemen, Mr. Hans Grundberg, and the Acting
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, for their valuable briefings.
We also thank the civil society representative, Ms. Ola
Al-Aghbary, for highlighting critical issues.
At the outset, I would like to reiterate my
country’s support for all efforts aimed at reaching a
comprehensive political solution in Yemen under the
auspices of the United Nations that can bring an end
to the Yemeni crisis, meet the legitimate aspirations of
the Yemeni people and achieve security and stability
in Yemen and the region. Accordingly, I would like to
focus today on four points.
First, achieving progress towards ending the
Yemeni crisis will not be possible until Houthi militias
cease their hostilities and repeated violations against
the Yemeni people. The Houthis must understand
that the only solution is a political one agreed upon
by the Yemeni people and free from any regional
hegemonic aspirations.
We therefore condemn the Houthi militias’
continued escalation and repeated attempts to capture
Yemeni territory by force, as well as their continued
disregard for the calls made by the Security Council
and civil society to stop their attacks on the Ma’rib
22-22847

12/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

governorate. We call on them to stop their escalation
and end their siege on the governorate.
The Houthis also continue to violate the ceasefire in
Al-Hudaydah governorate on a daily basis and hinder the
movements of the staff of the United Nations Mission to
Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA). We also
take this opportunity to welcome the appointment of
Major General Michael Beary as head of UNMHA and
acknowledge the efforts of his predecessor, Lieutenant
General Guha.
We took note of the statement issued by UNMHA
yesterday, which expressed great concern over reports
of the militarization of Al-Hodeidah ports. We welcome
the Mission’s request to undertake an inspection,
and we call on the Houthis to respond to this request
immediately and without conditions, in accordance
with the Stockholm Agreement.
The Houthis have repeatedly used explosives-laden
speedboats and sea mines to threaten the freedom of
navigation in the Red Sea and the Bab Al-Mandab
strait. In this context, we condemn, in the strongest
terms, the Houthi act of piracy against the civilian cargo
vessel RWABEE off the port of Al-Hudaydah. This is a
dangerous escalation against the safety of international
navigation in the Red Sea. It requires the adoption of
a firm position by the Security Council. We thank all
countries that have issued statements condemning this
act of piracy.
Secondly, my country expresses its strong
condemnation and denunciation of the attempt by the
Iranian-backed Houthi militias to target the territory
of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia by using drones and
ballistic missiles, in flagrant violation of international
law. Furthermore, the transfer and supply of these
weapons to the Houthis, as well as the provision
of training to them, constitute a clear and repeated
violation of the arms embargo imposed by resolution
2216 (2015). Accordingly, my country reiterates its
solidarity with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia against
every threat to its security and stability, as it is also
a threat to the security and stability of the region. We
support the measures taken by the Kingdom to preserve
its security and protect the safety of its residents.
Thirdly, we stress the importance for Yemenis to
reach consensus and come together in line with the
Riyadh agreement. They must also prioritize the best
national interests of their country and make tangible
progress in political process in line with the aspirations

S/PV. 8946

of the Yemeni people. We also urge all parties to
practically work to ensure the meaningful and active
participation of women in United Nations-facilitated
political processes and in any future dialogues.
We believe that there is still a window of
opportunity to end the crisis, thanks to such genuine
initiatives as the peace initiative put forward by the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the proposals on which
Special Envoy Grundberg is currently working. In this
regard, we stress the need to implement both the Riyadh
agreement and the Hodeidah Agreement.
Fourthly, international efforts need to be intensified
to respond to the humanitarian needs of the Yemeni
people in the light of the worsening humanitarian
situation. The Yemeni people, especially women and
children, are suffering greatly. More than 24 million
Yemenis need relief aid because of the deterioration of
the economy. For its part, since 2015, the United Arab
Emirates has provided Yemen with humanitarian and
development aid exceeding $6 billion. Moreover, my
country has also been one of the largest international
contributors to supporting Yemen in its fight against
the coronavirus disease pandemic.
We welcome the recent efforts of the Yemeni
Government to improve the economy, and we look
forward to solutions that contribute to its revival. On the
other hand, we express our deep concern with regard to
the failure to find a solution for the FSO SAFER oil tanker
issue, owing to the Houthis’ continued obstruction of
any maintenance work. We call for the United Nations
technical team to be expeditiously granted access to the
tanker in order to prevent an environmental disaster.
In conclusion, we hope that the Security Council
will find unity to send a clear message to the Houthis
and those who support them: they must end their
destabilizing terrorist acts in the region and engage
seriously and positively in the political track. That is
the only way out of the crisis in Yemen.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States
America): At the outset, let me thank our briefers.

of

Today I would like to discuss three broad topics: the
worrisome increase rise in hostilities, the clear pattern
of Houthi escalation and obstruction and the concerning
humanitarian fuel and FSO SAFER oil tanker situation.
First, the United States remains alarmed by the
continued military escalation in Yemen, particularly
in Sana’a, Ma’rib and the Red Sea, as described by

22-228479/21

S/PV.8946

The situation in the Middle East

our briefers. This increase in hostilities threatens
the prospect for a peaceful and inclusive political
solution and exacerbates the already dire humanitarian
situation. This escalation demonstrates the serious need
for an inclusive peace process — one that integrates
the voices of women, marginalized groups and diverse
civil society leaders such as Ms. Al-Aghbary, who we
heard speak so powerfully today. To that end, we are
encouraged by Special Envoy Grundberg’s efforts to
develop a framework for an inclusive peace process
to help end this conflict. We look forward to hearing
more about his proposal as soon as it is finalized. All
parties must engage with the Special Envoy and with
each another in good faith and without preconditions
in order to advance an inclusive political solution. The
members of the Security Council should encourage
such a constructive working relationship between the
Special Envoy and the parties to the conflict. While
we encourage peace, we must not be afraid to call out
actions that obstruct it.
Secondly, we condemn the Houthi escalation in
violence, which undermines the cause of peace. Despite
Council condemnation, the Houthis continue to detain
and harass the United States Yemeni local staff as well
as United Nations staff. They also control our former
Embassy compound. The Houthis must immediately
release all of our Yemeni employees unharmed, vacate
the former United States Embassy compound, return
seized United States property and cease their threats
against our employees and their families. We similarly
condemn the Houthi seizure of an Emirati-flagged
merchant vessel last week, and we call on the Houthis
to immediately release the ship and crew unharmed.
Another part of this pattern is the ongoing Houthi
military offensive in Ma’rib, which has led to thousands
of additional internally displaced people, now living
in precarious conditions. This offensive is fuelled by
the illegal flow of weapons to the Houthis. Just last
month, the United States Navy seized upwards of
1,408 rifles and 226,000 rounds of ammunition from a
vessel originating from Iran. That ship was on a route
historically used to illegally smuggle weapons to the
Houthis. The smuggling of arms from Iran to the Houthis
represents a flagrant violation of the Organization’s
targeted arms embargo and is yet another example of
how Iran’s destabilizing activities are prolonging the
war in Yemen. The Houthis’ pattern is punctuated by
their continued engagement in violence, rape and other
forms of sexual violence, arbitrary detentions and
10/21

12/01/2022

obstructions, as well as targeted killings, including
of female politicians and professionals. That is
unconscionable. We unequivocally condemn all human
rights abuses and violations by all parties. We remain
strongly committed to promoting accountability for
human rights violations and abuses in Yemen.
Finally, we remain concerned about the
humanitarian situation, the fuel situation and the FSO
SAFER oil tanker. The United States is relieved that
United Nations humanitarian flights have resumed at
Sana’a airport after a week-long closure in December,
prompted by Houthi claims of communications
equipment failure. But we are concerned about Houthi
threats to obstruct future flights, despite United
Nations inspections deeming the airport equipment
operational. We call on all parties to facilitate the
free flow of humanitarian assistance and remove
unnecessary administrative requirements that impede
humanitarian operations, and we call for the release of
detained United Nations personnel in both Sana’a and
Ma’rib. There are now six fuel ships awaiting Yemeni
Government clearance. Simultaneously, the Houthis
continue to stockpile and manipulate the price of fuel,
keeping it out of the reach of Yemenis in need of it.
All parties must focus on reaching a durable solution
for regularizing fuel imports that ensures Yemenis can
access essential goods and services.
Disappointingly, the issue of the FSO SAFER
oil tanker remains an economic, environmental and
humanitarian time bomb, threatening not only the
Yemeni people but also fragile ecosystems and global
supply chains. The Houthis are responsible for this
unacceptable impasse. We call on them to help ensure a
safe, viable and prompt solution.
This year has the potential to bring progress
for peace in Yemen. We must reverse the current
trajectory, end the violence and help facilitate the kind
of intra-Yemeni dialogue that will resolve this conflict
once and for all.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to begin
by thanking Special Representative Hans Grundberg
and Acting Assistant Secretary-General Ramesh
Rajasingham for their very informative briefings. I
also wish to thank Ms. Al-Aghbary for her insightful
contribution to our discussion. I also take this
opportunity to welcome to the Security Council our
colleague Ambassador Al-Saadi.
22-22847

12/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

The briefings today have once more revealed
the scale of the Yemeni tragedy and the daily threats
to Yemenis’ lives, livelihoods and dignity. While
urgent action is needed on a number of issues, from
de-escalation to economic and humanitarian support,
those measures will not be sustainable without a
countrywide ceasefire and, ultimately, a comprehensive
and inclusive political solution.
Let me reiterate Brazil’s full support to Special
Envoy Grundberg in the pursuit of that goal. We are
encouraged by his efforts to reach out to Yemenis from
different regions and diverse social groups, including
journalists, youth and women in particular. Brazil also
appreciates the renewed emphasis on the economic
aspects of the crisis. We have taken note of his outline
for a Yemeni-owned political process that would
seek to avoid preconditions and to promote progress
on different tracks and look forward to seeing it in
further detail.
Today we are witnessing a worrisome trend towards
escalation and instability. The months-long Houthi
offensive in Ma’rib and adjoining governorates has had
disastrous humanitarian consequences, especially for
internally displaced persons, a situation that may be
further aggravated in the near future. In Al-Hudaydah,
November’s sudden repositioning of forces was
conducted without coordination with the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement, thus
undermining the Stockholm Agreement. The seizure
by the Houthis of an Emirati-flagged vessel last week
is also deeply concerning and risks further escalating
the conflict. Brazil calls on the parties to exercise
restraint and to take measures to defuse tensions,
including the release of the vessel and its crew. That
is yet another example of the threats posed by the war
to maritime transportation in the region, which include
the deployment of sea mines, the use of water-borne
improvised explosive devices and the ongoing issue
of the FSO SAFER oil tanker, which could cause vast
environmental devastation.
Our briefers addressed the increasingly dire
economic situation in Yemen. Ongoing economic
warfare between the parties has generated massive
inflation, increased humanitarian needs and established
increasingly divergent economic zones within the
country. Immediate measures that could alleviate the
crisis include the lifting of restrictions on the imports
of essential goods and foreign exchange injections
through the Central Bank.

S/PV. 8946

Brazil commends the Norwegian presidency’s
focus on women and peace and security and would like
to highlight the importance of mechanisms capable
of amplifying women’s voices, such as the Yemeni
Women’s Technical Advisory Group, represented here
today by Ms. Al-Aghbary. Without their participation,
there will be no lasting peace. That is yet another
reason that systematic and violent repression by Houthi
authorities of politically and professionally active
women is unacceptable and must be halted immediately.
Brazil is also concerned about the issue of children
and armed conflict in Yemen, especially with the
increase in the use of child soldiers by Houthis and
other actors.
As underlined by Acting Assistant SecretaryGeneral Rajasingham, the humanitarian situation
continues deteriorating despite the best efforts of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and
others. Reports by the World Food Programme (WFP)
recently being forced to reduce rations are a distressing
illustration of the growing funding gap. Brazil has
sought to do its part, including by making donations to
the WFP at pledging events in March and September
2021. We hope that donor countries from all regions can
come together to meet the basic humanitarian needs of
Yemenis in 2022.
Finally, it is also imperative that all parties
guarantee full, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access. Movement restrictions, attempts to interfere
with beneficiary lists, visa denials and constraints on
female humanitarian workers have been costly and
harmful, especially in Houthi-controlled areas. Lifting
the restrictions on Yemeni Red Sea ports and the
Sana’a airport would also be crucial steps to alleviate
the humanitarian crisis, especially with regard to
food insecurity.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I wish to begin my
remarks by welcoming the particular focus of today’s
briefing on the women and peace and security agenda
in Yemen and by thanking the Special Envoy and the
Acting Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, for sharing with the Security Council their
efforts in bringing the voices of Yemeni women
to the peacemaking process. Similarly, I thank
Ms. Ola Al-Aghbary for her briefing. I would also like
to welcome the representative of Yemen to this briefing
of the Security Council.

22-2284711/21

S/PV.8946

The situation in the Middle East

As this is the first time our delegation speaks on
this agenda item, let me affirm Ghana’s commitment
to supporting a comprehensive, inclusive and
sustainable peace process that would end the war in
Yemen, foster economic stabilization and reform and
alleviate the grave humanitarian crisis faced by some
21 million Yemenis.
Against that background, I wish to emphasize the
following points in my statement.
First, Ghana joins the international consensus that
military options will not end the war in Yemen and calls
for an immediate nationwide ceasefire. The military
escalations witnessed in Ma’rib governorate and across
several front lines since September 2021 have only
succeeded in deepening the fault lines and left in their
wake increased civilian casualties and the displacement
of more than 35,000 people. We condemn all hostilities
against civilians and civilian infrastructure and impress
upon the conflicting parties their obligation to abide
by international humanitarian law, including on the
protection of women and children.
Secondly, the resumption of a comprehensive and
inclusive political process that would forge a consensus
of diverse interests and political leanings is both
urgent and necessary for a sustainable peace process in
Yemen. In that regard and in the light of resolution 1325
(2000), let me affirm Ghana’s support for the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women at all levels
of the political and decision-making processes. The
contribution of women to lasting peace is one that is
well-established in the Council. Moreover, the women
of Yemen have an equal right in determining how the
conflict should be resolved. We recall the involvement
of women in the 2013 National Dialogue Conference
and advocate for structures that would facilitate an
inclusive and gender-responsive political process.
Thirdly, gender mainstreaming in humanitarian
responses must be prioritized. The women of Yemen
must be empowered as actors in the peace process and
nation-building, rather than remain a predominantly
humanitarian dividend. Greater funding and support
are needed to secure the delivery of maternal and
reproductive health-care services, keep adolescent girls
in school and out of marriage and provide protection
from sexual and gender-based violence.
Fourthly, we are pleased to note, and express our
support for, the measures being undertaken to curb
the economic decline and improve the delivery of
12/21

12/01/2022

essential services to the people. The opening of the
Sana’a airport and the port of Al-Hudaydah to enable
the increased entry of fuel and commodities should be
pursued as part of economic stabilization measures.
Furthermore, immediate and unconditional access must
be negotiated for the assessment and repair of the FSO
SAFER oil tanker to avert a looming environmental and
humanitarian catastrophe.
In conclusion, I call on the international community
and regional actors to support all tracks of the peace
process and, at this stage, to foster dialogue and
consensus-building among the parties.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I thank Special Envoy Grundberg,
Acting Assistant Secretary-General Rajasingham and
Ms. Al-Aghbary for their briefings.
We have once again heard about the grave
humanitarian consequences of the conflict. Far from
ending, the violence is increasing, especially in
Ma’rib, Shabwah, Taiz and Al-Hudaydah. The civilian
population, particularly women and girls, are paying
the highest price.
We condemn the continued violations of
international humanitarian law. We note with concern
the harassment of workers and the persistent difficulties
faced by humanitarian operations. In that regard, we
demand the release of the three detained United Nations
workers in Sana’a and Ma’rib. We also condemn the
disruption of humanitarian flights from Sana’a airport
and obstacles to port operations. We simply find no
justification for those acts and emphasize that it is
imperative that all parties facilitate humanitarian work.
Mexico condemns the detention of the Emiratiflagged vessel RWABEE and reiterates that any attack
against a civilian vessel violates international law. We
call for the immediate release of the vessel and its crew.
Regrettably, that is not the first incident of its kind, and
we call on all actors in the region to ensure the freedom
of navigation in accordance with the law of the sea, in
particular the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea.
We are deeply concerned about the persistent
violations of the arms embargo and demand compliance
with obligations under international law. Accordingly,
we recall that, in accordance with resolution 2616 (2021),
adopted last year, the Security Council encouraged
regional cooperation by land, sea and air to detect and
22-22847

12/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

prevent arms embargo violations. It is imperative to
prevent additional weapons from reaching Yemen and
prolonging the conflict.
Lastly, we welcome the Special Envoy’s
consultations, particularly the meeting with Yemeni
women entrepreneurs in December 2021.
An inclusive political process, led by the Yemenis
and supported by the international community, is
indeed the road map required for the resolution of the
conflict. We reiterate our call on the parties to cooperate
constructively with the Special Envoy in his efforts and
to observe a nationwide ceasefire.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Envoy Grundberg, Acting Assistant
Secretary-General Rajasingham and the civil society
representative, Ms. Al-Aghbary, for their briefings.
The situation in Yemen has remained turbulent
in the recent past and hostilities among the parties
to the conflict have escalated, prompting widespread
concern in the international community. According to
a report released by the United Nations Development
Programme, as of the end of 2021 the conflict had
killed 377,000 Yemenis, most of them children. An
early end to the conflict would mean saving more lives.
All parties to the conflict should immediately uphold a
ceasefire, put an end to the violence, exercise maximum
restraint and refrain from taking any actions that could
lead to a complicated escalation of the situation.
In that regard, China takes note of the letters
from the Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia
and the Permanent Representative of the United Arab
Emirates to the President of the Security Council,
dated 28 December and 9 January, respectively. Saudi
Arabia condemned the Houthi attack on a store in
Jizan, which resulted in civilian casualties. The United
Arab Emirates reported on the hijacking of an Emiratiflagged cargo ship by the Houthis on the high seas, in the
Red Sea. China is deeply concerned about those reports
and notes that many countries in the region, as well as
the Gulf Cooperation Council and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, have expressed concern about the
ship’s hijacking by Houthis.
China supports the Security Council in issuing a
statement on those developments and condemning all
attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure. We
hope that the relevant issues will be properly resolved
as soon as possible, that the ship and its crew will be

S/PV. 8946

released and that maritime safety on the Red Sea and
international navigation channels will be maintained.
The Yemeni issue must ultimately be resolved
through political means. Special Envoy Grundberg
has actively engaged with all parties in Yemen. He
has visited several countries in the region and has
proposed a comprehensive and inclusive political
process, supported and coordinated by the international
community. China supports that approach.
As a new year has just begun, the Yemeni people
urgently need to gain confidence and hope for the future.
We hope that all parties in Yemen will demonstrate
good political will, engage with the Special Envoy
without conditions, exchange views candidly and reach
a realistic and feasible political solution at an early date.
In that process, attention must be paid to the views of
women, young people and other groups.
The Yemeni issue concerns peace and stability
in the Gulf region, while the situation in the region
also affects the situation in Yemen. China calls on
the countries of the region to play an active role in
promoting peace talks on the Yemeni issue, as doing so
serves the common interests of all parties.
Yemen’s humanitarian needs continue to increase,
with 15.6 million Yemeni people having fallen into
extreme poverty. It is imperative to act urgently to
alleviate the humanitarian crisis in Yemen and improve
the country’s economy. China supports the United
Nations in advancing its economic framework for
Yemen and implementing short-, medium- and longterm relief measures in phases.
The international community should continue to
provide financial and material assistance to Yemen
and maintain the United Nations humanitarian relief
programme in the country. All parties in Yemen
should abide by international humanitarian law, ensure
humanitarian access and protect civilians, especially
vulnerable groups such as women and children. We
support the Yemeni Government in taking active
measures on the economy and livelihoods, regulating the
oil and fuel market and strengthening the management
of public finance.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to start
by thanking our briefers for their contributions today.
It is always good to see and hear from Special Envoy
Grundberg, whom I thank for his update. I have to say
that Acting Assistant Secretary-General Rajasingham’s

22-2284713/21

S/PV.8946

The situation in the Middle East

message was deeply worrisome. We needed to hear it,
but it is very discouraging and concerning.
I wanted to give a special thanks to Ms. Al-Aghbary,
who joined us this morning, for her impactful words. Her
clear message to us and her daily courage, as illustrated
in her remarks, shows exactly why the Council needs to
not only hear but listen to and heed her words.
I would like to echo the welcome that others have
expressed for the appointment of the new Head of
the United Nations Mission to support the Hudaydah
Agreement and Chair of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, Major General Michael Beary. I have
the utmost confidence that, when we meet him next
month, we will see him assume his role with decades
of deep experience behind him as a distinguished
Irish peacekeeper and Force Commander. We look
forward to seeing him here with us for the relevant
Council discussions.
We are very grateful to the Norwegian presidency
for placing such an important theme as women and
peace and security at the heart of our discussion today,
thereby building on our shared commitment to translate
that agenda into action at the Council. I will focus my
remarks today on women and peace and security in
relation to Yemen.
The persistent exclusion of Yemeni women from
the political landscape and peace talks is, in our view,
unjustifiable. We believe that it has proven detrimental
to the realization of peace of Yemen. The women of
Yemen have more than demonstrated the crucial role
they can play in fostering peace, including in negotiating
local ceasefires and prisoner releases, opening up
humanitarian access and mediating conflicts over
water and land resources. The women of Yemen can
be — and are — critical actors in building peace in
their own country. Yet, as Ms. Al-Aghbary pointed out
to us this morning, they remain the unsung heroines
of the day-to-day struggles on the ground in really
challenging circumstances.
Despite all of that, not a single woman was included
in any delegation in the five rounds of negotiations on
prisoner exchange facilitated by the United Nations
over the past years. That is a rather telling observation,
to put it mildly. In a dedicated Arria Formula meeting
that Ireland and Mexico co-hosted in March last year,
which was co-sponsored by 12 Council members and
in which 50 delegations non-members of the Council
participated, we called on the United Nations to step
14/21

12/01/2022

up and insist on the participation of women in United
Nations-facilitated talks. It is now past time to deliver;
in the case of Yemen, the cost of not delivering is clear.
We very much welcome Special Envoy Grundberg’s
commitment to consult with a diverse range of
women’s groups. We have heard from women before
in this Chamber that consultation should not be a
substitute for meaningful participation. Yemeni women
peacebuilders have rightly made clear that their vital
local contribution must be translated into places at the
negotiating table. We strongly encourage the Special
Envoy and all parties to work to that end.
That goal will remain elusive as long as significant
barriers to women’s participation remain entrenched.
As we know, civil society plays a crucial role in
training women mediators in Yemen, and their efforts
need ongoing support. Ireland reiterates that an
immediate nationwide ceasefire is urgently needed
to protect civilians, particularly those in vulnerable
situations, including women and girls and internally
displaced persons.
We deplore all incidents of violence in Yemen,
including conflict-related sexual violence and violence
against politically active women, women peacebuilders,
journalists and human rights defenders. We call on
parties to commit to ending this violence, lift restrictions
on women’s safe and unhindered freedom of movement
and implement measures to protect women.
Ireland welcomed the designation by the Security
Council last February of an individual responsible for
the violent repression of women, including through
sexual violence and rape. We should stand ready to list
additional individuals responsible for such heinous acts.
Regrettably, there remains a dearth of accountability,
which we fear will be exacerbated by the non-renewal
of the mandate of the Group of Eminent Experts.
As we heard today in very stark terms from
Mr. Rajasingham, the grim reality is that Yemeni
women and girls are often the last to eat, the last to see
a doctor and the last to get out the door to go to school.
The dire humanitarian situation in Yemen not only
presents a further obstacle to women’s full participation
in political and public life but also jeopardizes women’s
ability to access essential medical care and exercise
their fundamental rights as active members of their
own communities.
22-22847

12/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

The destruction of the Yemeni public health system
and economy, as well as the shifting front lines of
conflict, mean that pregnant Yemeni women, mothers
and their children are often unable to access life-saving
health care when they need it most. I have to say that it
was one of the most shocking things to hear today from
Mr. Rajasingham — the maternal deaths in childbirth
reaching such devastating levels. That is a shameful
realization for everyone in this Chamber.
We reiterate our call for the removal of all restrictions
on the import of fuel and food and support the United
Nations proposals to tackle the economic collapse in
Yemen. We also strongly condemn any harassment of
humanitarian actors and obstruction of their essential,
life-saving work. We call for the immediate release of
the three detained United Nations workers.
The women of Yemen, such as Ms. Al-Aghbary,
who is with us today, have shown inspiring courage and
perseverance in their pursuit of sustainable peace. They
deserve the clear commitment of the parties and the
solidarity and support of the international community,
including the Security Council. Their full, equal and
meaningful participation at all levels in the political
process — a process that will shape the future of their
country — is the minimum they should expect. Such
a commitment to inclusion could offer new hope that
this might just be the year when the long nightmare of
conflict finally ends for the Yemeni people and Yemeni
women and young people will find their place in that
longed for transformation of their country.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Special Envoy Hans
Grundberg, Acting Under-Secretary-General Ramesh
Rajasingham and Ms. Ola Al-Aghbary, co-Founder and
Chief Executive Officer of Sheba Youth Foundation, for
their briefings. I also welcome the participation of the
representative of Yemen in this meeting.
Kenya remains deeply concerned over the
deteriorating situation in Yemen and its impact on
millions of lives, not only in Yemen but also in the
surrounding region. The regrettable military escalations
are undermining efforts to achieve a sustainable
political solution to the conflict, not to mention the
inevitable loss of lives and livelihoods and destruction
of civilian infrastructure that they cause. We call on
all parties to rethink their military interventions
and recognize and perform their obligations under
international humanitarian law, noting that the violence
has taken a heavy toll on the civilian population, with

S/PV. 8946

disproportionate impacts on women, children and other
vulnerable members of the community.
A United Nations Development Programme report
indicates that every nine minutes a child under the age of
five dies as a result of the conflict. That is unacceptable,
and the Security Council must take decisions to ensure
that all those involved are held to account.
Given the gravity of the humanitarian situation, we
cannot overstate the need for effective, sufficient and
sustainable humanitarian operations. Unfortunately,
that has not been the case. We note, for instance, that
in 2020 and 2021 Yemen’s humanitarian response plans
were funded at just over 50 per cent, as compared to
2018 and 2019, when approximately 80 per cent of the
plans were funded. We call on the Security Council to
give deeper consideration to how the United Nations
can better mobilize and coordinate the delivery of
humanitarian aid that reaches all those in need in
sufficient measure.
As we heard today, women in Yemen are
increasingly being subjected to discrimination, forced
marriage, sexual violence and torture. Last year the
Council sanctioned one individual over his involvement
in conflict-related sexual violence. That was a positive
step, but more needs to be done for the consolidation
of a Yemeni women and peace and security national
action plan. The continued exclusion of women from
the political and negotiation processes is also a matter
of concern. We cannot overemphasize the shortterm and long-term value of a truly inclusive Yemeni
peacebuilding and peace agreement process, with the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women.
Kenya remains concerned over the maritime
incidents driven by the increasing manifestation of
regional rivalries and brinkmanship in the Red Sea and
the Gulf of Aden, which represent a threat to regional
and global security. More attention needs to be paid to
the potential effects that can result from the escalation
of threats to commercial traffic, including tankers
carrying oil and gas, as well as the impact on peace and
humanitarian concerns of the smuggling of weapons
and supplies to the terrorist groups that threaten
the security and stability of regional countries. The
international community can, and should, strengthen
joint efforts in the Red Sea, the Gulf of Aden and
adjoining water bodies to combat piracy, smuggling,
illegal dumping and other threats to stability.

22-2284715/21

S/PV.8946

The situation in the Middle East

I reiterate our deep concern over the status of the
FSO SAFER oil tanker and the significant threat it
poses to the livelihoods of millions in the region. We
call on the parties to resolve the FSO SAFER oil tanker
issue as a stand-alone issue without any preconditions
at the earliest opportunity.
Finally, I wish to reaffirm Kenya’s solidarity with
the people of Yemen in their quest for lasting peace,
security and prosperity.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen Hans Grundberg and Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
Ramesh Rajasingham for their comprehensive reports.
We listened attentively to Ms. Ola Al-Aghbary.
The new year did not bring with it prospects for
a normalization of the situation in the country for
Yemenis. There has been an increase in armed hostilities,
in particular in Ma’rib and Shabwah governorates.
Those clashes are fierce, and the number of victims has
grown. Civilians, including in different Yemeni towns
and cities, as well as refugees and internally displaced
persons, remain especially vulnerable.
The humanitarian situation has been on the brink
of disaster for a long time. That is true throughout the
territory of Yemen, both in areas under the Government’s
control and areas under the control of Ansar Allah.
We note the efforts of United Nations humanitarian
agencies, especially OCHA, and the progress, albeit
modest, made in organizing humanitarian access.
No region of the country can be called stable or safe,
including in terms of the availability of food or medical
supplies. In this regard, we would remind all parties to
the conflict of the need to provide humanitarian access
to those in need and remove restrictions on access to
food, medicine and other basic necessities in all regions
of the country.
Also of serious concern are the ongoing attacks
on civilian facilities in Yemen and Saudi Arabia. We
call for unswerving compliance with the provisions
of international humanitarian law and a swift and
comprehensive rejection of those hostilities that destroy
non-military infrastructure and cause civilian victims.
This depiction of the situation, which Security
Council members agree on, confirms the need for
the speedy launch of a fully-fledged peace process in
16/21

12/01/2022

Yemen. A central role in this should be played by the
United Nations. We support Hans Grundberg and trust
that he will soon come up with specific proposals and a
road map for settlement.
For our part, we are convinced that success in a
peace initiative will only be achieved if it takes into
consideration the opinions of all segments of Yemeni
society, from all faiths and political parties and forces in
all regions of the country. In this regard, marginalizing
people will only push us further away from the aim of
establishing peace.
We hope that the Special Envoy will heed this
advice and approach the issue in terms of updating the
basis for settlement, keeping in mind the need to tweak
the approach in the light of the objective realities on
the ground. Of course, there is a need for constructive
contributions from States of the region. Given the impact
of the Yemeni conflict on the region-wide situation,
including on the safety of navigation in the light of
the recent maritime incident, and given the ongoing
mistrust between the leading players, we would recall
resolution 598 (1987) and other initiatives, including
the Russian concept for collective security, all of which
are initiatives aimed at fostering regional stability.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I welcome
the presence among us of Mr. Hans Grundberg,
Special Envoy, Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Emergency
Relief Coordinator of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, and Ms. Ola Al-Aghbary. I
also thank them for the excellence of their respective
briefings. I welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Yemen in today’s meeting.
Yemen is in the midst of one of the worst crises
in the world, a multidimensional crisis, with political,
security, economic, and humanitarian components, all
of which are interconnected. The briefings we received
from the three briefers confirm the extent of the
escalating violence and the opacity of the horizon in the
search for peace. Peace in Yemen undeniably requires
a comprehensive political solution, the prerequisite of
which is a ceasefire, followed by an inclusive dialogue
in which all the scattered fragments of the country
would take part in good faith.
It is clear that the Yemeni people aspire to the
restoration of the authority of the State over the whole of
the country’s territory and to regaining stability and its
major role at the heart of the subregion. The reopening
of the Sana’a airport on 27 December is an act that
22-22847

12/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

leads in the right direction, in that it will undoubtedly
allow for better access for delivery of humanitarian aid.
Speaking of acts, many more are needed to get the
Yemeni people out of their vicious cycle of violence.
In this regard, there must be more committed action
by the international community in order to meet the
needs of the civilian population, including the tens of
millions of people in distress, particularly children and
displaced persons.
Women are paying a particularly heavy price in the
crisis ravaging Yemen. They face abuse and violence
and multiple violations of their rights. We find the
abuse and violence against women unacceptable and
call on the international community to show solidarity
with Yemeni women.
We condemn the seizure of a United Arab Emiratesflagged vessel in the Red Sea and call for its immediate
release and respect for the freedom of navigation.
Furthermore, we are concerned about the ongoing
situation around the vessel FSO SAFER and fear the
possible consequences for the environment.
We urge the international community to be
more engaged in responding to the humanitarian
challenges in Yemen, including through funding that is
commensurate with the needs and distress of the people.
We note that the 2021 humanitarian response plan was
funded at 58 per cent, a shortfall of $1.6 billion.
In conclusion, we express our support for the
approach undertaken by Special Envoy Hans Grundberg
and call for respect for the protection of humanitarian
personnel, while urging the parties to remove all
impediments to humanitarian assistance in order to
preserve hope for the Yemeni people. Of course, we
salute the courage and bravery of all those who, at the
risk of their lives and often in very difficult conditions,
are engaged in humanitarian operations.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I thank Special Envoy Hans
Grunberg and Acting Assistant Secretary-General
Ramesh Rajasingham for their detailed briefings. I
also thank Ms. Ola Al-Aghbary for her briefing. I also
welcome the Permanent Representative of Yemen to
today’s meeting.
We are extremely concerned by the continued
intensification of military operations in Yemen. The
fierce clashes in Sana’a, Ma’rib and Shabwah in the
last few weeks are jeopardizing the prospects of peace.
The seizure and detention of the United Arab Emirates-

S/PV. 8946

flagged vessel RWABEE off the coast of Hudaydah
earlier this month has further exacerbated the ongoing
tensions. We express our grave concern at this act,
which has the potential to deeply compromise the
maritime security in the region. Seven Indian nationals
are among the crew members on board the ship, and
we are deeply concerned about their safety and wellbeing. We urge the Houthis to immediately release the
crew members and the vessel. The Houthis also bear
the responsibility of ensuring the safety of the crew
members until their release.
I call upon all parties to the conflict to immediately
cease fighting, de-escalate the situation and engage
unconditionally with Special Envoy Hans Grundberg
in his efforts to commence discussions towards
comprehensively ending the conflict in Yemen.
The conflict continues to have a devastating
impact on the people of Yemen, especially on women
and children, and extends well beyond the tragic loss
of human life. It has pushed millions into poverty,
led to hunger and disease, disrupted education,
deprived basic health and sanitation and brought
about malnutrition among Yemeni children. The dire
situation in the country has been further aggravated
by the economic decline and the coronavirus disease
pandemic. Sustained international donor assistance and
concrete short-term and long-term economic measures
as identified in the United Nations economic framework
for Yemen are therefore necessary to overcome the
economic and humanitarian crisis in the country.
The brief suspension of humanitarian flights into
and out of Sana’a airport in December is a matter of
concern. The operation of these flights is critical, not
only for the movement of aid workers and the delivery
of humanitarian supplies into Yemen, but also for
emergency medical transfers. We call on the parties
to the conflict not to impose any impediments or
restrictions on the movement of humanitarian aid and
humanitarian personnel. We also urge them to maintain
the civilian character of Sana’a airport and other critical
public infrastructure in Yemen.
We condemn the continued cross-border attacks
into Saudi Arabia, targeting civilians and civilian
infrastructure. All parties must uphold their obligations
under international humanitarian law by ensuring that
civilians and civilian infrastructure are not targeted
during military operations.

22-2284717/21

S/PV.8946

The situation in the Middle East

We take note of the developments surrounding the
FSO SAFER, whose current condition poses a potential
environmental, economic, maritime and humanitarian
threat. We hope for an early conclusion of the required
agreements and arrangements.
Let me conclude by reiterating India’s call for an
immediate and comprehensive ceasefire across Yemen,
followed by a robust and inclusive political process,
with the involvement of Yemeni women.
Such a process should also fully respect Yemen’s
unity, sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. We believe that, with effective Yemeni,
regional, international and United Nations leadership,
a lasting and inclusive political settlement in Yemen
is achievable. We encourage the Special Envoy to
continue his engagement with all Yemeni parties and
his coordination with the countries of the region to
reach a durable solution to the conflict.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank the briefers for their
valuable information. We fully support the efforts
of Special Envoy Grundberg and are anxious to see
concrete and tangible results. War has ravaged Yemen
for seven long years, causing massive casualties and
destruction, still with no end in sight. Civilians have
suffered the most, especially women and children.
The economy has collapsed and, as we heard from
Mr. Rajasingham, the humanitarian situation is simply
disastrous. This must stop. The road to peace in Yemen
is not — and cannot be — a bloody, protracted war.
Conflict only prolongs pain and suffering, borne mostly
by civilians.
We are particularly concerned about the situation
of women and girls in Yemen. Women human rights
defenders, advocates for gender equality, journalists
and other civil society representatives are facing
increased threats and risks, including arbitrary
detentions, enforced disappearances and even targeted
killings. This must not be tolerated.
I thank you, Madam President, for placing special
focus on women and peace and security in today’s
meeting, as per our joint commitment. And I thank the
Special Envoy for providing due attention to women’s
inclusion and participation in his work. We encourage
him to continue to do so.
What Yemen and the Yemeni people desperately
need is an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire.
Violence and destruction will lead nowhere. The
18/21

12/01/2022

Council has the authority and the power to be loud and
clear on this. We call on all parties to end hostilities, in
line with resolution 2532 (2020), return to negotiations
and resume meaningful peace talks with the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women, youth and
civil society.
Albania supports the Special Envoy in his mission
to reach out to the different parties in conflict and other
stakeholders in order find a path towards a meaningful
and inclusive road map and, as he qualified it, a “a
serious, sustained and structured process”. His efforts
to regularly and transparently consult with civil society,
especially women’s groups, are highly appreciated, and
we are heartened by Ms. Al-Aghbary’s words today.
Albania condemns all actions that prevent the Special
Envoy from moving this vital political process forward.
Detention of United Nations personnel is unacceptable,
and we and ask for their immediate release. We demand
the same for the Yemeni citizens who have worked for
the United States Embassy in Sana’a. We condemn all
restrictions on humanitarian workers and impediments
to the delivery of humanitarian aid.
We strongly condemn cross-border attacks on
civilian infrastructure into Saudi Arabia, which have
increased, as the Special Envoy highlighted, and we
demand strict observance of international humanitarian
law and the protection of civilians and civilian
infrastructure at all times.
As we speak, an Emirati-flagged civilian cargo
vessel, intercepted while in international waters, is
being illegally detained by Houthi militias, which is an
act of piracy and a total breach of international law and
the freedom of navigation. We call for the immediate
release of the vessel and its crew.
Albania supports all efforts leading towards national
reconciliation, reunification and reconstruction. We
believe that, for peace to prevail and be lasting, it must
reflect the will and aspirations of all Yemeni people.
It requires a democratic setting and institutions that
uphold the rule of law and human rights, especially the
rights of women and children.
Finally, Albania urges all parties to support a
political process that leads to the full realization of
all rights for all Yemeni people, without regard for
religion, gender or ethnicity. We hope that soon we
will create the necessary conditions so that everyone in
22-22847

12/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Yemen starts thinking about life, rather than continuing
to deplore catastrophe.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Norway.
I thank Special Envoy Grundberg and Acting
Assistant
Secretary-General
Rajasingham
for
their briefings.
As President, we designated today’s meeting to
focus on the women and peace and security agenda and
to draw attention to the urgency of strengthening the
role of women in conflict resolution and peacebuilding
as part of our strong commitment. In that regard, I wish
to thank my fellow Council members and the briefers
for highlighting today that the women and peace and
security agenda is a priority in Yemen.
Yemeni women mediate humanitarian access,
services and local conflicts every day. And they have
made significant contributions to track-two and -three
peacemaking efforts. However, seven years of conflict
has diminished the space for women. In the global
Women, Peace and Security Index, Yemen ranks thirdto-last with regard to women’s inclusion. Women have
a right to participate on issues that are fundamental to
their security and the future of Yemen. And we know
that inclusive peace processes where women participate
in outcomes produce more sustainable solutions.
Women’s voices, in all their diversity, must be included.
As we heard from the briefers, much work has gone
into ensuring an inclusive political dialogue in Yemen,
and we commend those efforts. However, ensuring
the meaningful inclusion of women, including young
women, in all aspects of peace and security needs to
be an ongoing priority. In that respect, I also want
to sincerely thank Ms. Al-Aghbary for sharing her
invaluable insights and recommendations today. Let me
highlight four recommendations of our own.
First, we encourage the Government of Yemen
to operationalize its strategy on women and peace
and security and to meaningfully include women in
decision-making and leadership positions.
Secondly, as Ms. Al-Aghbary highlighted, grassroots women’s organizations remain fundamental to
building peace in Yemen, yet funding for their work is
scarce. We encourage the international community to
provide more flexible support.

S/PV. 8946

Thirdly, we call for accountability to end the cycle
of impunity and for immediate steps to ensure women
are safe to speak up and contribute.
Fourthly, we want to encourage the Special Envoy
to seek out new opportunities for the direct participation
of diverse Yemeni women of all political backgrounds,
and from all regions of Yemen, including those from the
grassroots. We also emphasize the importance of the
Special Envoy continuing efforts to advance women’s
participation in the peace process.
Turning now to recent events, we are deeply
concerned about the recent military escalation by
all parties and appreciate Mr. Grundberg’s update
on the situation. We continue to be alarmed by the
continued cross-border attacks. De-escalation of
military activities, a nationwide ceasefire and a turn
towards a political solution is the only path forward to
end the cycle of violence. We remind parties of their
obligations to respect international humanitarian law
and international human rights law and to protect
civilian lives and infrastructure.
We also underline the importance of free and secure
navigation at sea and echo others urging the parties to
ensure the safe use of Sana’a airport for humanitarian
flights. It is of great concern that humanitarian
partners in Yemen have had to cut critical humanitarian
programmes as a result of insufficient funding. That
means that daily rations for 8 million Yemenis are now
reduced, at a time when one Yemeni child dies every
10 minutes from preventable causes. Inaction in the
face of that kind of suffering is incomprehensible.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I wish again to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Madam President,
on your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I wish you every success in
your task. I welcome the new non-permanent members
of the Security Council and wish them every success
in their efforts, along with the other members of the
Council, to establish peace and security in the world,
resolve conflicts and promote stability. I thank
Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham and Mr. Hans Grundberg for

22-2284719/21

S/PV.8946

The situation in the Middle East

12/01/2022

their briefings. I also thank my sister Ola Al-Aghbary
for her briefing.

and removing all obstacles so that we can achieve our
shared goal of relieving humanitarian suffering.

We reiterate the importance of the effective role
that Yemeni women and young people play in building
Yemen’s present and future and establishing peace.
We note that the Yemeni Government has not excluded
women from the United Nations-led consultations
on peace. Women have always been included in the
Government’s delegation. Rather, the Houthi militias
are the ones who have excluded and ignored Yemeni
women and prevented them from participating in any
political negotiations.

Our priority today is to end the war and put pressure
on the Houthi militias to choose peace and renounce
destruction and violence, with the goal of achieving
the peace that the Yemeni Government and all people
yearn for, which would alleviate human suffering and
transform Yemen into a safe and stable country in which
justice, stability, equality, prosperity and development
may prevail after long years of suffering and pain due
to the unjust war against our people.

We thank Norway for supporting the Yemeni
Government in implementing the women, peace and
security agenda in Yemen.
The war in Yemen has entered its eighth year
without any positive sign that the end of the conflict
is in sight, thanks to the recalcitrance of the armed
Houthi militias. The war has exacerbated the economic
situation in Yemen and led to the worst humanitarian
crisis in the world, rolling back economic development
and leading to dire consequences for the Government
and the people of Yemen.
Despite all those challenges, the Government
has stepped up its efforts on many levels to restore
State institutions and promote their role. We have
implemented reform measures to support the national
economy and make progress in financial and monetary
areas, including by appointing new management at
the Central Bank, which has had a positive impact
on economic stability and the national currency
exchange rate.
In addition, funding the humanitarian response
plan in Yemen is of the utmost priority for millions
of people in need. In that regard, we once again
call on all our brothers, friends and international
donor organizations to help and support the Yemeni
Government to implement our programmes and plans
in order to overcome economic hardship and address
current challenges with a view to bolstering sustainable
development programmes and creating an environment
conducive to achieving sustainable peace in Yemen.
I take this opportunity to reiterate the commitment
of the Government of Yemen to facilitating the role
of the United Nations, international organizations
and emergency humanitarian personnel in Yemen,
while strengthening coordination and partnership
20/21

Nevertheless, all proposed peace initiatives have
been rejected by the Houthi militias supported by
Iran. The Houthi militias refuse every opportunity
for peace. However, we are convinced that peace
is within our reach and that 2022 will be the year of
peace in Yemen. Under the auspices of His Excellency
President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, the
Yemeni Government is determined to reach a political
solution and ensure the success of United Nations
and regional efforts and to engage positively with the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General with a view to
achieving comprehensive and lasting peace based on a
political solution and the terms of reference of the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation
Mechanism, the outcome of the comprehensive National
Dialogue Conference and relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2216 (2015).
The brutal attack against Ma’rib by the Houthi
militias continues unabated. The city has become the
last resort for millions of refugees, with catastrophic
consequences for civilians and displaced persons,
while the already dire humanitarian situation has
been exacerbated. As a result, last month 26,000
families — or 157,000 people — were displaced, 80 per
cent of them women and children.
It is clear that the Houthi militias will not stop the
killing and destruction, while the humanitarian crisis
deteriorates further, and the international community
remains suspiciously silent. International human
rights organizations have not provided support and
protection to civilians and have not taken measures
to condemn and bring to an end the violations and
crimes against humanity. The Houthi militias have
chosen war and targeted infrastructure and civilians
in the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which
demonstrates that they do not want to be part of the
political solution and peacebuilding process. They are
22-22847

12/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8946

supported by the Iranian regime and have no serious
desire to engage in a political process and dialogue.
Peace is not an option for them. They receive their
orders from Iran’s Revolutionary Guards and Lebanese
Hizbullah militants.

vessel RWABEE. That is a serious development, which
constitutes a threat to maritime navigation and world
trade and a stark violation of international law and the
law of the sea. We urge the Houthi militias to release
the ship and its crew unconditionally.

The Houthi militias have dug in their heels and
continue to kill Yemenis to advance the Iranian
expansionist agenda in the region. Independent
investigation teams have provided evidence that the
Houthi militias have used civilian infrastructure,
including the Sana’a airport, for military purposes,
stockpiling arms and launching ballistic missiles and
drones as well as trafficking in arms.

We also call on the international community and
the Security Council to take decisive measures against
the aggressive and terrorist practices of those militias,
which every day engage in acts of aggression to
destabilize security and stability in that vital region of
the world, threatening regional security and the world
economy as well as international trade corridors.

Two vessels were recently intercepted that were
transporting weapons from Iran to the Houthis, thereby
demonstrating that the Iranian regime has violated
Security Council resolutions, in particular paragraph 14
of resolution 2216 (2015). That is why the international
community needs to exert additional pressure on the
Houthi militias in order to end the conflict in Yemen,
oblige them to come to the negotiation table and end
the blatant Iranian interference and violations being
inflicted on Yemen.
Over the past three years since the signing of
the Stockholm Agreement, the Houthi militias have
undermined the Agreement, hindered the activities of
the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement and obstructed its mission pursuant to
resolution 2452 (2019). The Agreement is at an impasse.
The Houthi militias have continued to violate the
ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah. They have bypassed the
Agreement to seize the city and its ports in order to
mobilize their forces and target other governorates,
including Ma’rib.
The Houthi militias have transformed Al-Hudaydah
and its ports into a militarized zone — a centre for
contraband weapons and an area for stockpiling
Iranian ballistic missiles and drones — blowing up
boats, laying sea mines and looting oil derivatives and
humanitarian aid.
We have repeatedly warned the Security Council
of the dangers posed by Houthi militias to international
maritime navigation in the Red Sea and Bab Al-Mandeb
Strait. We have seen them perpetrate acts of piracy,
most recently the seizure of the Emirati-flagged civilian

Once again, we recall the SFO SAFER oil tanker,
which is a ticking time bomb that poses a threat to
the Red Sea and international navigation and denies
millions of people in Yemen and the region of their
livelihoods and fishing rights. The Security Council
has held several meetings on the matter, issued
statements and placed responsibility on the Houthis for
the potential explosion of the tanker and for impeding
the United Nations technical team from accessing it to
evaluate its condition and repair the damage. We are
today facing an imminent disaster, and the Security
Council should take all the measures necessary to stop
the Houthi intransigence and start taking important
steps and measures to assess the situation of the tanker
and prevent an oil leak or explosion before it is too late,
otherwise we face an environmental, economic and
humanitarian disaster.
In conclusion, the Yemeni Government appreciates
the efforts of the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access
Facility in providing vaccines and preventing the
spread of the virus. Nevertheless, despite the generosity
of international donors, most Yemenis still have not
received a first dose because vaccine quantities are
limited. We would therefore urge the United Nations,
our partners and supporters to provide additional
vaccines, not only to protect the Yemeni people but also
to stop the spread of the pandemic around the world.
None of us is safe until everyone is safe.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at noon.

22-2284721/21
