General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

92

null and void, constitute a flagrant violation of international law and the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War and have
no legal effect;
4. Calls upon Member States not to recognize such
legislative and administrative measures and actions;
5. Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to desist
from enacting such legislation.

92nd plenary meeting
I I December 1980
F

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, 18
Recalling Security Council resolutions 468 ( I 980) of
8 May I980 and 469 ( 1980) of 20 May 1980,
Deeply shocked by the most recent atrocities committed by Israel, the occupying Power, against educational institutions in the occupied Palestinian territories,
Taking cognizance of the recent repeated expulsion by
Israel, the occupying Power, of the Mayors of Hebron
and Halhul,
Condemning the rejection of Israel to accept and carry
out the above-mentioned decisions of the Security
Council,
I. Reaffirms the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of I 2 August I 949, to the Palestinian and
other Arab territories occupied by Israel, including
Jerusalem;
2. Condemns Israeli policies and practices against
Palestinian students and faculty in schools, universities
and other educational institutions in the occupied
Palestinian territories, especially the policy of opening
fire on defenceless students, causing many casualties;
3. Condemns the systematic Israeli campaign of
repression against universities in the occupied Palestinian territories, restricting and impeding academic
activities of Palestinian universities by subjecting
selection of courses, textbooks and educational programmes, admission of students and appointment of
faculty members to the control and supervision of the
military occupation authorities, in clear contravention
of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War;
4. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, comply with the provisions of the fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War and rescind all actions and measures
agalnst all educational institutions and ensure the
freedom of these institutions;
5. Requests the Security Council to convene urgently
in order to take the necessary measures, in accordance
with the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, to ensure that the Government of Israel, the
occupying Power, rescinds the illegal measures taken
against the Palestinian mayors and the Sharia Judge
Tamimi, and to facilitate their immediate return so that
they can resume the functions for which they were
elected.
92nd plenary meeting
I I December 1980

35 / 123.

Question of the Malagasy islands of Glorieuses. Juan de Nova, Europa and Bassas da
India

The General Assembly.
Having considered the item entitled "Question of the
Malagasy islands of Glorieuses, Juan de Nova, Europa
and Bassas da India", together with the report of the
Secretary-General on the subject, 21
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, in rarticular the provisions concerning the preservation o the
national unity and the territorial integrity of a country
at the time of its attainment of independence,
Recalling further the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, contained in its resolution 2625
(XXV) of 24 October ·l 970, and also the relevant provisions of the Charter concerning the peaceful settlement
of disputes,
Bearing in mind the various decisions taken by the
Organization of African Unity and by the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries on the question of the Malagasy
islands of Glorieuses, Juan de Nova, Europa and Bassas
da India,
Noting with regret that the negotiations envisaged in
its resolution 34/91 of 12 December 1979 have not been
initiated,
Taking into account the resolutions on co-operation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity.
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the question of the Malagasy islands of Glorieuses,
Juan de Nova, Europa and Bassas da India;

2.

Takes note also of resolution CM /Res.784

(XXXV) on the same question, adopted by the Council

of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its
thirty-fifth ordinary session, held at Freetown from 18
to 28 June 1980; 22
3. Reaffirms its resolution 34/91 of 12 December
1979;
4. Invites the Government of France to initiate with
the Government of Madagascar, as a matter of urgency, the negotiations provided for in resolution 34 /91,
with a view to settling the question in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to monitor the
implementation of the present resolution and to report
t~ereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth sess10n;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Question of the
Malagasy islands of Glorieuses, Juan de Nova, Europa
and Bassas da India".

92nd plenary meeting
11 December 1980
--

_,, A/35/480.
-'' See A/J5/46J and Corr. I. annex I.

IV.

35/124.

93

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

International co-operation to avert new flows of
refugees

The General Assembly,
Gravely concerned over the increasing flows of
refugees in many parts of the world,
Deeply disturbed by the human suffering affecting
millions of men, women and children who flee or are
forcibly expelled from their homelands and seek refuge
in other countries,
Reaffirming the right of refugees to return to their
homes in their homelands,
Commending the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees for his untiring humanitarian and social efforts,
Commending also all Governments, United Nations
organs, the specialized agencies and intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations which have provided aid for their contributions, and stressing the importance of their efforts in this field,
Noting that, in addition to creating individual human
misery, flows of refugees can impose great political, economic and social burdens upon the international community as a whole, with particularly dire effects on
developing countries with limited resources of their
own,
Considering that massive flows of refugees may not
only affect the domestic order and stability of receiving
States but also jeopardize the stability of entire regions
and thus endanger international peace and security,
Conscious of its duty to examine in depth all aspects of
the refugee problem and to study the means and
resources provided by the relevant provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations in order to maintain international peace and security,
Reaffirming the inviolability of existing international
norms and principles governing responsibilities of
States, especially regarding the protection of refugees.
and reaffirming the framework of competences of international organizations and institutions,

Reaffirming its resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October
1970, by which it approved the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations,
Convinced, therefore, that the United Nations is called
upon to consider, in addition to humanitarian and social relief, suitable means to avert new flows of refugees,
l. Strongly condemns all policies and practices of oppressive and racist regimes as well as aggression, alien
domination and foreign occupation, which are primarily
responsible for the massive flows of refugees throughout the world and which result in inhuman suffering;
2. Invites all Member States to convey to the
Secretary-General their comments and suggestions on
international co-operation to avert new flows of refugees and to facilitate the return of those refugees who
wish to return;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session, for its further examination and thorough study, the views, comments and suggestions expressed by Member States, together with those expressed on the item at its thirty-fifth
session, including all additional contributions per-

taining to the matter which he may receive from other
United Nations organs;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "International cooperation to avert new flows of refugees".

92nd plenary meeting
I I December 1980

35/201.

Questions relating to information

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 3535 (XXX) of 17 December
1975. 31/139 of 16 December 1976, 33/115 A to C of
18 December 1978 and its other resolutions on the question of information, in particular resolutions 34 / 181 and
34/182 of 18 December 1979,

Recalling article 19 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 21 which provides that everyone has the
right to freedom of opinion and expression and that this
right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and
ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers, and
article 29, which stipulates that these rights and
freedoms may in no case be exercised contrary to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations,
Recalling also articles 19 and 20 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,"
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December '. 974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation,
Recalling the recommendations on the question of information and communication contained in the Final
Declaration of the Sixth Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Havana from 3 to 9 September I 979, 25 which emphasized, inter alia, that co-operation in the field of information
,titutes an integral part of the struggle for the
creation ~• new international relations in general and of
a new world information and communication order in
particular,
Recalling the Declaration on Fundamental Principles
concerning the Contribution of the Mass Media to
Strengthening Peace and International Understanding,
to the Promotion of Human Rights and to Countering
Racialism, Apartheid and Incitement to War/' adopted
on 28 November 1978 by the General Conference of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, as well as the resolutions on information and
mass communications adopted by the General Conf~rence at its nineteenth. twentieth and twenty-first sessions.
Taking note of the Final Act of the Conference on
Security and Co-operation in Europe. signed at Helsinki
on I August 1975.
-

,, Resolution 217 A (Ill).
·'' Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
Sec A/34/542, annex, sect. I, paras. 280-299.
•,, l:nited Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural Organi7ation, Records of the General Conference. Twentieth Session, vol. 1.
R esolw ions, pp. I 00- I 04.
