UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/46/26
27 December 1991

Forty-aixth aeaaion
Agenda item 48
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
(on the report of the First Committee (A/46/662)]
46/26.

Compliance with arma limitation and disarmament
agreements

The General Assembly.
Reaffirming its resolution 44/122 of 15 December 1989,
Recoonizino the abiding concern of all Member States for maintaining
respect for rights and obligations arising from treaties and other sources of
international law.
Convinced that observance of the Charter of the United Nations, relevant
treaties and other sources of international law is essential for the
strengthening of international security.
Mindful, in particular, of the fundamental importance of full
implementation and strict observance of agreements on arms limitation and
disarmament if individual nations and the international community are to
derive enhanced security from them.
Stressing that any violation of such agreements not only adversely
affects the security of States parties but can also create security risks for
other States relying on the constraints and commitments stipulated in those
agreements,
.
.
.
'
Stressing also that any weakening of confidence in such agreements
diminishes their contribution to global or regional stability and to further .
disarmament and> arms limitation efforts and undermines the credibility and
effectiveness of the international legal system,
Recoonizino. in this context, that full compliance by parties with'
.
existing agreements and' the resolving of compliance concerns effectively can,­
, ’

' .■

91-42387

,

/•.—

A/R ES/46/26
Page 2

inter alia, facilitate the conclusion of additional arms limitation and
diearmciment agreements.
Believing that compliance with arms limitation and disarmament agreements
by States parties is a matter of interest and concern to all members of the
international community, and noting the role that the United Nations has
played and should continue to play in that regard,
Convinced that resolution of non-compliance questions that have arisen
with regard to agreements on arms limitations and disarmament would contribute
to better relations among states and the strengthening of world peace and
security,
Noting recent developments in international relations, and welcoming the
universal recognition of the critical importance of the question of compliance
with and verification of arms limitation and disarmament agreements,
1.
Urges all States parties to arms limitation and disarmament
agreements to implement and comply with the entirety of the spirit and
provisions of such agreements;
2.
Calls upon all Member States to give serious consideration to the
implications of non-compliance with those obligations for international
security and stability, as well as for the prospects for further progress in
the field of disarmament;
3.
Also calls upon all Member States to support efforts aimed at the
resolution of non-compliance questions, with a view to encouraging strict
observance by all parties of the provisions of arms limitation and disarm£unent
agreements and maintaining or restoring the integrity of such agreements;
4.
Welcomes the role that the United Nations has played in restoring
the integrity of certain arms limitation and disarmament agreements and in the
removal of threats to peace;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide assistance
that may be necessary in restoring and protecting the integrity of arms
limitation and disarmament agreements;
6.
Encourages efforts by States parties to develop additional
cooperative measures, as appropriate, that can increase confidence in
compliance with existing arms limitation and disarmament agreements and reduce
the possibility of misinterpretation and misunderstanding;
7.
Notes, in this connection, the contribution that verification
experiments and research can make and already have made in confirming and
improving verification procedures in arms limitation and disarmament
agreements under negotiation, thereby providing an opportunity, from the time
that such agreements enter into force, for enhanced confidence in the
effectiveness of verification procedures as a basis for determining
compliance;
e.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-eighth
session the item entitled "Compliance with arms limitation and disarmament
agreements".
6Sth Plenary meeting
6_December 1991
