S/2001/578

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 June 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 8 June 2001 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
convey the attached report on the international security presence in Kosovo covering
the period from 1 to 30 April 2001 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the attached report to the attention of
the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

01-40729 (E) 120601

*0140729*

S/2001/578

Annex
Monthly report to the United Nations on Kosovo Force
(KFOR) operations
1.
Over the reporting period (1 to 30 April 2001) there were approximately
43,000 Kosovo Force (KFOR) troops in theatre, with no major changes in
deployment since the last report.
2.
Lieutenant General Thorstein Skiaker took over as the new Commander of
KFOR on 6 April.
3.
The conditional and controlled return of the forces of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia into the ground safety zone, which began in March with Sectors A, C
(East) and C (West), continued during the reporting period. The entry of the forces
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia into Sector D started on 14 April and has
taken place without incident.
4.
On 25 April a group of 144 Kosovar Albanian prisoners were released back
into Kosovo at Gate 3 under International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
arrangements as part of the Amnesty Law of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
The majority of these prisoners were from the so-called Dakovica group — Kosovar
Albanians taken prisoner at random at the end of the conflict and accused of
terrorism. The majority of ethnic Albanian prisoners remaining in Serbia are
detained on criminal charges. There was no reaction in Kosovo to the arrest of
President Milosevic on 1 April.
5.
The number of refugees making their way into Kosovo from the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedoniaa during the period from mid-February until the end
of March has reached a total of 8,432.
Security
6.
During the reporting period, the level of inter-ethnic violence remained high.
From the middle of April, KFOR had to deal with public disorder in Mitrovica and
northern Kosovo when Kosovar Serbs reacted against the implementation of the
excise and sales tax collection policy of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). Exchanges continued between ethnic Albanian armed
groups and the forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in the Presevo Valley
and in the ground safety zone.
7.
The establishment of excise and sales tax collection points by UNMIK b along
the boundary with Serbia in the middle of April caused a reaction from Kosovar
Serbs, who began to build blockades and block roads with dustbins and vehicles in
northern Kosovo and in Mitrovica, reducing vehicle movement to a minimum for a
few days. On 19 April, KFOR began to dismantle the blockades over several days
and used tear-gas to control the crowds. Four KFOR soldiers were injured in these
incidents and a Kosovar Serb was wounded and later died after a grenade was
thrown by someone in the crowd. Full freedom of movement was restored in
northern Kosovo by the end of the month.
8.
Inter-ethnic incidents and intimidation continued during the reporting period.
On 6 April a 36-year-old male Serb was found shot in the head in Idriz Selmani; and
on 14 April a Kosovar Albanian was found machine-gunned to death in his car near

2

S/2001/578

Lugovic. Four Kosovar Serb houses were blown up in Vitina on 8 April, following
which a Serb priest reported that up to 70 Serb families were leaving the town
because they no longer felt safe. The priest also reported that this was seen as a
failure of KFOR and UNMIK to protect the Serb families. On 18 April, anti-tank
rounds were fired near Vellca Hoca and six men were seen escaping. The attack on
this village brought the number to seven in a 10-month period. On 28 April, a car
exploded without warning in Pristina — no one was injured. On 30 April, a Kosovar
Serb and a Kosovar Albanian were shot from a passing car. The Serb died of his
wounds.
9.
Criminally and politically motivated acts of violence were also evident during
the reporting period. In Klina, on 24 April, a Kosovar Albanian who was President
of the local assembly and representative of the Democratic League of Kosovo
(LDK) was shot dead outside his apartment — this shooting is seen as politically
motivated. On 18 April a prominent Kosovar Serb died in Pristina when his car
exploded and eight persons were injured. A suspect has been arrested following this
incident which is believed to be criminally motivated. Five hand grenades exploded
in two coffee bars and two grenades were found intact in the vicinity of Zrze. No
one was injured and these incidents are also believed to be criminally motivated.
10. Several peaceful demonstrations took place across the province for a variety of
reasons. The biggest demonstration of between 5,000 and 6,000 Kosovar Albanians
took place near Gnjilane on 2 April against the treatment of ethnic Albanians in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. On 17 April, the so-called Eskodi March,
starting from Mitrovica and involving about 3,000 people, took place to
commemorate Albanians displaced in 1999. A meeting of 2,000 people, which took
place in Mitrovica on 24 April, was addressed by a member of the Serb National
Council of Northern Kosovo Social Affairs Committee. The crowd was urged to
persist in demands and remain on blockades to protest against the imposition of the
border tax collection policy.
11. During the period under review, KFOR troops uncovered and confiscated
significant amounts of weapons, ammunition and explosives across the province as
well as computers, stolen cars and alcohol in or near Banjica, Prelovac, Pristina,
Seciste, Debelde, Kojlovica, Pasino Selo, Tebovic and Jagado. At least four Kosovar
Albanians involved in the incidents were detained. The weapons destruction
programme is scheduled to begin again on 11 June, once necessary repairs to the
furnace have been completed.
12. The “Nis Express” service resumed on 17 April with appropriate measures
taken by KFOR to protect the convoy.
Illegal border activity
13. KFOR forces continue to provide appropriate control of Kosovo’s internal
boundaries, external borders and recognized crossing points. KFOR continues to
reinforce control on the external border with the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia in order to deter and interdict cross-border infiltration and to confiscate
weapons and ammunition. On 14 April, a KFOR vehicle hit a mine near Krivenik,
killing one soldier and injuring two others.
14. In the Presevo Valley and throughout the ground safety zone, firefights, small
arms and mortar fire were reported on a daily basis. On 4 April, a vehicle of the

3

S/2001/578

armed forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia escorting KFOR forces ran over
a mine, killing one Serbian Special Police (MUP) officer and injuring two others.
On 11 April, KFOR troops were fired at. One soldier was killed and another injured.
Twenty-one suspected members of the Liberation Army of Presevo, Medvedja and
Bujanovac (UCPMB) were detained. On 14 and 15 April, five Yugoslav hostages
were released by the ethnic Albanian armed groups.
Security Council resolution 1160 (1998)
15. Although KFOR operations continue to result in weapons seizures there have
been no reported violations of Security Council resolution 1160 (1998).
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
16. Over the reporting period, there were 13 cases reported of non-compliance
among the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC), including the arrest by UNMIK police
of a KPC commander, Ruzhdi Saramati, on suspicion of an attempted murder dating
back to 1993. Four members of his staff were also detained for interfering in his
arrest, and 400 demonstrators in Prizren blocked roads in protest. The International
Organization for Migration (IOM) continues to approve the funding of KPC
humanitarian and minor infrastructure projects. Excluding the time spent on the
“Kosovo Clean-up Week”, the total number of man-days devoted to KPC
community projects has now reached 39,728.
17. The security forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia remain in general
compliance with the terms of the Military Technical Agreement.
Cooperation with international organizations
18. KFOR continues to provide daily assistance, on request, to international
organizations and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) throughout Kosovo and
to provide security assistance in support of UNMIK police operations.
19. Consultations are being held between the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), UNMIK and KFOR to assess the events that
led to the expulsion of non-Kosovar Serb families from northern Mitrovica in the
middle of March. Minority families allege that the level of protection provided by
KFOR and UNMIK police is inadequate.
20. KFOR continues to advise and assist the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in planning for the Kosovo-wide elections. The Joint
Working Group on the Legal Framework has reached agreement in principle on the
basic provisions to be observed by the provisional institutions.
21. Although the transfer of railway operations from KFOR to UNMIK took place
in March, after being under military control since July 1999, KFOR continues to
assist UNMIK’s Department of Transport and Infrastructure in repairing railway
lines linking Kosovo and Serbia. In addition, and until an agreement is signed
between UNMIK and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, KFOR will
continue to operate the trains crossing the border with the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia.

4

S/2001/578

Outlook
22. The security situation in Kosovo continues to be affected by the violence in the
northern area of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and has increased the
risk to KFOR personnel.
Notes
a

Turkey recognizes the Republic of Macedonia with its constitutional name.

b

UNMIK has stated that the establishment of tax collection points was in accordance with the
revenue arrangements that apply in Kosovo and that all residents of Kosovo benefit from these
revenues. The regulation enabling the establishment of these tax collection points dates from
1999, and the first tax collection point on the administrative boundary line was established in
February 2000.

5
