General A1111embly-Eishteenth Session

------------------------Noting with satisfaction that the Economic and Social
Council, in its resolution 939 (XXXV) of 11 April
1963, has already drawn the attention of the Prepz.ratory
Committee of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development to , · •.f' paragraphs of the report of the
ad hoe Working Grl>1,p15 concerning problems of international trade, specifically paragraphs 58 to 64,
1. Expresses the hope that the examination of those
problems in the Preparatory Committee of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and
at the Conference will contribute to the speeding-up
of the final elaboration and adoption of the principles
of international economic co--operation;
2. Invites the Economic and Social Council and,
through it, the ad hoe Working Group, to expedite the
work on the question of a draft declaration reforred to
in Council resolution 939 ( XXXV).
1276th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.
1943 (XVIII). World campaign against hunger,
disease and ignorance

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1710 (XVI) of 19 December
1961, establishing the United Nations Development
Decade,
Convinced that the achievement of the objectives of
the Decade requires investment in human resources
by a world-wide effort against hunger, disease and
ignorance,
Recalling that 1965 has been designated as International Co-operation Year by the General Assembly in
its resolution 1907 (XVIII) of 21 November 1963,
Recognizing the great contribution made by nongovernmental organizations to international co-operation
and to furthering the objectives of the United Nations,
Believing that widespread support can be engendered
for a concerted effort to combat hunger, disease and
ignorance, which would mark the second half of the
Decade,
l. Appeals to all non-governmental organizations to
put their increased enthusiasm, energy and other resources into a world campaign in the basic human fields
of food, health and education, including training, to
start in 1965 and to continue for the remainder of the
United Nations Development Decade;
2. Urges States to facilitate in all appropriate ways
the efforts of their non-governmental organizations
taking part in such a campaign in the fields of food,
health and education and contributing to the achievement of the objectives of the Decade ;
3. Requests the Secretary-GePeral to consult with
the Governments of Member States and the specialized
agencies, as well as wi_th_ non-governmental organizations in consultative status, and to report to the Economic and Social Council at its thirty-seventh session
on the feasibility and the methods of stimulating such
a campaign of non-governmental organizations under
the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind
the following considerations:
(a) The value of closer contact between peoples and
non-governmental organizations in the developed and
the developing countries in order to improve understanding between them ;
111 Official

Records of the Economic and Social C01tncil,
Thirty-fifth Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, document E/3725.

( b) The desirability of developing more active methods of co-operation between the United Nati.ons-including the specialized agencies-and non-governmental
organiz8.tions. designed to extend non-governmental
particip;:ition in the progress of the Decade, particularly
in the fie1ds of food, health and education;
( c) The need to ensure that such a campaign is conducted under conditions which are acceptable to, and
receive the approval and support of, the Governments
of the countries concerned; ·
4. Invites the Economic and Social Council to consider the Secretary-General's report af its thirty-seventh
session. and to t::ike s1 1ch action as it may deem
appropriate.
1276th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.

1944 (XVIll). International co-operation in the
application of science and technology to
economic and social development

The General Assembly,
Having noted the sustained efforts the Governments
of the developing countries are making in their en?eavour to raise the standards of living of their peoples,
m accordance with the purposes and objectives of the
United Nations Development Decade as set forth in
Economic and Social Council res(\llution 916 (XXXIV)
of 3 August 1962,
Recalling with appreciation the assistance provided
for economic and social development by the United
Nations, the specialized agencies, the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the Special Fund, the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance and the
United Nations Children's Fund,
Considering that science and technology, when suitably adapted and applied to the specific conditions of
the developing countries, can make an outstanding contribution to the achievement of the aims of the Decade
and the aspirations of the people,
1. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts and
achievements of the United Nations Conference on the
Application of Science and Technology for the Benefit
of the Less Developed Areas;
2. Welcomes the statements on the subject by the
Secretary-General in his report18 and his address to the
Economic and Social Council on the follow-up to th~
Conference,17 as well as the action taken by the Ad!11-inistrative Committee_ on Co-ordination in creating an
inter-agency _s?b-comm1ttee on science and technology,
and the dec1s1on taken by the Council in resolution
980 A (XXXVI) of 1 August 1963 to seek to intensify
practical efforts in this field by establishing an Advisory
Committee on the Application of Science and Technology to Development ;
3. Requests the Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and Technology to Development
to examine, in keeping with its terms of reference
the possibility of establishing a programme on intern.a~
tional co-operation in science and technology for economic and social development, in which scientists and
technicians of the highly developed countries would
as a matter of priority, help to study the problems of
the developing countries and explore suitable solutions
having regard to limitations upon the material resource~
HI Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 15,
document E/3772.
17 Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session, 1271st meeting.
