A /77/PV.27

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

27th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 2 November 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Ruidíaz Pérez
(Chile), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 72
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft resolution (A/77/L.6)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Members
are reminded that the debate on this agenda item will be
held in December.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Singapore to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.6.
Mr. Khng (Singapore): I have the honour of
introducing draft resolution A/77/L.6.
In resolution 76/72, of 9 December 2021, the
Assembly decided to devote its plenary meetings on
8 and 9 December 2022 to the consideration of the
item entitled “Oceans and the law of the sea” and
the commemoration of the fortieth anniversary of
the adoption and opening for signature of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. Under draft
resolution A/77/L.6, the Assembly would adopt the
organizational arrangements for those plenary meetings
as contained in its annex, including a list of speakers.
Singapore acknowledges and welcomes the strong
support of many delegations for the commemoration,
which will be an occasion to celebrate key milestones

for multilateralism and the rule of law in the oceans
and seas. We are also grateful for the support expressed
by many delegations for the draft resolution, as well
as the constructive comments we received during the
informal consultations.
To conclude, Singapore hopes that the General
Assembly will adopt draft resolution A/77/L.6 without
a vote. We also wish to reiterate the Assembly’s
encouragement in resolution 76/72 that Member States
and observers be represented at the highest possible
level for the commemoration.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We shall
now proceed to consider draft resolution A/77/L.6,
entitled “Plenary meetings of the General Assembly on
8 and 9 December 2022 devoted to the consideration
of the item entitled ‘Oceans and the law of the sea’ and
to the commemoration of the fortieth anniversary of
the adoption and opening for signature of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.6?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 77/5).

A/77/L.6

*2266933*

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 72.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-66933 (E)

was

A/77/PV.27

Agenda item 70 (continued)
Report of the International Court of Justice
Report of the International Court of Justice
(A/77/4)
Report of the Secretary-General (A/77/204)
Mr. Ndoye (Senegal) (spoke in French): My
delegation aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (see A/77/PV.20).
My delegation also takes note with satisfaction of
the report of the President of the International Court
of Justice (A/77/4) on the judicial activity of the Court
from 1 August 2021 to 31 July 2022. Senegal would
like to warmly thank President Joan Donoghue for her
statement (see A/77/PV.20) and through her to express
our gratitude to all the staff who work on a daily basis
to ensure the smooth functioning of the Court. My
delegation is also pleased to welcome the report of the
Secretary-General on the trust fund to assist Member
States, particularly developing countries, in the
settlement of disputes through the International Court
of Justice (A/77/204).
As the President noted, the International Court
of Justice has been extremely active over the past 12
months. That high level of activity has led to an increase
in the number of its decisions. Indeed, four judgments
and 15 orders were issued in the period under review.
An analysis of the cases brought before the Court shows
that its pending contentious cases involve three States
from the Group of Asia-Pacific States, eight from the
Group of Latin American and Caribbean States, three
from the Group of African States, six from the Group
of Eastern European States and three from the Group of
Western European and other States. It is clear that the
broad geographical distribution of the cases submitted
to the Court reflects the general and universal character
of the principal judicial organ of the Organization.
We are also pleased to note the diversity of the
cases submitted to the Court, including on issues
relating to territorial and maritime delimitation, human
rights, reparation for internationally wrongful acts,
the protection of the environment and the immunity of
States from jurisdiction, as well as the interpretation
and application of international treaties, in particular
those concerning diplomatic relations, the prevention
of genocide and the suppression of the financing of
terrorism. My delegation welcomes that fact, which
2/12

02/11/2022

is undoubtedly a testament to the choice made by the
States Members of the United Nations to settle their
disputes by peaceful means, in line with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
My delegation remains convinced of the principal
role of the International Court of Justice in resolving
disputes between States and in the promotion and
development of international law. It is therefore
important to underscore that the effectiveness of the
Court is largely dependent upon the willingness of
Member States to recognize its jurisdiction and accept
its authority. My delegation therefore sincerely invites
all Member States to refer their international disputes
to the Court, which would help to promote friendly, if
not peaceful, relations between States. To date, fewer
than half of the States Members of the United Nations
have declared their recognition of the compulsory
jurisdiction of the Court. That is why my delegation
encourages all Member States that have not yet done
so to consider accepting the compulsory jurisdiction of
the Court, in accordance with Article 36, paragraphs
2 and 5, of the Statute of the International Court of
Justice. That is the first condition for the Court to be
able to fully achieve its objective of consolidating and
safeguarding international law.
The second condition is encouraging understanding
of international law and the Court’s procedures, through
ongoing training and by strengthening the capacity of
our future staff, regardless of their background. For
that reason, Senegal attaches particular importance to
the Judicial Fellowship Programme, the aim of which
is to enable universities to sponsor international law
graduates — who will have the opportunity to be trained
at the Court — by covering the cost of their training.
To that end, my delegation welcomes the creation of
the trust fund for the Judicial Fellowship Programme
in 2021, following the adoption by consensus of
resolution 75/129, of 14 December 2020. In view of
its usefulness, Senegal will continue to support and
promote that initiative, including in the context of the
core group and alongside Argentina, the Netherlands,
Romania and Singapore. My delegation would like to
take this opportunity to encourage Member States and
international financial institutions to contribute to the
trust fund in order to guarantee the geographic and
linguistic diversity of the participants in the Judicial
Fellowship Programme.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its
commitment to the rule of law, the primacy of law
22-66933

02/11/2022

A/77/PV.27

and the obligation to adhere to the decisions of the
International Court of Justice. In that regard, we would
like to underscore the need for Member States, the
General Assembly and the Security Council to ensure
that the Court’s decisions be respected and enforced.
The force of law must take the place of the law of force,
which poses a genuine threat to international peace and
security.

water is one of the most important global issues,
which is discussed by the Assembly and developed
in international law. That is why it is a controversial
issue of regional and global interest. Because Bolivia
respects international law, the important judicial organ
that is the Court and its international decisions, it also
expects that its judicial rulings will be accepted and
fully respected by those who accepted its jurisdiction.

Mr. Pary Rodríguez (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): First of all, I thank President Joan
E. Donoghue for her important statement last Thursday
(see A/77/PV.20) in introducing the report of the
International Court of Justice (A/77/4) on its activities
during the period from 1 August 2021 to 31 July 2022.

My country believes that dialogue and political and
diplomatic negotiations between brotherly peoples will
always be the best way to resolve disputes. However, we
also believe that recourse to the International Court of
Justice is the right of every State when State integrity
and sovereignty are affected.

The Plurinational State of Bolivia recognizes
the important role played by the International Court
of Justice in contributing to international peace
through the adjudication or settlement of international
disputes and situations that could disrupt the peaceful
coexistence among States. Its legal basis is the Charter
of the United Nations, in particular Article 1, in line
with the principles of justice and international law.

Finally, we underscore the function and jurisdiction
of the Court and its contribution to the development
of international law. Given that the countries of the
world, today more than ever before, hold as common
objectives peace, security and the development of
peoples, we are certain that the International Court of
Justice will continue to contribute to the fulfilment of
those lofty goals.

My country participates in and follows all initiatives
and jurisdictional activities of the International Court
of Justice — an institution we believe to be impartial
and independent. Similarly, we underline its efforts
in resolving the pending contentious cases under its
jurisdiction, with full effectiveness and efficiency. The
proof of that is the renewed interest of States in using
that judicial organ to peacefully resolve their disputes.

Mrs. Kupradze (Georgia): Let me start by thanking
the President of the International Court of Justice, Judge
Joan E. Donoghue, for the report (A/77/4) submitted
under agenda item 70. We would also like to express
our deepest condolences and pay tribute to the memory
of Judge Antônio Augusto Cançado Trindade, whose
legacy to the world of international law is enormous.

In that context, as a sign of confidence in the
international judicial institution and its commitment
to international law, Bolivia has continued to accept
its jurisdiction, this time as the defendant, in a second
contentious matter, as detailed in Chapter V, section 6,
of the Court’s report, namely, the case of the Dispute
over the Status and Use of the Waters of the Silala
(Chile v. Bolivia), which was brought by the Republic
of Chile against Bolivia. As the matter is of particular
relevance to my country, together with other issues
pending resolution, we hope that the Court’s ruling
can lead to a definitive solution so that the parties can
re-establish their peaceful and friendly coexistence as
brotherly peoples who share an extensive border and
have developed cultural relations.
Resolving that dispute will not only have an impact
on countries that are currently involved in disputes,
but it will also have implications for the future, as

More than 200 days have passed since the beginning
of Russia’s unprovoked, unjustified and premeditated
aggression against Ukraine, in grave violation of
international law, which has led to immense suffering,
including the loss of thousands of innocent lives, the
forced displacement of millions, torture, rape and other
serious violations, some of which amount to war crimes.
It is imperative that accountability be ensured for
those grave violations. In these challenging times, the
effective functioning of international legal mechanisms
such as the International Court of Justice and
compliance with its decisions by Member States remain
as important as ever before. Let me reiterate our call on
Russia to comply with the provisional measures of the
International Court of Justice of 16 March, which bind
Russia to immediately suspend the military operations
that it commenced on the territory of Ukraine on
24 February. Today the international community must
stand united in defending the principles of the Charter

22-669333/12

A/77/PV.27

of the United Nations and ensure that justice for crimes
committed be served through all available international
legal instruments.
The universal and general character of the
International Court of Justice is well reflected in the
geographical range of the cases brought before it and
the diversity of their subject matter. As duly noted in
the report, the continuous flow of new cases submitted
to the Court and the significant number of judgments
and orders delivered during the reporting period reflect
the institution’s great vitality. Special emphasis should
be given to the Court’s role in promoting the rule of
law and the importance of dispute settlement between
States by peaceful means. Therefore, as one of the
countries that declared recognition of the jurisdiction
of the Court as compulsory, Georgia believes that it is
important for States that have not yet done so to consider
accepting the jurisdiction of the Court, in accordance
with its Statute.
Unfortunately, as we see today, international law
continues to be fully disregarded and human rights
flagrantly violated. In that regard, let me recall the
dire humanitarian situation and grave human rights
violations in Georgia’s Abkhazia and Tskhinvali
regions, where the Government of Georgia is deprived
of the possibility of exercising its legitimate jurisdiction
due to occupation by the Russian Federation. In that
respect, let me recall the historic judgment of the
European Court of Human Rights of 21 January 2021
on the case of Georgia v. Russia (II), which once again
reaffirmed the responsibility of the Russian Federation,
as the occupying Power, for grave human rights
violations in the illegally occupied regions.
In conclusion, let me reiterate our belief that the
International Court of Justice, as the only international
court of universal character with general jurisdiction,
can play an important role in upholding the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We greatly value the work of the International
Court of Justice as the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations. We thank the President of the Court,
Joan E. Donoghue, for her comprehensive and detailed
analysis delivered at our previous meeting on this item
(see A/77/PV.20), held on 27 October.
The docket still contains contentious disputes on
territorial and maritime delimitation, which is a topic
that remains a key element of the Court’s work. A
4/12

02/11/2022

substantial number of cases is in the stage of active
legal proceedings in other areas of international law,
which shows States’ high level of trust in the Court.
The Court’s judges bear considerable responsibility, as
the outcome of cases and expert opinions of the Court
play a key role in the interpretation of international
legal standards. In many cases, they serve as guidelines
for the adoption of political and legal decisions at the
international and national levels. During the reporting
period, a significant number of orders were issued
on several cases, including an order on 16 March on
provisional measures in Ukraine — a case filed in
reference to the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. I would like to
touch on that case separately.
Traditionally, we do not go into details as to the
merits of ongoing judicial proceedings at the Court,
including when our country is involved. But as
multiple other representatives have already done so
in their statements, I will do the same. The main aim
of the Genocide Convention is to ensure the criminal
prosecution of those guilty of committing genocide,
conspiracy to commit genocide, direct and public
incitement to commit genocide, an attempt to commit
genocide or complicity in genocide. None of that is part
of Kyiv’s claim. I ask members to pay close attention
here. The key requirement of the claim is to declare
null and void Russia’s statements on the commission of
genocide by Ukraine. Therefore, the Court’s task is to
confirm the fulfilment of Kyiv’s obligations under the
Convention. The formulation of the claim is obviously
beyond the scope of the Genocide Convention. Ukraine’s
claim, which enjoys the full backing of Kyiv’s Western
allies, could also set a very dangerous precedent. In
practice, it would make it possible to artificially adapt
any situation to any international treaty that confers
jurisdiction on the International Court of Justice.
Proceedings could be started against any country that
is party to such a treaty.
The Court’s support for that approach would
have the most serious consequences, not only for the
interpretation and application of important conventions
such as the Genocide Convention but also for States’
perception of the nature and grounds of the Court’s
jurisdiction. Kyiv is not deterred by the fact that the
Convention does not regulate issues of use of force,
the recognition of States or the right to self-defence.
Lawyers working in Kyiv’s interest “resolve” that issue
by resorting to the dubious concept of certain “implied
22-66933

02/11/2022

obligations”. They could not build a case based on the
content of the Convention’s articles, and they therefore
tried to base it on what is not there. Such manipulation
and abuses have probably never been seen in the history
of the Court.
As we talk about abuses, we must note the
unprecedented intention of 47 States, primarily the
member States of the European Union and NATO, to
intervene in the proceedings on behalf of Ukraine.
Several of them submitted declarations of intervention
to the Court, which essentially represent political
support for Kyiv — not legal, but political support.
We see such actions as a brazen abuse of Article 63
of the Statute of the International Court of Justice and
an attempt to exert political pressure on that important
international organ. Such flagrant violations go hand
in hand with the collective West’s traditional double
standards. Declarations of intervention were sent by
the United States of America, which does not recognize
the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice
under the Convention since it made a reservation with
respect to the Convention that even places its national
Constitution above the provisions of that international
treaty. On 17 October, our country submitted its
objections to the Court concerning the admissibility
of declarations by States providing political support
to Ukraine in the case. We hope that the Court will
not yield to political blackmail or allow such a broad
interpretation of the Convention. The decisiveness
and integrity of the Court determine the stability and
authority of the entire international justice system.
Mr. Sharma (India): At the outset, we thank the
President of the International Court of Justice for
presenting the report on the activities of the Court
(A/77/4) and for guiding the work of the Court.
As we all know, the fundamental principle of the
United Nations is to maintain international peace and
security. By performing the task of resolving disputes
between States and rendering its advisory opinions,
the International Court of Justice, as the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations, has a greater role
and responsibility in achieving that United Nations
objective. In that context, the Court has been entrusted
with dual jurisdiction: its contentious jurisdiction
involves adjudicating legal disputes between States
under its own Statute, while its advisory jurisdiction
involves the rendering of advisory opinions on legal
questions presented to it at the request of organs of the
United Nations or specialized agencies authorized to do

A/77/PV.27

so under the Charter of the United Nations. The Court
is the only court of a universal character with general
universal jurisdiction.
Taking stock of the work performed since its first
sitting, in April 1946, and the submission of its first case,
in May 1947, the Court had been seized of 184 cases as
of July 2022. It has delivered more than 145 judgments
and rendered 28 advisory opinions. During the judicial
year 2021–2022, the Court delivered judgments in four
cases, handed down 15 orders required for different
purposes at different stages of proceedings of the cases
and held public hearings in six cases. The report reveals
that, as of 31 July 2022, the Court has 15 contentious
cases pending on its docket. The volume and quality
of its work demonstrate that the Court has stood the
test of fulfilling the task of settling disputes between
States and has acquired a well-deserved reputation as
an institution that maintains the highest legal standards
in accordance with its mandate.
Concerning subject matter and issues, the cases
before the Court involve complex factual and legal
issues relating to a variety of fields, including
territorial and maritime delimitation, human rights,
environmental protection, the jurisdictional immunity
of States and the interpretation and application of
international treaties and conventions, in particular
those concerning diplomatic relations, the suppression
of the financing of terrorism, the elimination of racial
discrimination and the prevention of genocide. Those
facts clearly illustrate the importance of the Court’s
role in upholding the rule of law. The Court’s activities
are directly aimed at promoting and reinforcing the rule
of law through its judgments and advisory opinions. It
plays a crucial role in the interpretation and clarification
of the rules and principles of international law, as well
as in the progressive development and codification of
international law.
The report reflects the importance that States
attach to the Court and the confidence they place in it,
which are evident from the number, nature and variety
of cases with which the Court deals and its ability to
handle the most complex aspects of public international
law. The same is apparently reconfirmed by the fact
that the pending contentious cases have been submitted
by States from the Asia and the Pacific, Latin America
and the Caribbean, Africa, Eastern Europe and Western
Europe and other States’ regions, which reflects the
universal character of the Court.

22-669335/12

A/77/PV.27

In the performance of its judicial functions, the
Court has remained sensitive to the political realities
and sentiments of States, while acting in accordance
with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
its own Statute and other rules of international law.
The continuous flow of cases submitted to the Court
and the number of judgments and orders it delivered
during the reporting period reflect the institution’s
great vitality. Significantly, the Court has not lost sight
of the need to adapt itself to new working methods in a
post-coronavirus disease pandemic context, including
through the holding of public hearings in a hybrid
format, while setting itself a demanding schedule
of hearings and deliberations in handling emergent
situations and dealing with the complexity of the cases
submitted to it.
We welcome the establishment, following the
adoption of resolution 75/129 in 2020, of the trust fund for
the Judicial Fellowship Programme of the Court, which
grants fellowship awards to selected candidates who
are nationals of developing countries from universities
based in those countries. The trust fund is intended not
only to cover a wider geographical diversity but also to
enable participants in different legal systems to benefit
from the Court’s Judicial Fellowship Programme by
providing training opportunities to young jurists from
developing countries. We are pleased to note that
the trust fund has had a promising start to the year
2022–2023 by selecting 15 candidates, including three
from developing countries who were nominated by
universities in those countries.
We appreciate the Court’s efforts to ensure the
greatest possible global awareness of its decisions
through its publications, multimedia offerings and
website, which features the Court’s entire jurisprudence
and that of its predecessor, the Permanent Court
of International Justice. Those sources provide
useful information for States that wish to invoke the
jurisdiction of the Court. We also appreciate the efforts
undertaken by the authorities of the host country for
the decontamination and renovation of the Peace
Palace — the seat of the Court — with a view to
restoring its worthiness while at the same time ensuring
the continuation of the Court’s functioning.
Finally, we wish to reaffirm our strong support
for the Court and acknowledge the importance that the
international community attaches to its work.
6/12

02/11/2022

Mr. Lagdameo (Philippines): The Philippines
thanks Judge Joan E. Donoghue, President of the
International Court of Justice, for her report (A/77/4).
We associate ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (see A/77/PV.20).
The International Court of Justice is an integral part
of the United Nations architecture on the maintenance
of international peace and security. It is critical to the
fulfilment of our peremptory duty, under Article 1,
paragraph 1, of the Charter of the United Nations, namely,
“to bring about by peaceful means, and in conformity
with the principles of justice and international law,
adjustment or settlement of international disputes
or situations which might lead to a breach of the
peace”. The 1982 Manila Declaration on the Peaceful
Settlement of International Disputes, which marks its
fortieth year, asserts the same commitment. It holds a
special regard for the International Court of Justice,
reiterates the Court’s role as the principal judicial organ
of the United Nations and encourages States to resort
to the International Court of Justice in the peaceful
settlement of disputes. As noted by President Ferdinand
Marcos Jr. before this organ,
“By shepherding through the Manila Declaration
of 1982, we helped affirm that differences should
be resolved only through peaceful means. By
reinforcing the predictability and stability of
international law ... we provided an example of how
States should resolve their differences, through
reason and right.” (A/77/PV.5, p.3)
He also stressed that
“amid challenging global tides, an important ballast
is the stabilization of our common vessel, that is,
our open, inclusive and rules-based international
order, governed by international law and informed
by the principles of equity and justice”. (ibid.)
The International Court of Justice is a pillar of
the rules-based international order. Its increasing
workload, the importance, complexity and variety of
the subject matter of the cases brought before it and
the geographical diversity of the States bringing cases
before it illustrate the vitality and universal character
of the jurisdiction of the principal judicial organ of
the United Nations. During the period covered by the
report, the Court experienced a high level of activity,
having handed down four judgments and 15 orders and
22-66933

02/11/2022

having held public hearings in six cases. Meanwhile,
four new contentious cases were brought before the
Court and, as of July 2022, the number of cases before
the Court stood at 15. That is a show of trust and
confidence by States in the Court’s critical role in the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the promotion of
the rule of law. The speedy resolution of disputes before
the Court is no doubt a factor in increasing resort to the
Court, as is the Court’s determination not to be swayed
by political pressures or to politicize cases.
The international community’s trust and confidence
in the Court must be accompanied by the provision of the
commensurate budget and funds necessary for its proper
functioning. We laud the responsible stewardship by the
Court of its funds. We support the provision of adequate
financial resources, which are essential for the Court’s
discharge of its judicial functions. The Philippines has
recognized the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court
since 1972, and we renew our call on other States to do
the same. The relationship between the Court and the
Security Council is fundamental in the maintenance
of peace and security. We call on the Security Council
to seriously consider Article 96 of the Charter of the
United Nations and make greater use of the Court as
a source of advisory opinions and interpretation of the
relevant norms of international law.
Beyond the exercise of its judicial and advisory
powers, we welcome the Court’s role in promoting the
rule of law through its academic and public outreach
programmes, in particular those targeted towards
young people worldwide. We support the trust fund
established to enable the participation of graduates
from developing countries, thereby guaranteeing the
geographic and linguistic diversity of participants in
the Judicial Fellowship Programme. That is critical, as
the diverse geographical spread of cases indicates how
States are increasingly turning to the Court, reflecting
the value placed by the international community in its
role in attaining the cardinal principle of the Charter:
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the observer of the Observer State
of Palestine.
Mr. Bamya (Palestine): We thank President
Donoghue for her report (A/77/4) and the Court for its
important work and, following the passing of Judge
Antônio Augusto Cançado Trindade to Brazil, we join
the international community in expressing our deepest

A/77/PV.27

condolences to his wife and children and the global law
and justice community.
The State of Palestine aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
(see A/77/PV.20).
The United Nations has enshrined among the main
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations the peaceful settlement of disputes in conformity
with the principles of justice and international law. The
establishment of the International Court of Justice is
one of the clearest manifestations of its wish to pursue
that goal. By any standard, the Court’s establishment
was a watershed moment in the history of international
law and international relations. However, the founders
fell short when it came to ensuring that the Court would
be able to exercise its jurisdiction in all places and in
all situations. We call ours an international law-based
order; therefore, we cannot leave it to States to interpret
or misinterpret the law, stretch it beyond reason to
extend their rights or shrink it beyond understanding to
deny their obligations. To assess in any given country
whether the rule of law is observed, we look not only
at its laws but also at its courts and its enforcement
mechanisms. How would one qualify a State with the
best laws but with courts that had jurisdiction only over
those people willing to accept it? What if those courts
had almost no enforcement mechanisms, while those
that they did have were utilized only with regard to a
certain category of people and not others? Would one
qualify that country as enforcing the rule of law? That
is our world order.
The Charter of the United Nations enacted the
most important rules at a time in history that witnessed
an unprecedented movement, born of the most
horrific tragedies, towards codifying and advancing
international law across all fields. Logically, we
established a world court to uphold those principles and
rules, but we did not grant it compulsory jurisdiction.
Anyone who believes in justice cannot be satisfied with
selective or voluntary justice. However, the Court has
been able to deliver on its mandate for two reasons:
first, because of its authority and credibility; and
secondly, because of the will of many States to freely
subject themselves to its jurisdiction. We commend
the Court for its work and long-standing service to the
cause of international law and the peaceful settlement
of disputes. We equally commend all States that have
decided to recognize the compulsory jurisdiction of the

22-669337/12

A/77/PV.27

Court, and we call on all those that have not yet done
so to accept that compulsory jurisdiction. The State of
Palestine is proud to be among those States that have
endorsed the declaration on promoting the jurisdiction
of the International Court of Justice.
The International Court of Justice was established
not only to resolve disputes but also to help clarify
applicable law, its correct interpretation and the
obligations for States and international organizations,
including the United Nations. That is why the Court
was entrusted with its advisory capacity. We resorted
to the Court to seek its guidance 20 years ago, and
we shall resort to the Court again in the coming
days. Some States like to emphasize the non-binding
nature of the International Court of Justice’s advisory
opinions, but the International Court of Justice and
its advisory opinions rely on binding law, including
peremptory norms of international law that can suffer
no derogations. As such, when the highest court and
most authoritative organ in the world states the law, it
is the duty of all States and international organizations
to conform to it. We cannot but commend those nations
that, when faced with an existential threat, decide to
turn to the law to find answers. We are well-placed to
understand them. We assure their representatives in
this Hall of our solidarity and reaffirm our hope that
humankind will rise to the challenge for the survival
of those nations today and for the survival of all
humankind tomorrow.
Through its contentious and advisory functions, the
Court is capable of determining the law with authority
and credibility as it pertains to any international
situation. It thereby contributes in no small measure
to the peaceful settlement of disputes. We call on the
United Nations, including the Security Council, to make
use of the Court’s advisory function whenever possible
in order to ensure that its actions are guided by the
law and are aimed at upholding it. Both prevention and
conflict resolution demand that the greatest possible
role be given to the Court. It is also the marker that
we are being true to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
In conclusion, the only possible rules-based order is
an international law-based order. No one gets to dictate
the rules. No one should get away with breaching
them. By undermining rules that were centuries in
the making, disregarding the lessons of the past,
undermining every avenue leading towards the future,
unravelling this edifice that was built stone by stone,
8/12

02/11/2022

tragedy after tragedy and generation after generation,
and undermining the international law-based order to
advance a brute force-based chaos, no one will achieve
triumph or security. Such decisions will come back to
haunt those who make them, and they will haunt us all
if we do not stand up to them. The International Court
of Justice is our first line of defence — the more we
empower it, the safer we all are.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on this item.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to take note of the report of the International
Court of Justice?
It was so decided (decision 77/510).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of item 70.
Agenda item 71 (continued)
Report of the International Criminal Court
Note by the Secretary-General (A/77/305)
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/77/306 and
A/77/307)
Draft resolution (A/77/L.7)
Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Mali aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Côte d’Ivoire on behalf
of the African States Parties to the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) (see A/77/
PV.22). In my national capacity, following briefing
of the President of the Court on the activity of the
International Criminal Court, I would like to commend
the exemplary cooperation between the ICC and the
Government of Mali, particularly in the fight against
terrorism and violent extremism.
As members of the General Assembly know, my
country ratified the Rome Statute on 16 August 2000,
and the Court’s jurisdiction over Mali was established
on 1 July 2002. Since then, Mali and the International
Criminal Court have maintained excellent cooperative
relations, characterized, inter alia, by the signing of the
Agreement on Privileges and Immunities, in 2004; the
Agreement on the Enforcement of Sentences, in 2012;
the establishment of a country office in Bamako in
2014; and regular visits by Court officials to Mali.
22-66933

02/11/2022

It is within the framework of this cooperation that,
since 2012, the Government of Mali has referred crimes
committed in connection with the security and political
crisis in Mali to the International Criminal Court. Two
cases involving Malian citizens are currently before
it. The first involves Mr. Ahmad Al Faqi Al Mahdi,
former head of the Vice Brigade of Ansar Eddine, a
terrorist group affiliated with Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb. At the request of the Malian Government,
the Court opened investigations in 2013, after which an
international arrest warrant against him was issued on
28 September 2015. Indeed, Mr. Al Mahdi and others
were guilty of attacking and destroying, between
30 June and 11 July 2012, 10 of the most important
and well-known monuments of our beloved historic
city of Timbuktu. In this regard, I would remind the
Assembly that these historical monuments are all listed
in our national heritage registry and are considered to
be part of the common heritage of humankind. At his
trial before the ICC, Mr. Al Mahdi pleaded guilty and
was sentenced to nine years in prison for the war crime
of intentionally directing attacks against religious
and historical buildings in Timbuktu. He served his
sentence, which was completed on 18 September 2022.
I would like to commend the professionalism
and diligence with which the International Criminal
Court conducted this historic trial, which serves as an
example for humankind. I would also like to praise the
Court for the reparations order and the establishment
of a fund for the benefit of individual and collective
victims, with reparations to be paid to members of the
Timbuktu community. To date, over 850 people have
received individual reparations. Accordingly, allow me
to reiterate the gratitude of the Government and the
people of Mali to its partners, in particular, Norway
and Canada, for their support. I am also pleased to
thank UNESCO for its support for the reconstruction
of the Timbuktu monuments. Let me now take this
opportunity to invite all States parties to further support
the trust fund for victims, whose role is fundamental
and central to restorative justice, both within the Rome
Statute system and for the long-term development of
international law.
The second case before the Court involves Mr. Al
Hassan Ag Abdoul Aziz Ag Mohamed Ag Mahmoud,
former Commissioner of the Islamic Brigade in
Timbuktu, for crimes against humanity and war
crimes. In this second case, the Court sent a very
strong signal to criminals by issuing an arrest warrant

A/77/PV.27

against Mr. Mahmoud on 27 March 2018. Following
preliminary stages, the trial, which began in July 2020,
remains ongoing.
Before concluding, I would like to emphasize that
Mali reaffirms its commitment to supporting the role
the ICC plays as an independent and impartial judicial
institution in the fight against impunity for the most
serious crimes committed against humanity. The
Government of Mali hopes that the Court will work in
parallel to strengthen the capacities of national judicial
systems within the framework of the principles of
complementarity and universality in accordance with
the Rome Statute. In addition, Mali advocates building
on the ongoing efforts to improve geographical
representation and the promotion of gender in the
Court’s work. In the same vein, the Government of
Mali welcomes the progress made by the Court’s review
mechanism to strengthen the effectiveness, legitimacy
and capacity of this international judicial institution.
In conclusion, I reiterate the Government of
Mali’s continued support for the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and its cooperation with
the Court.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the observer of the Observer State
of Palestine.
Mr. Bamya (Palestine): I thank the delegations for
bearing with me speaking twice in a such a short span
of time.
We are grateful to the President of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for his briefing (see A/77/
PV.22), but more importantly for his leadership in
these challenging times. We would also like to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation to the judges
and the officials of the Court who are striving to uphold
and honour their mandate.
The words enshrined in the Rome Statute were
inspired by tragedies — terrible human tragedies,
human-made
tragedies
and
human-endured
tragedies — including those the world witnessed
during the Second World War, notably the Holocaust.
The millions of victims who had fallen were what it
took to finally convince the world to develop rules
of international law, including international criminal
law, establish criminal courts and, finally, establish a
criminal court with a universal calling.

22-669339/12

A/77/PV.27

Our collective duty is to honour all the victims
who had to fall for the ICC to finally exist. The Court
also stands for all the victims who have fallen since it
came into existence, including in the areas under its
jurisdiction, and it will continue to exist for all those it
can help to keep from becoming victims.
We owe a great deal to the legal and diplomatic
figures that helped to bring the Court into existence.
We take this opportunity to honour the memory, legacy
and, for some of them, their continued commitment
to upholding the mandate of the Court. But as we
stand in this Hall, we must acknowledge the unknown
heroes who, at the risk of their lives, cooperate with
the Court: the witnesses, human rights defenders and
representatives of civil society organizations on the
ground, who, in the face of great dangers and many
disappointments, march on.
Accordingly, I cannot but seize this opportunity
to salute from this podium the six Palestinian
non-governmental organizations that continue their
human rights and humanitarian work despite threats and
attacks against them. I salute all of them, including those
that cooperate with the Court, which is the real reason for
their having been attacked. I salute Al-Haq, Addameer,
Defence for Children International-Palestine, the Bisan
Centre for Research and Development, the Union of
Palestinian Women’s Committees and the Union of
Agricultural Work Committees. We have an expression
in Arabic in which we say,
(spoke in Arabic)
“All mountain, no wind can shake you.”
(spoke in English)
These organizations continue doing their work
despite the storm, embodying the best of the spirit of the
Rome State. I have to thank the General Assembly and
the international community for rejecting the outrageous
labelling of these non-governmental organizations as
terrorist organizations by the occupying Power, for
standing by them and for their continued support for
these organizations.
The establishment of the ICC constituted a
watershed moment in the fight against impunity for
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community as a whole — war crimes, crimes against
humanity, genocide and the crime of aggression. Its
importance lies primarily in its intention to convey to
victims anywhere that these crimes will not be tolerated
10/12

02/11/2022

and to convey to perpetrators everywhere that they
should be held accountable by national jurisdictions or
by an international court.
If we want the Court to live up to its sacred
mandate — to be a force of deterrence and
accountability — much more needs to be done. We
support a substantive increase in the regular budget
of the Court for the benefit of all situations, especially
situations where crimes are ongoing and are causing
suffering through a protracted impunity crisis. We
call on all States to help the Court fulfil its universal
calling — by not obstructing its work, cooperating with
it and acceding to the Rome Statute.
We stand ready to do our part and reiterate in
this Hall our full commitment to cooperating with
the Prosecutor in the context of investigations in the
situation in the State of Palestine. Palestinian victims
look forward to seeing the Court fulfil its mandate and
help to bring an end to decades of impunity for crimes
perpetrated against them, ushering in an era where
justice and redress are finally within reach.
It took 20 years to activate the jurisdiction of the
Court over the crime of aggression. It will remain hard
to explain to future generations why it took so much
time and effort to achieve that end for one of the original
crimes covered by the Rome Statute, when aggression is
the supreme international crime and the most unlawful
form of the use of force. This is particularly so since
aggression is so often accompanied by the commission
of other crimes falling under the jurisdiction of the
Court. It will be hard to explain the severe limitations
on the jurisdiction of the Court over this crime. Because
of the lessons of the past, the challenges of the present
and the future we want to help build, the jurisdiction
over this crime should be aligned with the jurisdictional
regime governing the three other categories of crimes.
We note with disappointment that in many debates
going on today, there is little to no discussion about
correcting this terrible mistake.
In conclusion, the words enshrined in the Rome
statute were inspired by tragedies — terrible human
tragedies, human-made tragedies, human-endured
tragedies — and words have the power we confer to
them. The Rome Statute is still, in many aspects, a
promise, a pledge yet to be fulfilled. It is our collective
responsibility to help the Court live up to this pledge
for the benefit of all humankind.
22-66933

02/11/2022

A/77/PV.27

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last statement in the debate on this topic.

disassociate itself from this resolution for the reasons it
has expressed in the past.

The General Assembly will now consider the draft
resolution contained in document A/77/L.7, entitled
“Report of the International Criminal Court”.

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the last speaker in explanation of position
after adoption.

I give the
the Secretariat.

Before giving the floor to speakers in exercise of the
right of reply, may I remind delegations that statements
in the exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10
minutes for the first intervention and to five minutes
for the second intervention and should be made by
delegations from their seats.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors
of draft resolution A/77/L.7: Andorra, Bangladesh,
Belize, Brazil, Ecuador, France, Guatemala, Honduras,
Paraguay, Peru, San Marino, Senegal, Ukraine
and Uruguay.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May
I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/77/L.7?
Draft resolution
(resolution 77/6).

A/77/L.7

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor to speakers in explanation of position
after adoption, I would like to remind the Assembly
that statements are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
I call on the representative of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Skachkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): During the debate, we set out our position
on the activity of this prejudiced, politicized and
incompetent international judiciary body. We will not
repeat what we said. Obviously, the Court does not
deserve our support. The amendments to this year’s
resolution do not reflect the reality of the situation and
create a false impression that the jurisdiction of the
Court extends to the States that are not party to the
Rome Statute. Given this, our delegation disassociates
itself from the consensus on the resolution on the report
of the International Criminal Court.
Ms. Rivlin (Israel): Israel was an early advocate
for the establishment of an international criminal court.
As a democratic justice-seeking State and the nation
State of the Jewish people, Israel remains committed
to ensuring that the perpetrators of mass atrocities that
deeply shock the conscience of humankind are held
accountable. As in previous years, Israel has decided to

Ms. Rivlin (Israel): Israel regrets that certain
actors in this Hall have once again decided to sidetrack
this annual debate for their own narrow political goals
and aspirations. As we have seen time and time again,
conflicts are not resolved unless there is willingness
on both sides to do so. A conflict cannot be solved by
a party refusing to negotiate, while at the same time
speaking on international stages and calling for justice,
nor can a conflict be solved by disseminating false
narratives and twisting legal norms for self-serving
purposes. Justice is not achieved by turning to the
commission of terrorist acts or the financing thereof or
the glorification of murder. Nor is it achieved by a State
executing terror attacks while hiding behind its civilian
population, expecting the rest of the world to do the
State’s job and protect its civilians from harm.
We urge the Palestinian representative to stand
behind the principles that he has so righteously preached
and recognize the importance of the protection of
civilians anywhere and everywhere — and not just
when it suits him to advance his country’s narrow
political goals in the media and international forums.
As we have stated in the past, we can only pave the way
to a better future for Palestinian children and Israeli
children alike when the Palestinian leadership finally
decides to cease to act unilaterally and sit down at the
negotiation table with a sincere and genuine readiness
to discuss outstanding issues and accept necessary
albeit at times painful compromises.
Israel stands ready, as always, to discuss matters
that stand at the heart of the conflict. But that cannot
be done in a courtroom; it has to be done in a more
extensive peace process, of which we have been
supportive since the founding of our nation.

22-6693311/12

A/77/PV.27

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the observer of the Observer State
of Palestine.
Mr. Bamya (Palestine): I would like to remind
the Israeli representative in which Hall we are talking.
We are talking at the United Nations. When we speak
of narrow political goals, it is disrespectful for many
delegations at the United Nations that have fought
and struggled for their own freedom from all forms
of oppression. That is not a narrow political goal; that
is one of the purposes of the United Nations — to
achieve self-determination for peoples, including the
Palestinian people.
The second element I would like to address is that
there are among us people who seem to think pursuing
peace is compatible with committing war crimes and
crimes against humanity, and there are those among us
who believe that pursuing justice helps peace. I do not
think there is an argument that says that injustice is
the way to peace. Justice is the way to peace. And we

12/12

02/11/2022

said, when we joined the International Criminal Court,
that we had decided to choose justice over vengeance.
I think that choice should be praised and not attacked
or obstructed.
I call on the representative of Israel to read the
Rome Statute. We believe in its letter and spirit. It says
that peace and justice are intertwined. It is perhaps the
only peaceful path towards protecting our people, and
calling for the protection of our people is not about
attacking anyone. We support the protection of all
civilians. We support the rule of international law. We
want what others have enjoyed — freedom and dignity
in our land.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 71?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

22-66933
