48

General Assembly-Thirtieth 'Session

2. Requests the Industrial Development Board to
report on this matter to the General Assembly at its
thirty-first session.
2420th plenary meeting
28 November 1975
3403 (XXX). United Nations Institute for
Training and Research

The General Assembly,
Recailing its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) an4 3202
(S-VI) of l May 1974 containing the Declarat10n and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New lntemational Economic Order,
Recalling also its resolution 3281 (XXIX) ~f 12_ December 197 4 containing the Charter of Econom1c Rights
and Duties of States,
Recalling further its resolution 3217 (XXIX) of
6 Novembcr 1974 on the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research,
Considering its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 197 5 which set in motion measures that form
the basis and framework for the work of the competent bodies and organizations of the United Nations
system,
l. Takes note of the report of the Executive Director of the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research;5
2. Invites the United Nations Institute for Training and Research to concentrate its work in the sphere
of economic and social training and research so as to
include specific projects on the problems. in t_he areas
identified by the General Assembly at 1ts SIX~ _and
seventh special sessions and in the relevant dec1s1ons
of the Assembly at its twenty-ninth session;
3. Expresses the hope that the United Nations Institute for Training and Research will have greater and
wider financia! support from Member States and organizations.
2420th plenary meeting
28 November 1975
3404 (XXX). Reconstitution of the United
Nations/FAO lntergovernmental Committee
of the World Food Programme as a Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3348 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, in which it endorsed the resolutions of the
World Food Conference, 6
Considering that, in paragraph 6 of resolution XXII
of 16 November 1974, the World Food Conference
recommended that the United Nations/FAO Intergovernmental Committee of the World Food Programme
should be reconstituted, so as to enable it to help to
evolve and co-ordinate short-term and longer-tcrm
food aid policies recommended by the Conference,
Recalling the resolutions 7 setting up the World Food
Programme as a programme undertaken jointly by the
United Nations and the Food and Agriculture Organi5 Of]icial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/10014).
6 See Report of the World Food Conference, Rome, 5-16
November 1974 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.75.II.A.3), chap. 11.
7 Resolutions 1/61 and 4/65 of the Conference of the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nation.s, and General AssembJy resolutions 1714 (XVI) and 2095 (XX).

zation of the UtJited Nations and establishing, for the
purpose of providing guidance on policy; admini~tration and operations, an Intergovernmental Comrruttee
of twenty-four members elected half by the Council of
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and half by the Economic and Social Council,
Concurring with the proposals made, on the recommendation of the Intergovernmental Committee, by
the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations at its sixty-sixth session and the
Economic and Social Council at its fifty-ninth session,
to reconstitute the Intergovemmental Committee so as
to ensure the effective evolution and co-ordination of
multilateral, bilateral and non-governmental food aid
programmes, in the light of the recommendations set
forth in resolution XVIII adopted by the World Food
Conference on 16 November 1974,
Desirous at the same time of maintaining as much
as possible the established rules and procedures relating to the operation of the World Food Programme,
l. Decides that the United Nations/FAO Intergovernmental Committee of the World Food Programme
shall be reconstituted as the Committee on Food Aid
Policies and Programmes, which shall comprise thirty
States Members of the United Nations or members of
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, fifteen of these membcrs to be elected by the
Economic and Social Council and fifteen by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, it being understood that outgoing
members shall be eligible for re-election;
2. Resolves that States already elected as members
of the United Nations/FAO Intergovemmental Committee of the World Food Programme, pursuant to the
provisions of previous resolutions, shall continue as
members of the Committee on Food Aid Policies and
Programmes for the remainder of their respective terms
and requests the Economic and Social Council and the
Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations to elect three additional members
each, one member each for a term of one year, one
member each for a term of two years and one member each for a term of three years;
3. Decides that thereafter all members of the Committce on Food Aid Policies and Programmes shall be
elected for a term of three years and requests the Economic and Social Council and the Council of the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to
make such provisions as will ensure that the terrns of
office of five members elected by each of the two
Councils shall expire in each calendar year;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council and
the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, when they elect members of the
Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes, to
take into account the need for the balanced representation of economically developed and developing countries and other relevant factors, such as the representation of potential participating countries, both
contributing ~nd recipient, equitable geographical distribution and the representation of both developed and
developing countries having commercial interests in
intemational trade in food-stuffs, especially those
highly dependent on such trade;
5. Further decides that, in addition to discharging
the functions hitherto exercised by the Intergovemmental Committee, the Committee on Food Aid Poli-

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

49

cies and Programmes shall help to evolv~ and. ~oordinate short-term and longer-term food a.id polIC1es
r.ecommended by the World Food Conference and shall,
in particular:
r
d
(a) Provide general guidance on the po icy, a ministration and operation of the World Food Pro-

culture Organization of the United Nations that are
not members of the Committee to participate in its
deliberations;
10. Authorizes the Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes to establish s~ch su~sidiary
bodies as may be necessary to enable it to d1scharge
its functions;

gramme;
( b) Provide a forum for intergovemmental _consultations on national and intemational food rud programmes and policies;
(e) Review periodicr .ly general trends in food aid
requirements and availabilities;
(d) Recommend to Governme_nts, thr~,ugh . t?e
World Food Council, improvements m food md pohc1~s
and programmes on such matters as pro~ramme pnorities, commodity composition of food rud and other
related subjects;
(e) Formulate proposals for the more effective coordination of multilateral, bilateral and non-governmental food aid programmes, including emergency
food aid;
(f) Review periodically the implementation of the
recommendations made by the World Food Conference
on food aid policies;
6. Decides also that the Committee on Food Aid
Policies and Programmes shall report annually to the
Economic and Social Council and the Council of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations which in considering the reports of the Committee 'shall ttl:e into account the responsibilities of
the W~rld Food Council, and that the Committee shall
submit periodic and special reports to the World Food
Council;
7. Resolves that the Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes should norm~lly hol~ regul~r
sessions twice a year and such special sess1ons as 1t
considers necessary or as called for by the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations and the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, in consultation with the Executive
Director of the World Food Programme, or on request
submitted in writing by at Ieast one third of the members of the Committee;
8. Further resolves that the Committee on Food
Aid Policies and Programmes shall be serviced by the
Executive Director of the World Food Programme, acting in consultation with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the Director-General of the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
and that in this respect the Executive Director shall be
guided by the relevant provisions of the Genera~ Regulations8 of the World Food Programme and m particular shall continue to rely to the maximum extent
possible on the technical services of the United Nations
. and its subsidiary bodies, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and other organizations of the United Nations system, without any
duplication of such services;
9. Invites the Committee on Food Aid Policies and
Programmes to adopt its own rules of procedure, which
shall be based on the rules of procedure hitherto applicable to the Intergovernmental Committee, and to
make provision for inviting States Members of t~e
United Nations or members of the Food and Agn-

11. Resolves that the appointment of the Executive Director and the administration, procedures, financing and other working arrangements of the World
Food Programme should continue to be governed,
mutatis mutandis, by the World Food Programme
Basic Documents.
2420th plenary nf~ting
28 November 1975

s Por the text, see World Food Programme Basic Documents.

3405 (XXX).

New dimensions in technical
co-operation

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and
3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order,
Recalling the consensos, annexed to its resolution
2688 (XXV) of 11 December 1970, as the comprehensive framework far the activities of the United
Nations Development Programme, as well as the voluntary and universal character of the Programme,
Recalling its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975, in particular section JI, paragraph 6,
thereof,
l. Endorses the decision adopted by the Goveming Council of the United J':l'ations Devel?pme~t Pr?gramme at its twentieth sess1on on new d!mens1ons 111
technical co-operation, which is set forth m the annex
to the present resolution;
2. Stresses the importance of applying the general
guidelines contained in that decision for the future orientation of the Unite<l Nations Development Programme;
3. Requests the Govcrning Council of the United
N ations Development Programme to review periodically
the progress in the application of these guidelines;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
give continuing attention to the assessment of the progress in the application of these guidelines and to report
thereon on a regular basis to the General Assembly.
2420th plenary meeting
28 November 1975
ANNEX
Decision of the Governing Council of the United Natione
Development P1·ogramme9

At its 487th meeting, on 25 June 1975, tho Governfns
Council of the United Nations Development Programme:
(a) Reaffirmed the consensus of 1970 10 as the comprehensive
framework for the activities of the United Nations Development Programme and also reaffirmed the voluntary and universal character of the Programme;
( b) Recalled the relevant provisions of General Assemhly
resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974
pertaining to the Declaration and the Programme of Aotion
on the Establishment of a New Inteirnational Economic Order;
9 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Fiftyninth Session, Supplement No. 2A (E/5703/Rev.1), para. S4.
10 Resolution 2688 (XXV), annex.
