Resolution11 adopted on tbe report11 of tbe Third Committee

1960 applies, with regard to such individuals alleged ,to be
responsible for crimes under article II of the Convention who
are believed to be under their territorial and administrative
jurisdiction.
2. Pending the achievement of the objectives of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV), the provisions of the present Convention shall
in no way limit the right of petition granted to those peoples
by other international instruments or by the United Nations
and its specialized agencies.

77

(b) The date of entry into force of the present Convention
under article XV;
(e) Denunciations under article XVI;
(d) Notifications under article XVII.
Article XIX
l. The present Convention, of which the Chinese, English,
Frcnch, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall
be deposited in the archives of tbe United Nations.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations sball
traasmit certified copies of tbe present Convention to ali States.

Article XI
1. Acts enumerated in article II of the present Convention

sball not be considered political crimes for the purpose of
extradition.
2. Tbe States Parties to the present Convention undertake
in sucb cases to grant extradition in accordance with their
legislation and with the ,treaties in force.
Article XII
Disputes betweeen States Parties arising out of the interpretation, application or implementation of the present Convention which have not been settled by negotiation sbal1, at the
request of the States Parties to the dispute, be brought befare
the Jnternational Court of Justice, save wbere the parties to
tbe dispute bave agreed on sorne other form of settlement.
Article Xlll
Toe present Convention is open for signature by ali States.
Any State which does not sign the Convention befare its
entry into force may accede to it.
Article XIV
l. The present Convention is subject to ratification. lnstru-

ments of ratification shall be deposited with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.
2. Accession sball be effected by the deposit of an instrument of accession with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
Article XV
l. The present Convention shall enter into force on the
thirtieth day after the date of the deposit with tbe SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations of the twentieth instrument of
ratification or accession.
2. For each State ratifying the present Convention or
acceding to it after the deposit of the twentieth instrument of
ratification or instrument of accession, the Convention sball
enter into force on the thirtieth day after the date of the
deposit of its own instrument of ratification or instrument
of accession.
Article XVI
A State Party may denounce the present Convention by
written notification to tbe Secretary-General of the United
Nations. Denunciation shall take effect one year after the date
of receipt of the notification by the Secretary-General.
Article XVII
1. A request for the revision of the present Convention
may be made at any time by any State Party by meaos of a
notification in writing addressed to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations.
2. The General Assembly of the United Nations shall
decide upan the steps, if any, to be taken in respect of such
request.
Article XVIII
Toe Secretary-Oene.-al of the United Nations shall inform
ali States of the following particulars:
(a) Signatures, ratifications and accessions under articles
XIII and XIV;

3069 (XXVIII). Elimination of all forma of
religious intolerance
The General Assembly,
Recalling article 18 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights,
Referring to its resolutions 1781 (XVII) of 7 December 1962, 2020 (XX) of 1 November 1965, 2295
(XXII) of 11 December 1967 and 3027 (XXVII) of
18 December 1972,
Reaffirming the equal importance of both a declaration on the elimination of all farms of religious intolerance and an international convention on the elimination of ali farms of intolerance and of discri.mination
based on religion or belief,
Taking into account the decision taken al its twentyseventh session to accord priority to the completion
of the Declaration on the Elimination of AII Forms of
Religious Intolerance befare resuming consideration
of the draft International Convention on this subject,
Noting that the Economic and Social Council and
the Commission on Human Rights had no opportunity
to consider properly the draft Declaration on the
Elimination of Ali Forms of Religious Intolerance 17
and to present their recommendations thereon, and
that, despite the etfórts of Member States, it has not
been possible to complete the final draft of a Declaration
during the twenty-eighth session of the General
Assembly,
Considering that the draft articles prepared by the
Working Group set up by the Commission on Human
Rights at its twentieth session, 18 and suggestions, comments and amendments thereto submitted by Member
Sta tes, 10 constitute a suitable orientation far the preparation of a draft Declaration on the Elimination of Ali
Forms of Religious Intolerance,
Believing that the preparation of a draft Declaration
on the Elimination of All Forros of Religious Intolerance requires additional study,
l. Invites the Economic and Social Council to request the Commission on Human Rights at its thirtieth
session to consider, as a matter of priority, the elaboration of a draft Declaration on the Elimination of Ali
Forms of Religious Intolerance, taking into account
the observations submitted by Governments as well as
the opinions expressed, the suggestions put forward
and the amendments submitted in the course of the
discussion of this question at the twenty-eighth session
1 7 A/8330, annex l. For the printed text, see Of/iclal Record,
of the Economic and Social Council, Thirty-seventh Session,
Supplement No. 8 (E/3873), para. 294.
1 8 A/8330, annex 11. Por the printed text, see Of/icial Records of the Economic and Social Council, Thirty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 8 (E/3873), para. 296.
10 A/9134 and Add.1 and 2.

78

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

of the General Assembly, and to submit, if possible, a
single draft Declaration to the Assembly at its twentyninth session through the Economic and Social Council;
2. Invites Governments to transmit to the SecretaryGeneral their additional comments and suggestions on
the said articles and amendments in time for their consideration by the Commission on Human Rights at its
thirtieth session;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit all
the documentation on the subject that was before the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session to the
Commission on Human Rights;
4. Decides to include in the agenda of the twentyninth session the ítem entitled "Elimination of all forms
of religious intolerance" with a view to considering,
completing and adopting, if possible, a Declaration on
the Elimination of All Forms of Religious Intolerance.

2185th plerwry meeting
30 November 1973
3070 (XXVIII). lmportance of the universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination and of the speedy granting of
independence to colonial countries and peoples for the effective guarantee and observance of human rights

The General Assembly,
Faithful to its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Mindful of the importance of the t:niversal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination and
of the speedy granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples,
Bearing in mina the Political Decla:ration adopted
by the Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Algiers from
5 to 9 September 1973, 2 º
Recalling its resolutions 2588 B (XXIV) of 15 December 1969, 2787 (XXVI) of 6 December 1971,
2955 (XXVII) of 12 December 1972 and 2963 E
(XXVII) of 13 December 1972, as well as resolution
VIII adopted by the Intemational Conference on
Human Rights held at Teheran in 1968, 21
Noting with satisfaction the Secretary-General's report of 21 September 1973 22 ,and the assistance being
given to dependent Territories by certain Governments,
specialized agencies, intergovernmental organizations
and non-govemmental organi21ations,
Disturbed at the continued irepression and inhuman
treatment inflicted on peoples still under colonial and
foreign domination and alien subjugation, including
inhuman treatment of people imprisoned because of
their struggle for self-determination,
Recognizing the imperative need to put an early end
to colonial rule, foreign domination and alíen subjugation,
1. Reaf]irms the inalienable right of ali people
under colonial and foreign domination and alien subjugation to self-determination, freedom and indepen20 A/9330 and Corr.l, p. 3.

21 Final

Act of the lnternational Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
p. 9.
12 A/9154.

dence in -accordance with General Assembly resolutions
1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 2649 (XXV) of
30 November 1970 and 2787 (XXVI) of 6 December
1971;
2. Also reaffirms the legitimacy of the peoples'
struggle for liberation from colonial and foreign domination and alien subjugation by all available meaos,
including armcd struggle;
3. Calls upon ali States, in conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations and with relevant resolutions of thc United Nations, to recognize the right
of all peoples to self-determination and independence
and to offer moral, material and any other assistance
to ali peoples struggling for the ful! exercise of their
inalienable right to self-determination and indcpendence;
4. Strongly condemns the Governments of Portugal
and South Africa, as well as all others which continue
to disregard United N ations resolutions bearing on the
right of ali pcoples to self-determination and independence;
5. Further condemns the policies of those members
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and other
countries which assist Portugal and other racist régimes
in Africa and elsewhere in their supprcssion of peoples'
aspirations for, and enjoyment of, human rights;
6. Condemns ali Governments which do not recognize the right to self-determination and independence
of peoples, notably the peoples of Africa still under
colonial domination and the Palestinian people;
7. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of Governments, United Nations agencies and intergovernmental and non-govemmental organizations associated
with the United Nations which have extended various
forms of assistance to dependent Territories and appeals to them to increase fuirther such assistance;
8. Welcomes the initiative taken by the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection
of Minorities in appointing a Special Rapporteur2:i at
its twenty-scventh session to prepare a detailed study
on the historical and current development of the right
of pcoples to self-determination, on the basis of the
Charter of the United Nations and othcr instruments
adopted by Unitcd Nations organs, with particular
reference to the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
assist the specialized agencies and other organizations
within the United Nations system in working out
measures for the provision of increased international
assistancc to the peoples _of colonial Territories;
1O. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a
report on thc implementation of the present resolution
to the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session.

2185th plenary meeting
30 November 1973
3074 (XXVIII). Princip1es of intemational co•
operation in the detection, arrest, extradition and punishment of persona guilty of
war crimes and crimes against humanity

The General Assembly,
Recalling its rcsolutions 2583 (XXIV) of 15 December 1969, 2712 (XXV) of 15 December 1970,
23 See E/CN.4/1128, part B,

resolution 5 (XXVI).
