UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
THIRTY-N.INTH

2523”

COUNCIL
YEA

MEETING:

28 MARCH

1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2523). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 22 March 1984 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/16431) e............................

1

SIPV .2523

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutioy
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2523rd
Held in New York
President:

Mr. Javier ARIAS

on Wednesday,

STELLA

(Peru).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United’
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/2523)

of the agenda

Letter dated 22 March 1984 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/16431)
The meeting

was called to order at 4.35 p.m.
Adoption

MEETING

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 22 March 1984Xrom the Charge d’affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya
to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/16431)
1. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spanish]:
In accordance with the decision taken at the 2522nd
meeting, I invite the Secretary of the People’s Committee of the People’s Bureau for Foreign Liaison of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to take a place at the Council
table; I invite the representatives
of Democratic
Yemen, Poland, the Syrian Arab Republic and Viet
Nam to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Treiki (Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya)
took a piace at the Council table:
Mr. AI-Ashtal
(Democratic
Yemen),
Mr. Natorf
(Poland), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic) and
Mr. Le Kim Chung (Viet Nam) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Councit chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spanish]:
I wish to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Afghanistan, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Ethiopia, the German
Democratic Republic, the Islamic Republic of Iran, the

28 March

1984, at 3.30 p.m.

Lao People’s Democratic Republic and Mongolia in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual practice I propose, with the
*consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zarif (Afghanistan),
Mr. Garvalov (Bulgaria)
Mr. Kovatic’
(Czechoslovakia),
Mr. Ibrahim
(Ethiopia),
Mr. Ott
(German Democratic Republic), Mr. Rajaie-Khorassani (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Kittikhoun
(Lao
People’s Democratic Republic), and Mr. Erdenechuluun (Mongolia) took the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.
3. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) [interpretation
from Russian]: The Soviet
delegation supported Libya’s request for an urgent
meeting of the Council to consider the grave situation
which has come about as a result of unprovoked hostile
actions against that sovereign, non-aligned Member
State. We believe that the request was timely, and
entirely warranted.
4. This is not the first time that the Council has had to
consider the question of infringements of the sovereignty and independence of Libya, and the situation in
that country has worsened once again. It seems to us
that in his statement before the Council the Minister of
Libya, Mr. Ali Treiki, with the facts to support him,
indicated where we can find the roots of the danger still
threatening his country and the surrounding region.
5. For a number of years now, notwithstanding
generally recognized international norms and the Charter
of the United Nations, Washington’s
policy towards
independent
Libya has consisted of overt military
preparations, economic blockade, gross provocations
and military brinksmanship,
although, obviously, these
two countries belong to quite different leagues. These
actions have been accompanied
by constant antiLibyan campaigns and by a flood of assorted fabrications and fictions concerning Libya’s internal and
external policies. These have sometimes reached absurdity.
6. Members of the Council will vividly remember
events of last year, when the United States dispatched a

large-scale naval force to Libya’s coast and, in the
immediate
vicinity of Libya’s borders, staged very
clear demonstrations
of strength with the participation
of United States troops. American reconnaissance aircraft have been sent to nearby countries with the intention of carrying out surveillance of Libya.

paign about their “fight against international
terrorism”. But if we are to talk about terrorism, as it has
become part of their State policy to do, the principal
culprit is to be found not among the developing countries-which
are vitally concerned with tackling the
serious social and economic problems facing thembut in quite different quarters.

7. The recent events in Libya demonstrate the obstinacy-which
could well be put to better use-with
which Washington has been searching for any pretext
to heat up the situation in that part of the world and for
the opportunity to create a new source of tension. In a
sort of military reflex which has become the norm for
the United States, that country has once again sent
AWACS aircraft and considerable quantities of weapons to the countries bordering on Libya, along with
emissaries whose roles reveal no experience in the
diplomatic settlement of regional problems.

12. Another example is the statement made by United
States representatives regarding their alleged devotion
to the principle of the non-use of force in international
relations. The use of this device, which was resorted
to again only yesterday in the statement made here by
the United States delegation, represents an obvious
attempt to make us forget about the speeches made in
this very chamber in October of last year, when the
question of the “glorious victory” against Grenada was
under discussion. At that time, the representatives of
the United States attempted to prove the opposite: that
the United States had every right to use force against
sovereign States whose domestic or foreign policies
were, for some reason; not to the liking of the White
House.

8. The actions of the United States in that region
cannot be seen in isolation from the general policies of
imperialist forces seeking hegemony in international
affairs or from their world-wide intention to employ
terrorism and military methods. Speaking on 2 March,
the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Mr. Chernenko,
described that policy pursued by the most aggressive
circles of American imperialism as one of overt militarism and of attempts to gain world domination, to resist
progress and to violate the rights and freedoms of peoples. Examples of the application of that policy are the
invasion of Lebanon, the aggression against Grenada,
the threats made against Syria and Cuba, and the terrorist war waged against Nicaragua. It is well known who
supplied the Israeli military and armed them with the
weapons they used and continue to use in an attempt to
annihilate the Arabs. It is obviously too early to put a
full stop at the end of that list; the list, it could be said, is
still open-ended.

13. The United States tries to pursue its policy towards developing countries under the cover of continuous propaganda vociferations about a Soviet military
threat. Clearly, the world is now aware of what is
hidden behind that smoke-screen: an attempt by the
United States to justify its own arbitrariness and violence in the international
arena by references to the
East-West conflict.
14. For its part, the Soviet Union has ceaselessly
favoured an end to diktat and to intervention
in thk
internal affairs of young independent States, to spare
them the imperialist military presence so that their peopies can develop in freedom and independence and
along a path in accordance with their own aspirations.

9. Without the least concern about the consent of
independent sovereign States, they have arbitrarily declared spheres of United States “vital interests” in
extensive regions in North Africa and the Middle and
Near East, from the Indian Ocean to the Mediter-’
ranean. One thing alone remains unclear: Does
Lebanon continue to be such a sphere, or has it just
been deleted, for reasons beyond Washington’s control? The entire region is now ensnared in a network of
numerous military bases; preparations are under way to
deploy cruise missiles in the immediate vicinity.

15. The Soviet Union firmly supports the people of
Libya and other independent, non-aligned countries,
which are defending their sovereignty against pressure
and threats.
16. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Spanish]:
The next speaker is the representative of Viet Nam.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
17. Mr. LE KIM CHUNG (Viet Nam) [interpretation
from French]: May I first, on behalf of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam, convey our deepest, heartfelt
condolences to the delegation of the People’s Revolutionary Republic of Guinea on the death of President
Ahmed SCkou Tout-e, a distinguished Guinean statesman, a great African militant and a long-standing friend
of Viet Nam.

10. It is not only the natural resources of independent
States that they consider to be “strategic”
interests,
but also international waterways: the seas and oceans
in the area are host to aircraft-carriers with contingents
of marines on board. As a recent TASS statement said,
United States actions in this region pose a direct threat
to international peace and security.

18. I hope, Sir, that you will accept our warm congratulations, as well as our best wishes, on your accession to the presidency of the Council for this month.

Il.
All these attempts to achieve their hegemonistic
purposes are cloaked in a hypocritical propaganda cam2

I should also like warmly to thank all the members of
the Council for having afforded me the opportunity to
participate in the discussion of the very important item
before the Council.

23. The danger resulting from the hostile and provocative acts of the United States towards the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya is therefore real. This is not the first
time the Jamahiriya has faced the serious threat of the
use of force by the United States. On a number of
occasions already AWACS planes have been sent to
. countries adjacent to the Jamahiriya and American
warships have been sent to its territorial waters. On
each occasion there has been no failure to provide
circumstances to serve as a pretext.

19. Since the beginning of this month we have seen a
grave deterioration
of the situation in north-eastern
Africa, because of the aggressive plans and hostile acts
of the United States towards the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. A rapid review of the following facts is enough to
persuade us of that. According to a reliable source,
which gave the news on 5 March, the United States
decided to fly weapons to the Sudan. On the same day,
the State Department made known that Secretary of
State George Shultz had sent an envoy to Khartoum to
discuss the question of American military aid to the
Sudan.

24. Indeed, this is a very familiar trick in the repertoire of imperialism
and international
reaction. Viet
Nam has already experienced such provocations, and
therefore was able immediately fully to grasp the truth
and to empathize completely with Libya in the face of
the serious danger with which it is now threatened. In
our case, it was the Gulf of Tonkin incident that in 1964
served as a pretext for the United States to launch its
dirty war in Viet Nam-the
longest and bloodiest in
contemporary history.

20. On 12 March, the United States invoked “growing
threats to security” to justify its search for ways in
which to increase the Sudan’s military strength. It was
in this context that there suddenly burst the news of an
air raid carried out by a so-called Libyan bomber on the
Sudanese town of Omdurman on 16 March at 11.30 a.m.
That was enough for the President of the United States
to decide on 18 March to send two AWACS radar aircraft to Egypt in order to violate Libyan airspace, spy
on Libyan territory and prepare for military aggression
against the Jamahiriya. On 19 March, the State Department spokesman, Mr. Alan Romberg, confirmed that
the aircraft had indeed been sent, while letting it be
known that other AWACS aircraft could be sent to the
region and that the United States was also considering
the possibility of giving longer-term assistance to the
Sudan for anti-aircraft defence.

25. What is the international community
the serious threat to the Jamahiriya?

to do about

26. First, we must strongly denounce and condemn
the hostile, provocative
acts of the United States
towards the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya as well as the
manoeuvres designed to exploit the internal problems
of the Sudan and to cause divisions between various
African and Arab countries in order to strengthen the
American military presence and interference in northeastern Africa. In this connection, my delegation is
convinced that the countries concerned can withstand
these treacherous manoeuvres and can be equal to the
task of amicably settling their family quarrel within the
Organization of African Unity and the League of Arab
States.

21. These facts, taken in their chronological
order,
tell us a great deal about the underlying reasons for the
air raid on Omdurman as well as the motives of those
who devised the incident. The story, which slanderously attributed the crime to the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, was soundly denounced and refuted before the
Council yesterday by the Secretary of the People’s
Committee of the People’s Bureau for Foreign Liaison
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. Would it not be more
plausible to see in the raid a carefully contrived scenario to make it easier for the United States to put
into effect its own belligerent and aggressive decisions to which I have already referred? The American
press itself revealed these sinister designs. The Christian Science Monitor of 21 March expressed this very
opinion.

27. Nevertheless, it should be noted that the present
United States Administration
is attempting to distract
the attention of the American electors from the recent
setbacks to United States gunboat diplomacy in Lebanon by provoking tensions and crises in various other
. parts of the world. That is why we are also seeing an
increase of military manoeuvres and demonstrations of
United States force in Central America, the Persian
Gulf, north-eastern Asia and elsewhere.
28. Next, we believe, we should demand an immediate halt to the dispatch of aircraft and weapons to the
States adjacent to the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya as well
as to all provocative acts and threats to the sovereignty
of the Jamahiriya and to the peace and security of the
whole region.

22. The truth about the raid therefore comes down to
this. A cold-blooded attack was carried out on a densely
populated part of Omdurman, while the Jamahiriya was
falsely accused of being responsible. The object was
simply to justify the sending of American AWACS
planes to countries bordering the Jamahiriya and to
make it possible for the United States to send there
even more military forces, weapons and aircraft, thus
creating a serious threat to Libya’s security and to the
peace and security of the whole of north-eastern Africa.

29. Finally, we believe that we must express our firm
support for the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, which has
every reason to bring its complaint here before the
Council in the light of the serious danger it now faces
and to claim its right to defend itself against any aggression coming from imperialist and reactionary forces.
3

30. Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom): My delegation has listened with attention to the speeches
intended to substantiate the charge made against the
United States. ,We have smelt several red herrings
being pulled across the trail. Having listened, we do not
think there is any charge to answer. Accordingly, I shall
say no more.

inated without convincing evidence. In August 1983,
the world again witnessed the deployment of a naval
task force of the Sixth Fleet, with the nuclear aircraftcarrier Eisenhower included in the group. It saw the
Bright Star manoeuvres,
with the participation
of
United States land, sea and air forces close to Libya’s
borders.

31. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Spanish]:
The next speaker is the representative
of Poland.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

38. Today AWACS aircraft are again flying reconnaissance missions. They are backed up by a group of
fighter planes. Once again unfriendly statements are
being intensified. Some of them were heard only recently in this chamber. And, as before, a campaign is
being developed with the objective of dividing the Arab
and African countries and to paint Libya black in the
eyes of public opinion and accuse it of wrongdoing
without proof.

32. Mr. NATORF (Poland): At the outset of my statement, I wish first of all to convey to the people and the
Government
of Guinea, as well as to the bereaved
family, the condolences and words of profound grief of
my delegation on the untimely passing away of President Stkou Tour& a great statesman and African
leader.

39. Today, as before, we should like to point out that
the United States is arrogating to itself the right to pass
judgement on what is right and what is wrong in the
conduct of other peoples and Governments. Since its
record of gross violations of the norms of international
law, including interference in the internal affairs of
other States and acts of open aggression, such as in
Central America, is well known, one might say that the
moral qualifications of the judge are, to say the least, in
doubt.

33. May I now extend to you, Sir, the felicitations of
my delegation on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the current month. We are gratified to
see the representative of a country with which my own
country has traditionally
enjoyed friendly and cordial
relations presiding over these meetings. Your high diplomatic skill and experience are well known, and we are
confident that under your leadership the Council will be
able to discharge its responsibilities
successfully.

40. Beyond the shadow of a doubt, all these unfounded allegations constitute an integral part of a
broadly designed propaganda offensive and discriminatory action that includes an economic boycott directed and concerted by some Western countries against
Libya because of its determined and anti-imperialist
policy. These actions and practices serve the United
States objective of further strengthening its military
presence, which has already been beefed up in the
region, in order to make up for the failure of its policies
in the Middle East. These acts illustrate the United
States policy of dealing from a position of strength, a
policy which is also being pursued in other regions of
the world, such as in Central America, to name but one.

34. I should also like to congratulate your predecessor, Mr. Shah Nawaz of Pakistan for the exemplary and
efficient manner in which he guided the proceedings of
the Council in the month of February.
35. The item on the agenda today is the letter dated
22 March 1984 from the representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya addressed to the President of the
Security Council. In this letter, as well as in a previous
letter circulated on 21 March [S/26425], the attention of
the Council and all the Member States is drawn to the
dangers stemming from the grave situation currently
prevailing on Libya’s eastern frontiers as a result of
political and military actions by the United States,.
including such actions as the continuous violations of
Libyan airspace and territorial waters.

41. The policy of military
threats, intimidation,
flexing of military muscle, economic boycott and coercion that is being carried out by the United States
cannot but cause us profound concern, for it poses a
serious threat to peace and security not only in the
region but also throughout the world.

36. It is not the first time that the Council is considering a deteriorating situation near Libyan shores and
frontiers.

42. It is the Council’s duty to consider fully the dangers stemming from these activities, which are inconsistent with.the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and designed to serve strategic interests at the
expense of others.

37. Not very long ago-last
year-the
Council was
seized of a similar complaint by Libya. As we all recall,
in February 1983 the world watched with great attention and concern the dispatch of AWACS aircraft to a
country neighbouring on Libya. It witnessed the deployment of the United States aircraft-carrier Nimitz
accompanied by some other naval vessels. It saw other
unprovoked acts that were coupled with unfriendly or
openly hostile statements and a press campaign replete
with false suggestions and alleged accusations dissem-

43. In conclusion, Mr. President, I wish to thank you
and the other members of the Council for having granted my delegation’s request to participate in this important debate and present our Government’s point of view
on the situation created by the continuing escalation of
4

military and political pressure aimed at the independent
and anti-imperialist
policy of a non-aligned State.
44. The PRESIDENT
[interprefutionfiom
Spanish]:
I should like to inform the members of the Council that
I have received a letter dated 28 March [S/26443] from
the representative of the Upper Volta. It reads as
follows:
“I have the honour to request, in accordance with
rule 39 of the Security Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, that the Council extend an invitation to
the representative of the Pan Africanist Congress of
Azania in connection with the Council’s consideration of the item before it.”
If there are no objections, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation to Mr. Gora Ebrahim
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.
It was so decided.
45. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation from Spanish]:
I invite Mr. Ebrahim to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
46. Mr, EBRAHIM:
Mr. President, allow me first and
foremost most sincerely to thank you for giving me the
opportunity to represent the oppressed, exploited and
dispossessed people of Azania-a
territory known by
its colonial name, South Africa-to
be present here this
afternoon to participate in this important discussion in
the Council.
47. I should also like to take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency-of this Council for the current month. We, the
oppressed people of South Africa, have been grateful to
your country, Peru, for your stand against apartheid
and racism.
48. The Pan Africanist Congress of Azania, the custodian of the genuine aspirations of the oppressed,
exploited and dispossessed people of Azania, asked to
address the Council during the current debate precisely
because American involvement in Africa has been detrimental to the cause of liberation. Ever since the tide of
independence
began to surge on the African continent with the independence of Ghana-then
known
by its colonial name, the Gold Coast-Africans
have
pledged to rid the continent once and for all of all forms
of colonialism,
neocolonialism,
imperialism
and racism. The tide of the African liberation struggle has been
decisively and positively expanding in territory to free
Africa, Today only Namibia and Azania remain under
colonial domination.
49. Although Africa scored great gains in the anticolonial struggle, the struggle was not an easy one, nor
is it over. Moreover the burden of the struggle was
borne by the people and their liberation movements in
their respective countries. But those countries would

not have been able effectively to carry out the liberation
struggle alone, without the active support of the member States of the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
and especially its Co-ordinating
Committee
for the
Liberation of Africa. With the assistance given to these
respective liberation movements by the Co-ordinating
Committee in the past two decades, Africa has registered significant victories in the anti-colonial struggle.
50. The just struggle waged by the national liberation
movements recognized by OAU was entirely within the
scope and ideals of the Charter of the United Nations.
The Charter upholds the right of all peoples to independence and self-determination.
51. Throughout the two decades of the just struggle
forindependence
and self-determination
of the African
continent, a struggle supported by the United Nations
and all peace- and justice-loving
peoples the world
over, what was the position assumed by the respective
American Administrations?
52. None of the recognized liberation movements received any moral or material support from successive
American Administrations.
On the contrary, those genuine liberation movements, fighting for the same ideals
that the founding fathers of the United States fought
for, were branded, and continue to be branded, as
terrorists.
53. In apartheid South Africa, every conceivable
human right is being violated by law, and the connection between the present racist rulers and nazism is not
only well known but documented. The United States,
instead of totally isolating that international
criminal,
has been conniving with that Nazi-oriented regime. It
claims that it follows a policy of “constructive
engagement” with that regime. Under this so-called constructive engagement, the racist regime is pursuing with
arrogance, and ,with this support, its aggressive destabilizing policy and compelling front-line and independent and neighbouring States to sign so-called non-aggression pacts. Moreover, the so-called constitutional
proposals which the racists have come up with are not a
step in the right direction, as is claimed by members of
the Reagan Administration,
but a move from institutionalized apartheid to constitutionalized
apartheid.
54, The policy of the Reagan Administration
in Africa
has been either to protect colonialists or racists or to
replace them politically
and economically.
United
States policies never take into account the legitimate
rights and aspirations of the wronged peoples of the
continent. If they did, that country would long ago
have invaded occupied Namibia and liberated the colonized people of Namibia from racist tyranny. Instead,
the Reagan Administration
chose to invade Grenada
under the guise that the population of the island was
oppressed or posed a threat to the United States, a
super-Power. We fail to see how the people of Grenada,
who could be easily accommodated
in two apartment
buildings on Manhattan island, could.seriously threaten
a super-Power unless it was very vulnerable.

55. On the other hand, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
especially after the September Revolution
led by
brother Muammar Qaddafi, was made a member of the
Co-ordinating Committee for the .Liberation of Africa.
One of the criteria for membership of that Committee is
experience and commitment
to the cause of African
liberation. Every recognized liberation movement on
the African continent has received assistance from the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, both through the Liberation
Committee and bilaterally. Such assistance has greatly
contributed to the cause of African liberation and will
continue to do so to remove the last bastions of Fascist
colonialism.

the representative of Pakistan, Mr. Shah Nawaz, who
so excellently accomplished his task as President of the
Council in the month of February.
61. And. finallv. I should like through vou. Mr. President, to extend my thanks to the members of the Council for giving me this opportunity to explain the point of
view of the German Democratic Republic on the issue
which is before us.
WI

62. The German .Democratic Republic follows with
great concern the events and developments in the world
which constitute a danger to international
peace and
security. At the same time, it directs all its efforts
towards contributing to the improvement
of intemational relations, the settlement of conflicts and the prevention of new ones. Today this task is much more
urgent than ever before, in the light of the dangerously
aggravated situation in the world. We therefore resolutely reject all attempts to exacerbate further this
situation and stir up new tensions. Such peace-endangering attempts are nothing less than the expression of a
policy pursued by the most aggressive circles of imperialism, in particular the United States, which is aimed
at implementing
hegemonic ambitions in whole regions
of the world and obtaining arbitrarily fixed spheres of
interest.

56. On the southern tip of the African continent, we
are faced with the most vicious and discredited enemy
the world has known since nazism. The Reagan Administration is engaged in a policy which is designed to
assist that Nazi-like regime in breaking out of its total
isolation, instead of championing the just rights of the
oppressed, exploited and dispossessed people of Azania and Ngmibia. Instead of putting military, political
and economic pressure on the racists, as called for by
the international
community,
the Reagan Administration is busy undermining
staunch supporters of the
liberation struggles in Africa such as the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya. If the Reagan Administration
is concerned
about peace and stability in Africa, it should direct its
attacks against the enemies of peace in Africa, the racist
colonial regime of South Africa, and not against independent African States.

63. The sovereign rights of peoples in those regions
are thus’ entirely denied to them, even trampled upon.
The goal is the impediment and, if possible, the liquidation of social progress in developing countries, the
guarantee of maintaining influence in the form of economic, military and political diktat. In this connection,
quite often an attempt is made to aggravate problems
existing in the relationship between individual States
and to exploit them in the interest of imperialist policy.

57. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Spanish]:
The next speaker is the representative of the German
Democratic Republic. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
58. Mr. OTT (German Democratic Republic): Deeply
moved and full of grief, I desire at the very outset to
express my sorrow at the decease of the President of
Guinea, Ahmed SCkou Tour& The unforgettable contribution made by that outstanding statesman in the
cause of peace, the unity of African States and progress
deserves our highest appreciation. His resolute actions
against all forms of colonialism
and neo-colonialism
and for the elimination of the crime of apartheid are a
striking example of an African policy that is tit-m in its
principles. In President Ahmed SCkou Tour6 we have
lost a good friend of the German Democratic Republic.
His memory will always be held in honour by the people
and Government of my country.

64. The escalation of demonstrations
of military
might by the United States not only threatens sovereign
developing countries and national -liberation ‘movements but is also directed against the socialist States.
Its purpose is to divert simultaneously
attention from
the dangers arising from the stationing of medium-range
missiles in Western Europe.
65. Mankind is thereby entering a new, perhaps the
most dangerous, phase of its development. The deployment of nuclear first-strike weapons,’ whose range includes also the region of the Middle and Near East, is
the expression of Washington’s openly proclaimed goal
of achieving strategic military superiority. Let me point
to the fact that in Sicily, only a few hundred miles away
from the Libyan coast, United States cruise missiles
will become operational at the end of this month.

59. Permit me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of March and to wish you success in the discharge of this responsible offrce. We have the expectation that under your able guidance this important body
will achieve a positive result in the deliberation of the
issue on its agenda.
60. The appreciation
Democratic Republic

,

66. In the view of the German Democratic Republic,
the most recent campaign launched against the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya also goes along those lines. ‘It tits:
completely into the global concept of Washington and
of the North Atlantic’ Treaty Organization.
Those
attacks against an Arab State again testify td the fact

of the delegation of the German
goes also to your predecessor,
6

that this region nlavs a narticular role in the United
States Adm&istratidn’s
foreign-policy calculations and
that the Arab State in question is persistently being
exposed to a policy of interference and aggression. The
range of that course goes from separate deals, designed
to divide the Arab countries, and constant provocations
to direct military intervention.

I invite him to take a place at the Council
to make his statement.

73. Mr. IBRAHIM
(Ethionial:
Yesterdav the world
learned of the sad news of the untimely death of one of
the elder statesmen of Africa, President Ahmed SCkou
Tout-e of the People’s Revolutionary
Republic of
Guinea. Though the condolences of the people and
Government of Ethiopia have already been offered to
the people and Government of Guinea, as well as to the
bereaved family, I feel it my duty to reiterate at this
juncture and from this forum Africa’s sense of loss.

67. Since Washington has not been able to achieve its
envisaged objectives in Lebanon, it now attempts to stir
up fresh conflicts in other Arab areas. Obviously, the
sending of AWACS spy planes and combat aircraft to
the north-eastern African region is designed to suit that
purpose. The concern of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
with that threat is therefore shared by many States.

74. On a happier note, I should like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the high office of President of the Council. Your performance and that of your
predecessor, Mr. Shah Nawaz, the representative of
Pakistan, who had provided the Council with wise and
effective leadership, have earned both of you our
admiration and respect.

68. The adventurous
actions undertaken
by the
United States in that region fit into the global policy of
threat, and stir up tensions as well as efforts to stifle
liberation movements. Repeated provocations against
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya are characteristic of such
actions, as are the expansion of the military presence in
the Middle East-that
is, the naval presence off the
coast of Lebanon-the
military manoeuvres in Central
America and the Caribbean, as well as the machinations
against sovereign States in Africa and Asia.

75. Once again, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has come
to the Council to complain of threats to its security and
stability. This, as we all know, is not the first time that
the Council has been seized of similar threats from the
same sources against Libya. Again, this is not the first
time many of us have participated in such debates in
order to extend our solidarity to the people and Government of the Jamahiriya.

69. How else could such action by the United States
be described than as unconcealed implementation
of
the “big stick” or “gunboat”
policy towards developing countries? Such a policy, as proved by historical
experiences and the development of international relations at present, is doomed to failure. This is guaranteed
by the anti-imperialist
struggle of the peoples in the
Caribbean and Central America, of Namibia and South
Africa, of the Arab States and other regions of the
world. The socialist States firmly stand at the side of all
those who struggle against imperialist hegemony and all
forms of colonialism and neocolonialism
and for social
progress, freedom from any exploitation,‘for
independence and a life in peace. .

76. In view of the fact that the principle of the non-use
or threat of use of force in the conduct of international
relations as well as that of the peaceful settlement of
disputes are firmly entrenched in the Charter of the
United Nations and constitute the bedrock of the present system of inter-State relations, one would have
hoped-indeed,
expected-that
those principles would
be respected and followed in the situation under consideration. To our dismay, however, the preferred
course of action appears to be to resort to a modem
version of gunboat diplomacy, which some have characterized as AWACS diplomacy,
the motivation
of
which is nothing but the intensely anti-Libyan stance of
the present United States Administration.

70. The German Democratic Republic continues persistently to follow a policy of peaceful co-operation and
the peaceful settlement of disputes. This corresponds
to a position that has been repeatedly expressed in
proposals of the socialist States for the solution of
conflicts. I may be permitted to recall that the States
Parties to the Warsaw Treaty in their Prague Political
Declaration have advocated the transformation of “the
Mediterranean Sea into a zone of peace and co-operation” [see S/15556, annex, ZZfl.

77. As you, Sir, and the Council very well know and
as the debates here yesterday and in the past have
demonstrated,
the state of relations among the countries of the north-eastern region of Africa is far from
cordial. The imperatives of international peace and security dictate that under such circumstances each and
all should exercise maximum restraint and reject foreign intervention. Nothing should therefore be done to
aggravate the already tense and difficult situation. To
our regret, however, what has so far taken place is
directly contrary to what is dictated by the situation.

71. In concluding my statement, 1 should like to assure the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya of the firm solidarity
of the German’ Democratic Republic in the resolute
rejection of all imperialist provocations and in the struggle for the preservation of its independence and national sovereignty.
72. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
The next speaker is the representative

table and

78. Instead of an easing of tension, we observe the
exacerbation of tension through intensive propaganda
campaigns and diplomatic confrontations.
In place of
the search for a peaceful solution, we see attempts at
military solutions through the introduction of massive

Spanish]:
of Ethiopia.
7

and sophisticated
military
hardware, such as the
AWACS, into the region. Indeed, the military weapons
and the preparations that are currently under way are
not only beyond the defence needs of the States in the
region but seem to have very little to do with the defence of their sovereignty and territorial integrity.

and adeptly you are performing your difftcult duties has
taught us a great deal. I should like to thank you for this
and also extend our heartfelt congratulations
to you.
I should like also to express our gratitude and congratulations to the representative of Pakistan, Mr. Shah
Nawaz, for his efficient conduct of the Council’s work
last month.

79. Those preparations, coupled with the active military intervention of the United States in the region, is
a source of great concern to Ethiopia and we believe it
is aimed not only against Libya but against other States
as well. As what happens there affects my country
directly, we in Ethiopia therefore cannot remain indifferent to recent events in the region. Indeed, it is these
same concerns that have prompted us to take part in the
present debate and call upon one and all once again to
exercise maximum restraint and seek the solution of
their differences without the intervention
of extraregional Powers.

84. This is not the first time that the Government of
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has had to request the
convening of the Security Council. Because of the constant threats, the policy of blackmaii and the hostile
actions by the United States toward the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, that State has been forced to make such
requests many times in the past. We need only remember the events of 1981, when United States fighter
aircraft shot down two Libyan aircraft over the Gulf of
Sidra, or the intimidating
show of force by the United
States Sixth Fleet off the coast of Libya last year.

80. We have been told that the need for foreign intervention and the further aggravation of the tense situation in the region arose as a result of the bombing
incident in Omdurman. As we all know, the Sudanese
Government has charged the Libyan Government with
responsibility.
Libya, for its part, has categorically denied these charges. Fortunately or unfortunately,
the
contours of this debate have been blurred by reports in
the international press. Even though this may not be the
proper context to comment on the merits of the complaint of the Sudan against Libya, we are of the view
that the Sudanese and Libyan complaints have an
organic link. What the Council does on the Sudanese
complaint, we believe, is bound to have an effect on the
complaint by Libya.

85. Today, taking its out and out anti-Libyan
campaign one step further, the United States has used a
dubious pretext-if,
indeed, this is not a pre-planned
and pre-executed act of provocation-to
bomb Omdurman, in the Sudan, a neighbour of Libya. It is absolutely
typical that on the very day after this shocking act,
which cost innocent lives, the skies of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and the airspace of neighbouring countries
were darkened by sophisticated, modem electronic reconnaissance AWACS aircraft. Conjuring up the spectre of a so-called Libyan danger, the United States has
created an air corridor into a country next to the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, through which it has funnelled a great
deal of modem weapons, military mat&iel and detachments of troops-all
of which represent a serious threat
to peace and security in that region and throughout the
world. Brazen acts of espionage are taking place over
the entire territory of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

8 1. We therefore believe it our duty to emphasize the
need for caution and for any action by the Council to be
based on adequate and verifiable data. We are also
duty-bound to call upon our brothers in both the Sudan
and Libya to settle their differences either bilaterally or
through the good offices of the regional organizations in
which they enjoy common membership. The militarization of those differences and the unwelcome intervention of an extra-regional Power is in the best interest of
neither the Sudan nor Libya and indeed poses a threat
to regional peace and security.

86. It was really quite astonishing to hear the representative of the United States revealing yesterday
[2521sr meeting] how well informed she was about
when, how many and what kind of Libyan aircraft were
flying over Libya’s sovereign airspace.’
87. Unfortunately,
actions like these on the part of the
United States are by no means isolated instances: they
are simply links in a vast chain of aggressive military
acts that form the policy of the present United States
Administration.
In the Persian Gulf, the United States
ensures so-called freedom of navigation by threatening
to shoot down aircraft which approach within five miles
of its warships. Approaches to the ports of Nicaragua
have been thickly strewn with magnetic mines. Yesterday, the representative of Nicaragua [ibid.] referred to
the tens of millions of dollars that have been allocated
by the United States Government for military assistance to those bandits whose sworn purpose is to topple
the legitimate Government
of Nicaragua. All this is
being done under the guise of so-called humanitarian
assistance to other countries. Humanitarianism
American-style, like democracy American-style,
apparently

82. Mr. KRAVETS
(Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist
Republic) [interpretation
from Russian]: The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR would like to express its
deeply felt condolences at the death of the President of
the Republic of Guinea, Mr. SCkou Tour& an eminent
son of Africa, who devoted his life to the liberation of
his and other peoples of Africa from colonial domination, and was one of the founding members of OAU and
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
83. Mr. President, your country has been the first of
the,newly elected members of the Council to have had
the honour to preside it, and for us your experience is
particularly valuable. Observing carefully how skilfully
8

still cannot even exist without some sort of direct military presence by the United States or other forms of
intervention
by that country. For some reason, the
United States found it necessary to carry out three days
of military manoeuvres in the territory of Honduras at
the precise time when elections were being held in El
Salvador.

the hands of a distinguished, greatly experienced personality with a rich diplomatic background and a long
political career.
94. I should like also to thank and congratulate your
predecessor, Mr. Shah Nawaz, representative of Pakistan, on the masterly manner in which he conducted the
affairs of the Council during the month of February.

88. One could go on listing such actions by the United
States in all parts of the world-be it the Near East or
the Far East, northern or southern Africa, Central
America or the Caribbean.

95. The Council is meeting today in order to consider
another stage in United States aggression and intervention against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. The Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya is just one of the many countries in the
world which are the targets of imperialist aggression.
No one is better informed than you, Mr. President,
about the role of the United States in Central America
and in Latin America in general.

89. The United States Administration
has coolly
arrogated to itself the right to determine whether the
Government of any particular non-aligned country does
or does not square with its concept of democracy. If it
does not, then that Government is immediately
ostracized. Governments that are bold enough to have their
own positions and policies, differing from those of
Washington, are more and more frequently now becoming subjects of pressure, malicious propaganda
campaigns, provocation and even direct military intervention.

96. International
crime is not confined simply to the
resort to prohibited weapons. Intervention in the affairs
of other nations; the imposition of puppet regimes upon
other peoples, thereby trespassing upon and violating
all their rights and prerogatives of sovereignty and independence; provocative military and intelligence operations which disturb the peace and security of innocent people-in
which the United States is definitely
a record-breaker; conspiratorial attempts against revolutionary and popular regimes such as that of Nicaragua; addressing other people by pointing guns at
them; sending helicopter gunships to various parts of
the world, as in the case of Tabas; dispatching naval
terrorist groups; and resort to sophisticated modem
piracy, as in the cases of Grenada and Lebanon: all of
these acts are criminal acts, which, due to their magnitude, are often far beyond due consideration within
international
norms.

90. In practice, this imperialist policy of the United
States is based on the already tried and tested organizational, material and technical foundations which
facilitate intervention
in the internal affairs of other
countries. As an example, we need only refer to such
organs and structures as the United States Rapid Deployment Forces and the recently formed united central
military command. The sphere of duties of this central
command comprises a considerable part of the Indian
Ocean and the Persian Gulf and, in addition, 19 States
of the Near East and North Africa. This is a threat
which also directly affects the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
91. The delegation of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic fully shares the alarm voiced by the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya at this further deterioration
of the
situation in that area as a result of the hostile and
provocative actions of the United States there. We
support the Libyan people in their efforts to offset
foreign intervention in the internal affairs of their country. An end must be put to these constant threats and
blatant military actions against that country,

97. In order to get a general picture of the criminal
record of the United States, I should like members to
consider the records of the Security Council over the
past two years. In 1982, the Council dealt with 29 items,
18 of which were related to direct or indirect involvement of the United States. In other words, more than
62 per cent of the year’s work of the Council in 1982
consisted of nothing but consideration of the involvement of the foreign policy of the United States. The
records of the Council show that in the year 1983, out
of 32 items, 23 were related to the same American
involvement. In other words, 7 1.85 per cent of the cases
referred to the Council in 1983 concerned American
foreign policy. This increase of about 10 per cent in
United States involvement
in international
crimes is
slightly higher than the annual rate of inflation in the
United States. In other words, in spite of the billions of
dollars of deficit, and in spite of unemployment
and
inflation, the record of the foreign policy makers is even
more miserable than that of those who have been defining the economic policy of the United States. Despite
this remarkable criminal record, United States officials
still shamelessly accuse Libya of being behind every
problem in the Middle East..

92. The PRESIDENT
[interprerationfiom
Spanish]:
The next speaker is the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
93. Mr. RAJAIE-KHORASSANI
(Islamic Republic
of Iran): As this is the first time my delegation has
participated in Council deliberations under your presidency, Sir, I should like to congratulate you on the way
in which you have been presiding over the Council. In
spite of all the complicated problems usually created by
the very nature of the Council, I am confident that the
difftcult task of presiding over the Council and handling
its affairs will become very easy in your skilful hands,
9

98. I should like all the distinguished, honest people in
this chamber-Council
members and audience aliketo consider the following two sentences and choose
which is the more acceptable, the more realistic and the
more honest statement. Sentence one: Libya is behind
every international
problem in the Middle East. Sentence two: The United States is behind every international problem in the Middle East. I leave it to your
consciences to decide.

structive action by the Council to prevent American
intervention and provocations in our area. I therefore
do not propose anything to the Council, particulariy
when the United States is one of the arbiters, but
I should like to warn the international
forum against
the arrogant policies of the United States. I wish also
to assure the Council that the United States is going to
suffer further defeats. It seems that the case of the
Shah has not yet taught the United States the lesson
that puppet regimes will be overthrown by their own
people and that any edifice planned on such surrogate,
servile systems will collapse and leave the United
States Administration
more frustrated. For this there is
ample evidence: in Iran, in Lebanon, in Viet, Nam, in
Latin America and in every other site of American
involvement.

99. Take another couple of sentences. Sentence one:
Libya is behind every international problem in Central
America and the rest of Latin America. Sentence two:
The United States is behind every international
problem in Central America and the rest of Latin America.
100. We might, if we wish, consider another couple of
sentences. Sentence one: Libya is alone responsible for
major international problems in the Far East. Sentence
two: The United States is alone responsible for major
international problems in the Far East.

105. We have no doubt that American plots and intrigues against the Islamic countries of North Africa, the
Middle East and elsewhere will lead only to further
American defeats and frustrations. We condemn all
conspiracies, involvements,
interventionist
policies,
provocations
and the ill-fated,
sinister military
presence of the United States in our part of the world.
We want all foreign forces, whether they be Russian or
American, out of our area, and if the Council cannot
meet this very important requirement, our people will
do it.

101. I am sure that every individual in this Chamber
could produce many more pairs of sentences which
would be as illuminating and as informative as the three
pairs I have just put forward. Therefore, we really do
not need to go into the details of political events and
military occurrences in every part of the’world; we only
need to be very simple, ordinary people who can use
their common sense. Very little knowledge is required
to appreciate the criminal record of imperialism.

106. We believe that the United States leaders must
return to honesty and wisdom. Wisdom requires them
to stop ‘their interventions
in other countries, to end
their hegemony and to reconsider their foreign policies,
instead of simply reviewing their plans and projects for
supporting and preserving their puppets. Wisdom requires them to stop distorting facts and to stop misinforming and misleading their own people. The American public is suffering from misinformation.

102. One asks oneself: What is the role of the United
States AWACS in the Middle East? What are United
States naval forces doing near Libyan waters? What are
United States terrorist forces doing around the Persian
Gulf and near the Arabian Sea? Please remember that
the foregoing examples are merely a few cases of direct
American military presence and involvement. We have
not yet touched on any of the numerous examples of
United States-orchestrated plots, conspiracies and provocations, which are usually carried out by surrogate
regimes and American lackeys, at work against popular
regimes, revolutionary
Governments
and liberation
movements.

,*
107. I submitted a questionnaire to a group of Amer- ”
ican intellectuals who have a very important role in
that society. I do not need to name them, and probably
I cannot do so, because the names are not on the questionnaire. I asked them to name five countries in the
Middle East and North Africa which are known to be
pro-American, which maintain very good relations with
the American Government and whose regimes enjoy
popular support. It was a very difficult question, was it
not? The answers that some of those intellectuals gave
me were very interesting. They named the following
countries: Egypt, the Sudan, Jordan, Morocco and
-interestingly
enough-Syria.
They simply don’t
know that Syria is well known for its anti-American
position and is a member of the front-line countries, and
therefore cannot be regarded as a pro-American country. From the viewpoint of these American intellectuals, Syria is a very pro-American country which has
very good relations with the United States and therefore has popular support. That is the level of the
political knowledge of some highly important personalities in the United States who, I can assure the Council,
have a determining role in that country’s policies. It

103. Can any member of the Council name one popular revolution-towards
which the United States has not
been antagonistic and for the eradication of which the
United States has not mobilized its sinister military,
paramilitary and intelligence forces? Why is it that in
the vicinity of every revolutionary
country there is a
neighbour which, in conformity with the foreign policy
of the United States, does not miss any chance to act
against that revolutionary,
popular regime? In this context, Libya is not the only country which has such
“friendly”
neighbours: I am sure that the cases of
Nicaragua and the Islamic Republic of Iran will not be
forgotten.
104.. With the present composition
of the Security
Council, it is far from practical to anticipate any con10

. ,.

may be understood how dangerous the situation is. The
danger results simply from the fact that misinformation
is the function of the American Administration.
This
must come to an end. Honest information must be given
to the American people so that they can participate
honestly.

“to the serious ongoing events resulting from the
dispatch of weapons and aircraft of the United States
to States adjacent to Libya with the intention of
spying on Libyan territory and preparing to launch
aggression against it” [S/Z6432].
114. We are also’aware of Libya’s concern that there
exists a dangerous situation along its eastern frontiers
as a result of the aggressive practices of the United
States against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

108. Finally, the Islamic Republic of Iran fully supports the people and the Government of Libya in their
just struggle against American imperialism.
We expect
at least some members of the Council to side with the
revolutionary people of Libya against the United States
and its lackeys. We expect at least some members of the
Council honestly to adhere to the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and to condemn the
American interventionist
policies as a major threat to
international peace and security. Therefore, I expect all
those good members not to curtail their full and unreserved support for the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

115. Of course, the Council is also aware of the fact
that Libya brought a legitimate complaint before it last
year, when United States actions threatened its sovereignty and independence.
116. The Council is now convened as a result of yet
another dangerous development that obviously transcends its local geographical character and has, in my
delegation’s view, a direct bearing on the extremely
tense situation prevailing in the Middle East. What
we are witnessing at present is yet another attempt of
the imperialist forces to destabilize the Arab world, to
exert pressure on those who consistently, and as a
matter of principle, oppose new colonialist machinations and Zionist acts of aggression. It is no accident
that once again the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.has been
*selected as the target because it steadfastly defends the
just cause of the Arab people.

109. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spanish]: The next speaker is the representative of Bulgaria,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
110. Mr. GARVALOV
(Bulgaria): At the very beginning, I should like to express the sincere and profound
sympathy and condolences of the Bulgarian delegation
on the untimely passing away of President Ahmed
SCkou Tout-e of Guinea. I should like to’ tell you,
Mr. President, and through you the people and the
Government of Guinea, that President SCkou Tour&
who was one of the founders of the Movement of NonAligned Countries, will remain in our hearts and will
always be remembered as a steadfast and indefatigable
fighter against the remnants of colonialism in Africa and
as a true son of its heroic people.

117. Libya has for some time now; and rightly so,
been complaining to the Council about the provocative
and aggressive actions of the United States against it,
including continuous violations of Libyan airspace and
territorial waters, economic boycott and misleading
information campaigns. Those hostile acts against the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya are a clear violation of the
principles and norms of international law.

111. Although this is the end of the current month,
I should like to extend to you, Sir, my most heartfelt
congratulations and express my satisfaction at seeing
you preside over the work of the Council. Your extensive knowledge in the realm of international
affairs
and your well-proven professional qualifications
are
making a valuable contribution to solving the problems
facing the Council. You represent a country with which
my country maintains relations of great cordiality and
co-operation.

118. The history of the Middle East question-and
particularly
its most recent history-unequivocally
shows that the.imperiaiist
forces have been making all
efforts to split the unity of the Arab nations and to
impose on them their economic, military and political
diktat. Their behind-the-scenes diplomacy goes hand in
hand with the policies of open aggression and military
blackmail, as practised by the United States and Israel.
119. The latest imperialist action against Libya is a
logical sequence of this approach. Its aim is to foster the
military psychosis in a sensitive region’which is in close
proximity to other regions with hotbeds of tension.
And, of course, a basic objective of the imperialist
forces is to divert the attention of the international
community from their recent fiasco in the Middle East
and to counteract that failure by increasing their military presence and exerting pressure upon States and
nations in that part of the world that are not to their
liking. The almost automatic decision to send sophisticated new American weapons and other military
equipment, including two AWACS aircraft, to be used
against Libya cannot but be construed as yet another

112. I should like also to express my gratitude to the
President of the Security Council for the month of
February, the representative of Pakistan, Mr. Shah
Nawaz, for the exemplary way in which he conducted
the Council’s proceedings.
113. The Bulgarian delegation is grateful to you, Sir,
and the other members of the Council for having
allowed it to participate in the current debate. We are
acquainted with the letter of the representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya drawing the attention of the
Council
11

muscle-flexing move by the United States in an attempt
to change the balance of forces in the Middle East.

People’s Democratic Republic. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

120. This military, political and propaganda operation
clearly stands out against the background of the defeat
of the military intervention in Lebanon. Naturally, this
is not an incidental action prompted by various circumstances. Rather, it is an offtcial policy predicated on the
use of brutal military force. The shelling of Lebanese
villages by a United States naval force, massive air
raids, the Marines’ landings in Lebanon and Grenada,
the aggressive actions against Nicaragua and Cuba and
in the Horn of Africa-all
are most eloquent examples
of that official policy. The current campaign against the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is a link in the same chain. It is
inspired by the same vested interests and is part of the
well-known mechanism of aggression.

126. Mr. KITTIKHOUN
(Lao People’s Democratic
Republic) [interpretation
from French]: It was with
great regret and sadness that we learned of the sudden
death of President Ahmed Stkou TourC, the eminent
head of State of the People’s Revolutionary Republic of
Guinea. We should like, through you, Sir, to convey
our sincere condolences to the Government and the
people of Guinea, as well as to the family of the late
President.
127. Since this is the first time I have spoken in the
Council, we congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency for this month. Aware as we are of
your broad experience and your great qualities as a
diplomat, we are sure that the Council’s work under
your guidance will provide successful results.

121. The Bulgarian delegation believes that this serious situation-which
the Libyan Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Ah Treiki, brought to the attention of the
Council in all seriousness and in a most responsible
manner-is
a threat to peace and security in the region
and in the world as well.

128. We also take this opportunity
to congratulate
your predecessor, the representative of Pakistan, on
the competent manner in which he guided the Council’s
deliberations last month.

122. As far as the position of the People’s Republic of
Bulgaria on this question of principle is concerned, it
was only recently reiterated by the Secretary-General
of the Central Committee of the Bulgarian Communist
Party and President of the Council of State of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria, Todor Zhivkov, on 8 March
last during his official visit to the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya at the invitation of the leader of the Revolution of
1 September, Colonel Muammar Qaddafi. In his speech
Todor Zhivkov said, among other things:

129; We cannot begin setting forth our delegation’s
point of view without first sincerely thanking all
the members of the Council who were kind enough to
afford us this opportunity
to participate in this very
important debate.
130. The dangerous situation that has arisen along the
eastern border of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya following
the sending there of two AWACS radar aircraft and
fighter planes by the Government of the United States
to carry out espionage activities in Libyan territory
requires the attention of the Council. The speedy dispatching of such sophisticated aircraft to carry out
activities of this kind over the territory of a Member
State is a violation of the Charter of the United Nations
and will only further exacerbate the tension prevailing
in that sensitive part of the world.

“The critical situation in the Middle East and the
vital interests of the Arab nations require strengthening the unity and united action of all the Arab
countries and forces fighting against imperialism and
Zionism.”
123. Guided by the desire to see that this military
threat hanging over the Libyan people and other peoples in the region is removed, the Bulgarian delegation
supports the request of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
that the Security Council, which bears primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security in the world, “must draw the attention of the
United States Administration
to the dangerousness of
its aggressive and provocative policy towards the Jamahiriya and in the region” [see S/26425].

131. As the Secretary of the People’s Committee
.
of the People’s Bureau for Foreign Liaison of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
reminded us this morning
[2522nd meeting] this is not the first time the Libyan
Government has come to the Council to reveal to the
world the policies of aggression of a great imperialist
Power. Those policies have been pursued against his
Government
and people since 1969, since the great
September revolution.
132. In responding to that policy of aggression, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is not alone, as some circles
might believe or wish it to be. At a special meeting on
28 August 1981, at which it considered the serious
situation arising from provocative naval manoeuvres
conducted by the United States Navy off the Libyan
coast, the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the Movement of
Non-Aligned
Countries expressed its full solidarity
with the Jamahiriya and made an appeal to all non-

124. The Bulgarian delegation also shares the view
that what is needed at present is common sense, goodwill and concerted efforts by all States concerned, as
well as by the international
community,
in order to
prevent a new military confrontation in the region the
consequences of which might indeed be unpredictable.
125. The PRESIDENT
[i&erpretation
from Spun&h]: The next speaker is the representative of the Lao
12

aligned countries to resist the provocations and challenges, which were a most dangerous precedent in international relations.

shaky complaint of-the plaintiff, there remain serious
doubts about the facts. In support of the outlandish
allegation of Libyan aggression, presumptions
have
been the basis of argument, not facts. If in fact damage
has been caused, there has been no proof that such
damage was caused by Libyan aircraft.

133. Not so very long ago we too were victims of
American aggression, and for that reason we thoroughly sympathize with the Libyan complaint. Under
the leadership of the Lao People’s Revolutionary Party,
our people inflicted a humiliating
defeat on the occupying forces and their lackeys in 1975 and succeeded in
liberating our country completely and establishing a
new regime. We had hoped that a new era of peace,
freedom and justice would result. But since then our
people, like the Libyan people, have become a target
for the reprehensible plans for subversion and sabotage
being perpetrated by the imperialists in collusion with
the hegemonists.

137. Arguments are valid only when based on concrete facts, and, frankly, my delegation has considerable difficulty understanding or following the logic that
has been used in speedily providing every support,
including military
support, to the -plaintiff, whose
accusations against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya are
based on unlikely hypotheses. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is a small country that cherishes peace and is
proud of its independence and its steadfast support for
the movements of peoples struggling to be free.
138. The United States is often placed in an awkward
position because of its warlike behaviour, and there are
good reasons to believe that the United States, in its
dispute with the small but courageous Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, is engaged in exploiting to the maximum in
its favour the complaint of the Sudan in order to score
political and diplomatic points. The startling announcement of the dispatch of the AWACS radar aircraft
and support interceptors near the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, which is very revealing of the attitude of the
United States that it should be policeman to the world,
has therefore very little to do with the attack in the
southern Sudan that has been referred to. This rapid
dispatch of AWACS radar aircraft is actually an integral
part of America’s policy against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and is not an isolated act or one of happenstance.

134. The imperialist strategy to dominate the world
-and there can be no doubt about this-has been and
indeed always will be perfectly clear. To carry out this
treacherous strategy, imperialism strikes-or
waits for
a right opportunity to strike-all
peoples that are unwilling to accept its policies and to serve its interests.
No campaign of disinformation
or calumny can hide
that insatiable appetite. But the winds of change continue to blow, and peoples remain unswerving in defence of their freedom and in their struggle for emancipation.
135. We are supposed to believe that the’sending of
AWACS radar aircraft and American fighter planes was
linked to an alleged Libyan attack in the southern part
of a neighbouring country. This old argument, which
has been trotted out once again, is all too familiar to the
members of the Council. It will be recalled that those in
charge of American defence declared last year that the
movements of the American Sixth Fleet and AWACS
aircraft were linked to the alleged, mobilization
of
Libyan forces along its border with the Sudan and a
planned intervention
in that country and that the
movements of AWACS aircraft were part of joint manoeuvres with Egyptian troops. Curiously, following
that declaration, the Egyptian Government denied the
existence of any such manoeuvres. On 18 February
1983, The Christian Science Monitor even declared that
Egyptian leaders had said that they knew nothing about
any recent Libyan mobilization against the Sudan. That
is the kind of fabrication that has been concocted
against Libya. Imperialism
has been trying to deceive
the world with such fabrications to prepare it for its
attacks on the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

139. In support of his thesis-which
we consider to be
quite likely-in
his statement in the Council in February 1983, when presenting his complaint, the representative of Libya quoted the following passage from
The New York Times: “The plan, according to
American officials, was to lure Libya into striking and
then to destroy as much of its air force as possible”
[2415th meeting, para. 261.
140. In the final analysis, the Government
of the
United States has long been persistently preparing
American and world public opinion for its acts of
aggression against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. But the
world will not be taken in by this. Neither eloquence
nor demagoguery can possibly conceal the truth. In
view of its military power and harassed by its deepseated hatred of the peoples of the world which refuse
to bow to its will, the United States Government,
to
the surprise of all peace-loving States, has already
launched a serious invasion against the small island of
Grenada, after long years of patient and active preparation. Hence, there is every reason to believe that,
encouraged by this legendary victory over Grenada, the
United States Government,,in
its machiavellian
plans,
to put down with the use of force any hint of resistance
anywhere, is now eyeing another target-the
Libyan
people-as
it tries to realize its ambition for world
hegemony.

136. Yesterday, when the Council was considering
the Sudan’s complaint, which enjoys the vigorous support of the United States, my delegation did not intend
to participate in the debate. As a small country with a
population of nearly 4 million, it is our strong intention
vigorously to defend the sacrosanct principles of the
Charter, in particular the non-use of force and noninterference in the internal affairs of other countries.
But in that particular case, notwithstanding the long but
13

141. All the anti-Libyan
propaganda in the Council
should deceive no one. It is part of the litany in which
some imperialist circles have customarily engaged in
order to conceal the facts and divert attention. The
alleged Libyan aggression against its neighbours exists
only in the minds of those who disregard both the facts
and the likelihood of hypotheses. In our humble opinion, this myth is truly a figment of one’s imagination, for
Libya has only about 3 million inhabitants and it is
unlikely that it would invade its two neighbours to the
east whose populations number 70 million. Resorting to
sophistry and rhetorical flourishes to divert public
opinion from the true problem or the real situation
prevailing in that part of the world is like trying to put
out a fire but ignoring its source.

aggression and a flagrant violation of the Charter of the
United Nations and the charters of the regional organizations and norms of international
law, as well as a
threat to the security, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Sudan. Out of respect for the Council and so
as not to waste its time, we shall not reiterate the facts
of the case.
147. Secondly, the complaint by Libya was lodged
immediately
after the complaint
by the Sudan to
the Council in, which it, having conclusive evidence,
charged Libya with responsibility
for the air raid
against Omdurman.
Therefore Libya requested the
convening of the Council in order to divert attention
from its aggression against the Sudan and to create a
smoke-screen to hide the facts in a desperate attempt to
let its aggression pass unheeded and to deceive world
public opinion.

142. In support of the struggle of the Libyan people,
we would ask the Council, which is resuonsible for the
maintenance of international
peace and security, to
take appropriate action to put an end to these imperialist adventurous machinations.
That would pave the
way for the Libyan people to pursue its development
and national reconstruction
in peace, freedom and
honour.

148. Thirdly. this is not the first time that Libva has
resorted to such a practice. The records of the Council
prove beyond any doubt how, for the same reasons we
have just mentioned,
Libya attempted, after Chad’s
complaint against it last year, to call for the convening
of the Council to consider its complaint
against a
permanent member of the Council. Today is just like
yesterday and we are fully confident that the representatives of the international community will not be deceived by such methods and practices.

143. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spanish]: I should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have just received a letter from the representative
.of the Sudan in which ,he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion without the right to vote,
in conformity with the relevant’provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President,
took a place at the Council table.

149. Fourthly, Sudan’s resort to friendly sister countries for the provision of the means to defend its territory and citizens is a legitimate right ensured by the
charters of regional organizations,
the Charter of the
United Nations and the principles of international law,
particularly as it has become evident that the flagrant
intervention in its internal affairs is part of the ongoing
efforts to undermine its security, national unity and
stability, as well as the development projects on its
territory.

Mr. Birido (Sudan)

144. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spunish]: I call on the representative of the Sudan, who
wishes to exercise the right of reply.

150. In conclusion, the Sudan, which has reiterated
its belief in the priorities of reconstruction and development, in the necessity to mobilize energy for comprehensive development objectives and in the rejection of
aggression and interference in the internal affairs of
others, emphasizes that the observance by others of
those priorities will contribute to achieving the necessary potential and ensuring the benefit of ail people. If
Libya had adhered to these principles and objectives,
there would have been no need to have convened a
meeting of the Council yesterday and there would never
have been any justification
for convening a meeting
today, because the whole question is one offlagrant and
continued aggression and a desperate attempt to hide it.

145. Mr. BIRIDO
(Sudan) [interpretation
from
Arabic]: We have asked to be allowed to speak in
exercise of the right of reply because of the references
made to the Sudan by Mr. Ah Treiki, the Secretary of
the People’s Committee
of the People’s Bureau for
Foreign Liaison, and others speakers, and should like
to make the following observations.
146. First, having listened yesterday to the statement
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of my country in the
Council [252&h meeting] concerning the aggression
launched by the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya-an
air raid
against our national capital-I
need not dwell at length
on the subject. The Sudan, with all objectivity and
tranquillity,
has presented the full facts to the representatives of the international
community in this forum.
The statements by some members of the Council and
other friendly and fraternal countries have shed more
light on the seriousness of the air raid as an act of

151. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spunish]: The Secretary of the People’s Committee of the
People’s Bureau for Foreign Liaison of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya has asked to speak. I invite him to
make his statement.
14

.

aware of the danger represented by the policy of invasion, aggression and interference practised by the
United States, it cannot now take the proper decisions;
but the day will come when the Council will be able to
shoulder its responsibilities
vis-h-vis the maintenance
of international peace and security.

152. Mr. TREIKI
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) [inierpretation from Arabic]: I regret to have to speak at this
late hour. I promise to be brief. I only wanted to clarify
some matters in the light of what was said by the representative of the United States this morning.
153. What he said this morning in such a cavalier
way-that
the AWACS aircraft are unarmed planes,
spy planes that are being sent to other countries to spy
on them and to prepare the ground for aggression, and
that the Security Council should condone such behaviour-reminded
me of the time when, after the General
Assembly passed a resolution condemning the United
States invasion of Grenada, President Reagan said that
he suffered no loss of appetite as a result. That reminded me to what extent the United States or its
Administration
cares about the United Nations or the
Security Council.

158. This recklessness and nonchalance, these constant acts of aggression against small countries and
peoples are part of an invariable, systematic policy
pursued by the United States Administration.
What
would the world be like if that Administration
were the
only one having any strength? That would mean .the
total destruction of our world. The people of Japan are
still suffering from the destructive consequences of the
nuclear attack which occurred when the United States
was the only country possessing the nuclear weapon.
What would happen today in the world if the United
States Administration
were still the only one possessing
the nuclear weapon?

154. Many friends here have referred to the long list of
condemnations of the United States Administration
by
the Council and by the United Nations in general, but
pride of its military force and the desire to dominate
have prevented that Administration
from seeing things
as they are and from respecting the United Nations.
The United States seems to have forgotten that even
though the United Nations, because of circumstances
and in spite of the scores of resolutions condemning
that country, is incapable of deterring its aggression,
the people themselves can bring this about. I should like
to remind the representative of the United States of
what happened in Viet Nam, in Iran, in Cuba and in
Lebanon.

159. I should now like to comment on something said
by my brother, the representative of the Sudan-I
say
“my brother”
because, while one chooses one’s
friends, one cannot choose one’s brother. He said that
the complaint of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya had been
presented as a reaction to the complaint made by the
Sudan. That is quite true. We did present our complaint after the dispatching of American forces and the
AWACS aircraft to the Sudan. But we did not do that to
hide the truth in any way. In conformity with the mutual
defence pact of the League of Arab States, both the
Sudan and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya are duty-bound
to struggle against the United States aggression.

155. He may also recall that when the United States
tried to invade Libya in 1805 and sent in its destroyer
Philadelphia,
under the command of Captain Bainbridge, that ship was destroyed off the Libyan coast,
thus putting an end to United States aggression. To this
very day, however, the anthem of the United States
Marines contains the words “From the halls of Montezuma to the shores of Tripoli”. I should like to remind
him-perhaps
he was in the United States Marinesthat the anthem still exists. May I remind him also that
when, in the same year, the United States tried to
invade Libya from the east in an expedition led by
General Eaton, the expedition was destroyed at Dema.
History can repeat itself.

160. The reuresentative of the Sudan referred to’the
assistance of-friendly, fraternal countries. He did not,
however, say that the United States was a friendly
country. He could not say that, because the United
States is in fact an enemy of the Sudan, just as it is an
enemy of Palestine, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Nicaragua and other countries. What friendly countries did
he have in mind? Was he referring to those who helped
the Zionists to occupy Palestine? Was he referring to
those who bombed the Egyptian people and tried to
destroy them? Was he referring to those who helped the
Zionist entity to occupy southern Lebanon? Have these
enemies suddenly become the friends of the Arab nation? They wilt become friends only if they change their
policy and choose a policy serving justice.

156. We are a small people. We have resort to the
United Nations, whose Charter and resolutions we respect, but we are determined to live in freedom and to
die with our boots on. We shall not bow to threats or
aggression. Let our enemies realize that we are fully
determined to thwart any American aggression against
any Arab territory. The defeat inflicted upon the United
States by the small heroic people of Lebanon will be
suffered by it again, this time at the hands of the people
of the Sudan and of Libya and by all the Arab peoples.

161. The representative of the Sudan says they are
friends because they gave assistance to the Sudan. But
assistance against whom? I consider that a regime is
doomed that cannot defend itself from its own people
but seeks help from a foreign country which is an enemy
of its country and people; it certainly does not deserve
to represent the people that it claims to represent.
162. Is it compatible with the policy of non-alignment
to ask for assistance from the United States, a country
friendly to South Africa and Israel and which is stirring
up antagonism against a sister Arab country? I put that

157. As the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran said, we know that although the Council is well
15

question to the representative of the Sudan: I dare him
to state publicly that the United States is friendly to the
Sudan. For, in his heart of hearts, he knows that he
cannot say it.

of the third world is doomed to failure. Arrogance has
its limits. We witnessed the fate reserved for Hitler,
and we shall witness the fate reserved for American
aggression.

163. The hostile United States policy of aggression
against the Arabs, Muslims, Africans, and other people

The meeting

16

rose at 7 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore
or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sent en vente dam les librairies et les agences dipositaires
du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Gentive.
KAK

COMO

HOXY’IHTh

CONSEGUfR

ZIBAAHHJi

OPrAHUB.SIXHU

PUBLICACIONES

OI;?.E:lAHEHHhIX

DE LAS NACIONES

HAILHR

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirljase a: Naciones Unidas. Section de Yentas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00400

90-61313~January

1993-2.050
