XI
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORT OF THE JOINT SECOND AND THIRD
COMMITfEE AND THE F'IFTH COMMITfEE, MEETING JOINTLY
411 (V).

Administrative budgets of the specialized agencies

The General Assembly,
Having received the sixth report1 of 1950 of the Advisory Committee on Administrative an_d Budget~ry
Questions on the budgets of the specialized agencies
for 1951,
1. Urges the specialized agencies to intensify their
efforts to stabilize their regular budgets by the elimination or deferment of less urgent projects;
2. Draws the attention of all States Members of the
United Nations and of the specialized agencies to the
necessity for prompt payment of contributions to assure
the adequate financing of budgets approved by them;
3. Requests specialized agencies participating in the
technical assistance programme to provide information
concerning the estimates for expenditure of technical
assistance funds, as well as other extra-budgetary funds,
in their regular budget documents, and to agree to the
transmittal to the General Assembly of the United
Nations, for examination and approval, of the audit
reports relating to expenditure of technical assistance
funds allocated from the Special Account after approval
of the appropriate audit reports by the general conferences of the specialized agencies ;
4. Requests the specialized agencies to consider at an
early date the adoption of common financial regulations
and staff regulations modelled on those adopted by the
General Assembly, so far as their constitutional arrangements will permit;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the heads of the specialized agencies, to pay particular attention, in 1951, to the further development
of satisfactory arrangements for the provision of common services, particularly in respect of regional and
branch offices of the United Nations and specialized
agencies, with a view to achieving greater efficiency and
economy;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, after consultation
with the heads of the specialized agencies and with the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, to report to the next regular session of the
General Assembly in respect of progress made in
achieving a common salary system, in developing com?10? budg~tary polic_i~s a?d a common form. of budget,
m mcreasmg the utilization of soft currencies, in effi1 See

document A/1441.

ciencies and economies to be achieved through further
development of common services, and in dealing with
arrears in contributions ;
7. Requests the specialized agencies and the United
Nations to make every effort, during 1951, to meet as
fully as possible demands for expert assistance in Korea
and other operational programmes where the need is
urgent, by deferment of less urgent projects.
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.

412 (V). Utilization of the services of the
United Nations Investments Committee by
specialized agencies

The General Assembly,
Noting that certain specialized agencies may require
advice on the nature and extent of investment of their
funds,
1. Authorizes the United Nations Investments Committee to provide advice to a specialized agency at the
request of that agency ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the
specialized agencies that the United Nations Investments Committee is available for this purpose.
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.
413 (V).

Recalling its responsibilities under Article 17 paragraph 3, and Article 58 of the Charter,
'
Recalling its resolution 310 (IV) declaring that the
resources devoted to the economic and social work of
the United Nations and the specialized agencies should
be concentrated on tasks of primary importance,
Taking note of the work of the Economic and Social
Council at its eleventh session 2 in determining criteria
for establishing priorities within the fields allotted to
the various bodies composing and associated with the
United Nations,
Recognizing that the successful carrying out of the
economic and social work of the United Nations and the
specialized agencies may be jeopardized by undertak2

36

Concentration of effort and resources

The General Assembly,

See Economic and Social Council resolution 324 (XI).
