UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY C6UNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l922/Rev.

1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 3 May 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12066) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1922

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1922nd MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 26 May 1976, at 3 p.m.
President:

Mr. Louis de GUIRINGAUD

(France).

with all members of the Council, I am authorized
President to make the following statement:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

“Following
the request submitted by Egypt on
3 May 1976 [S/12066], the Security Council held
seven meetings between 4 and 26 May to consider
the situation in the occupied Arab territories. After
consulting all the members, the President of the
Council concludes that the majority of the members
agreed on the following.

agenda (S/Agenda/1922/Rev.l)

“Grave anxiety was expressed over the present
situation in the occupied Arab territories; concern
was also expressed about the well-being of the
population of these territories.

of the agenda

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 3 May 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Egypt to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/12066)
The meeting

“The Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August
1949,’ is applicable to the Arab territories occupied
by Israel since 1967. The occupying Power was
therefore called upon to comply strictly with the
provisions of that Convention and to refrain from
and rescind any measure which would violate them.
In this regard, the measures taken by Israel in the
occupied Arab territories which alter their demographic composition or geographical character, and
particularly the establishment of settlements, were
deplored. Such measures, which cannot prejudge
the outcome of the efforts to achieve peace, constitute an obstacle to peace.

was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
Adoption

as

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 3 May 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Egypt to the United Nafions
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12066)

“The Security Council
the situation closely.”

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with the decisions taken earlier [I916th
to 1918th and 1920th meetings], I shall now invite the
representatives
of Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalla, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic and Yemen, as well as the representative of
the Palestine
Liberation
Organization
(PLO),
to
participate in the debate without the right to vote.

should continue

to follow

3. Mr. JACKSON
(Guyana): Mr. President, the
manner in which you have guided our business
eloquently confirms our expectations of your abundant talent as a wise, mature and skilled diplomat.
I am deeply conscious of the honour bestowed on the
Council by your mature and constructive
superintendence of our deliberations.
My delegation pledges
its continued
co-operation
with you during the
remainder of this month.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. t-lerzog
(Israel) and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
Organization) took places at the Council
table and
Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Sharaf (Jordan),
Mr. Bishara (Kuwait), Mr. Jamal (Qatar), Mr. Baroody
{Saudi Arabia), Mr. Hussen (Somalia), Mr. Medani
(Sudan), Mr. Allaf (Syrian Arab Republic)
and
Mr. Sallam (Yemen) took the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber.

4. I should also like to take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Huang Hua of China for his able leadership during the month of April.
5. The return to the Council of Ambassador Malik
of the Soviet Union is a source of comfort and
satisfaction to my delegation. The news of the unfortunate accident of which he and his wife were victims

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
As a result of consultations
over which I presided
1

.

distressed us all. We are pleased by his recovery and
would ask him to convey our kind regards to
Mrs. Malik.

developments in the territories under its occupation.
Its dependence on violence and its retreat from reason
have served to stiffen the resolve of the Palestinian
people and to quicken the conscience.of the intemational community.
Of equal concern is the fact that
the occupying Power does not seem content with its
physical violence against the Palestinian people. It
continues its work of cultural violence.. Displaying
insensitivity to the basic rights of a people, the Israeli
authorities countenance provocative acts by religious
zealots who arrogantly assert a claim to the land of
others. The .Govemment
of Israel has declared its
intention to proceed with the establishment
of more
settlements in defiance of the resolutions adopted by
both the General Assembly and the Security Council.

6. May I also extend a sincere word of welcome to
Ambassador Abe of Japan and Ambassador Illueca of
Panama. I am sure they will maintain the impressive
standards that have been set by their .predecessors.
I look forward to fruitful co-operation with them in the
work of the Council.
7. The central issue of the Middle East question has
once more been brought sharply into focus by our
current series of meetings on the highly’charged
situation in the Arab territories occupied by Israel. The
protests and demonstrations
of the Palestinians
in
the West Bank reflect the tension which inevitably
flows from alien military
occupation.
And those
demonstrations
underline the tenacity with which the
Palestinian patriots ,are determined, in the face of an
intransigent
occupying Power, to struggle for their
right to be free and to give full expression to their own
national identity.
An acute consciousness of this
identity
and an uncompromising
identification
of
its political representatives
have been dramatically
reinforced by the outcome of the recent elections on
the West Bank.

12. The Council will meet later this’,month
as the
mandate of the United
Nations
Disengagement
Observer Force expires. This development,
together
with the situation with which the ‘Council recently was
concerned,
underscores a disquieting
reality-the
dangerous pause in the search for a solution of the
Middle
East problem,’
including
the Palestinian
question, and the ominous implications
this apparent
stalemate has for global peace and security.
13. The situation we are facing today reveals the
limitations of the measured,,but halting, steps that have
so far been taken, in the search for a final Middle
East settlement.
These particular
initiatives
have
resulted in temporary
and partial solutions.
My
delegation recognizes that such achievements,
while
limited, have served a useful purpose in reducing
tensions in the area of conflict. But such restricted.
progress, in so far as it has failed to achieve the central
goal of a permanent overall settlement based on justice
and equity, has inevitably given rise to frustration and
impatience:

8. It was just about two months ago that the Council
met to consider the deteriorating
situation in the
occupied territories. At that time some members of
the Council presented modest proposals, proposals
which, in a spirit of compromise and accommodation, . had been subjected to significant modification
so thdt in’%%
final form they could be said, in a
certain sense, to have given only a partial response
to the gravity of the situation. Those proposals,
however, attracted a crucial dissenting vote.
9. It is not surprising, in the view of my delegation,
that subsequent developments in the Arab lands under
Israeli occupation have led to a worsening of the
situation. To the Council’s failure to respond to the
conditions
prevailing
then have been added the
exacerbating actions of the occupying Power as it
attempts, by the use of oppressive force, to crush
the continuing manifestations of Palestinian patriotism,
.manifestations which have been fuelled by the legitimate desire of a people to protect its property and to
defend its national rights.

14. The principles for a just settlement have been
established by the international
community and have
been reiterated in different international
forums on
numerous occasions. They reaffirm the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by the use of force,
recognize the rights of Palestinians to a national home
and acknowledge the right of all States in the area to
exist within secure boundaries. The implementation
of these principles, however, still proves elusive. As
long as they continue to remain abstract elements of a
protracted debate, so much closer are we brought to
the fearful reality of renewed and perhaps generalized
conflict.

10. The developments
in the West Bank cannot be
explained away by alleging the sinister incitement by
outside forces. The reasons for the disturbances are
clear. They lie in the very nature of occupation-its
distorting process, its seemingly indefinite extensionand they lie as well in the determined
Palestinian
resistance to circumstances the continuance of which
they justifiably refuse to accept.

15. .The prospects for peace are not helped by
passivity and resignation
to the status quo. It is
therefore time to recapture the impetus and,to regain
the momentum
for bringing about a final solution to
the Middle East question. When a fresh search for a
permanent
solution is embarked
upon, let those
principles laid down by the international
community
be the essential guidelines.

11. My delegation must express its profound concern
at the nature of the occupying Power’s response to the
2

16. To speak of the urgent need for a Middle East
solution is indeed superfluous. The urgency is selfevident. What is required is positive and determined
action which sets in motion the mechanisms that will
lead to negotiations for a permanent political settlement of the Middle East problem, including, importantly, the Palestine question.

manner to minimize the problems which face Israel.
My delegation strongly hopes that Israel will now be
more sensitive to the deteriorating
situation in the
occupied areas. My delegation hopes also that the
Government
of Israel will realize that the situation
would not have worsened as it has if Israel had
complied with the provisions of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War. We therefore urge Israel, which is a party to
the Convention, to comply with it scrupulously.

17. It is the hope of my delegation that the statement
which you, Mr. President, read out a while ago will
have some effect in deflecting the Israeli authorities
from their chosen path of obstinacy and petulance.’

23. My delegation cannot fail to note that the settlement policy of the Israeli Government in the occupied
Arab territories is another cause for aggravation of
the tensions in that area. Recently we have obtained
reports of Israel’s renewed intention
to set up
settlements in the occupied Arab territories. If those
reports are correct it would be very regrettable, for
such actions would give rise to increased fear and
concern among the inhabitants and also among the
Arab parties directly involved and would constitute
another obstacle to a solution of the problem.

18. Mr. ABE (Japan) (interpretation
from French):
Mr. President, since I am speaking before the Council
for the first time, I should like to express to you,
albeit belatedly because of inevitable circumstances,
our congratulations
for your accession to the Presidency of the Council this month and our gratitude for
the impeccable manner with which you have conducted its business.
19. I should also like to take this opportunity to thank
my colleagues for the kind words they have addressed
to me.
[The speaker

continued

24. My delegation wishes to call upon Israel to
abandon immediately
the settlement policy in the
occupied territories. Clearly, the principal cause of
the recent deterioration
in the situation is the continuation of the occupation. It is also obvious that the
situation in the occupied territories will not be solved
in isolation but within the framework of an overall
settlement.

in English.]

20. My delegation agrees with the statement read out
by the President to conclude our debate, and we wish
to express our gratitude to him for the great efforts
he made to this end. In spite of the conclusion of the
debate, I think the Council should bear in mind that
the situation in the occupied Arab territories has been
deteriorating
already for some time, and there is no
reason for optimism about an immediate improvement
as a result of the President’s concluding statement.
The Council should therefore continue to follow
developments
with the same alertness and vigilance
as before, in the hope that the situation in the occupied
territories will take a turn for the’better.

25. In the view of the Government
of Japan, the
following principles should be adhered to in .achieving
a peaceful settlement of the Middle East pro&em:
first, the inadmissibility
of the acquisition and occupation of any territories
through the use of force;
secondly, the withdrawal of Israel’s forces from all
the territories
occupied in the 1967 war; thirdly,
respect for the integrity and security of the territories
of all countries in the area, including Israel, and the
need for guarantees to that end; and fourthly, recognition of and respect for the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, in bringing about a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.

21. We have heard the various statements made at
recent meetings by the parties directly concerned and
also by members of the Council. We have listened
with close attention always in the strong hope and
expectation
that they would make the Council’s
deliberations
more meaningful and contribute to its
joint efforts to find a peaceful solution to the problem.
My delegation has felt the need for more detailed and
more accurate information on the situation as a whole,
including incidents and the measures being taken by the
occupying Power. Although
sufficient information
was not at hand, it is obvious that the situation has
deteriorated. My delegation deplores the occurrence
of a number of tragic incidents, with the resulting
bloodshed, in the occupied Arab territories. We wish
to extend our deep sympathy to the victims.

26. The Government of Japan has consistently hoped
that a just and lasting peace iir the Middle East will
be achieved through the prompt and complete implementation of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), as well as through recognition of the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people in accordance with the Charter.
27. The Government of Japan deeply regrets that the
negotiating process for a peaceful solution is at a
standstill.
If the present stalemate continues,
the
momentum
in the search for a peaceful solution of
the Middle East problem may be lost. In those circumstances, my delegation wishes to draw the Council’s
attention to its heavy responsibility,
which is to make

22. It is worth noting the statement by the representative of Israel of 5 May [1917th meeting] to the effect
that he was not for a moment endeavouring in a facile
3

every effort to bring about moderation and reconciliation among the parties, thus leading to an improved
prospect for a just and durable settlement.

commitment
to Zionist aggression, but by considerations of right and justice and an honest quest for
peace.

28. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic):
First,
I should like to express my delegation’s and my own
appreciation and thanks to you, Mr. President, for your
leadership in this debate and your sincere efforts to
bring it to a conclusion.

33. Mr. SCRANTON
(United States of America):
First, I wish to say that the statement I am about
to make will clearly indicate, I believe, that the United
States is not unrelentingly
supporting “Zionist aggression”, nor is it taking its position because of internal
matters within the United States but rather because it
believes thoroughly that in any matter coming before
the Council it is important that we have a balanced
answer, particularly as the Council is instructed by theCharter to think first and foremost of peace.

29. We wish also to extend our appreciation to the
friendly non-aligned and other countries which worked
so hard to try to make the conclusion of the debate
a meaningful one. Unfortunately,
their efforts have
not resulted in the achievement of all we had hoped
for and all they were supposed to achieve.

34. Mr. President, my delegation has disassociated
itself from the statement you have read out, which
represents the view of the majority of the Council’s
members. As you know from views that my Govemment has expressed on past occasions in this chamber
and elsewhere, there is much in the statement of
the majority view with which we could agree. We
agree, for example, that the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War is applicable to the territories occupied by
Israel since 1967. We believe in the importance of
following its prescriptions.
In fact, we made our
position on this question clear during the Council’s
deliberations in March. Therefore, from the Council’s
unanimous agreement that the Convention applies to
the occupied territories, it follows that ail of its provisions apply. We also agree that Israel should
scrupulously comply with all the provisions of that
Convention. Our position about the Israeli settlements
in the occupied territories is similarly well known.

30. We wish to place on record the regrets and
disappointment
of the Libyan delegation that this
debate has ended in the drafting of a sadly weak text
which falls far short of facing the true gravity of the
situation in the occupied Arab territories and the
ferocity of the Zionist aggression and terrorism. We
know that this statement was accepted by the majority
of Council members in a spirit of compromise and in
the hope of achieving a unanimous decision--and this,
despite the legitimate reservations and objections of
the main interested parties, in particular, the representatives of the Palestinian people victims of the
Zionist imperialist
and racist aggression. Not only
does the text fail to condemn the provocative Zionist
policies and actions, it also fails to refer to the necessity for a speedy withdrawal from occupied Arab
territories. Since the Zionist occupation of those territories is the source of the entire problem, obviously
withdrawal is a prerequisite for peace and justice in
the region. In referring to the Arab territories occupied
since 1967, the text makes an indirect reference to
resolution 242 (1967), a resolution which we do not
accept as a basis for a solution to the Palestine
problem and to the conflict in the Middle East. Libya
has declared many times that resolution 242 (1967) is
irrelevant to any true and just solution to this problem.
31. Finally, we want to reiterate our regrets that the
same Power which consistently gives unlimited support
to the Zionist entity and its aggression has again, as
it did in March, exerted its influence and pressure-in
the present case, to cause a serious watering down of
the text of the statement. That is particularly
sad
because, after ail the concessions that have been
made with a view to unanimity of agreement, in the end
that Power will refuse to support the text, thus reducing
it to a majority opinion rather than a consensus of the
Council. Despite that, from the vote of 14 to 1 in
March, we are fully aware that the true sentiment of
the majority of the Council is that Zionist aggression
should be condemned.

35. We are concerned, however, that the statement
of the majority view lacks balance, and it is the element
of balance which should be the hallmark
of the
deliberations
of a body charged, as this one is, with
maintaining the peace. While the summary statement
does contain references to certain provisions of the
Geneva Convention describing the obligations of an
occupying Power, there is no corresponding reference
in the statement to those provisions of the Convention
which explicitly recognize that the occupying Power
has the duty to maintain law and order and the right
to protect its forces. We object, furthermore, to the
fact that this statement is unrelieved by any recognition of the many areas in which the Israeli
administration
of the occupied territories has been
responsible and just, as in its administration
of the
Holy Places in Jerusalem and in its substantial efforts
to permit the population to choose their own elected
representatives
to local government.
In particular,
we believe the statement’s
sweeping injunction
to
Israel to rescind measures is out of place in this
context and at this time.

32. We look forward to a time when all members,
including the United States, will be able to be guided
not by internal political games or by a senseless

36. Having said that, however, and having disassociated ourselves from the view of the majority, we
would be remiss if we did not call the attention of
4

the Government of Israel to the fact that there are
aspects of its policies in the occupie-d territories-in
particular that involving the establishment
of settlements-that
are increasingly a matter of concern and
distress to its friends throughout the world and are not
helpful to the process of peace. Israel has ample
reason, with the experience of recent years, to feel
that the Council too seldom approaches the Middle
East problem with objectivity.
It would be mistaken,
however, to dismiss as products of blind partisanship
all the points contained in the statement read out in
this chamber today.

and the developments
there-the
increasing use of
force and repression
by the Israeli occupation
authorities
to put down resistance-with
mounting
concern. The Prime Minister of Pakistan said only
last week:
“Pakistan
remains deeply concerned with the
situation in the Middle East, where the continued
and illegal occupation by Israel of Arab territory
threatens to plunge the Middle East into yet another
conflict and the world into an even more acute
economic and political crisis. Israel is continuing
its provocation by its policy of colonization
and
usurpation of Arab lands and the suppression of the
Palestinian people. *’

37. Mr. LAI.Ya-litChina)
(trunsfutionfiom
Chinese):
The Chinese delegation supports the statement made
by the President of the Security Council on behalf
of the majority of member States. However, I wish to
reiterate here that the Chinese Government and people
have always firmly supported the just struggle of the
Palestinian, Egyptian and other Arab peoples against
Israeli Zionism and super-Power hegemonism for the
recovery of their lost territories and the restoration of
national
rights. We maintain
that the atrocities
committed by the Israeli authorities in the occupied
territories should be strongly condemned and that
firm support should be given to the just struggle of the
Arab people in the occupied territories. Moreover, we
are of the opinion that, so long as Israel refuses to
withdraw from all the occupied Arab territories, so
long as the Palestinian
people fail to regain their
national rights and so long as the super-Powers do not
cease their rivalry in the Middle East, there can be no
settlement of the Middle East question, nor will it be
possible to bring about real peace in the Middle East.

41. The manifestations
and demonstrations
which
have become a daily occurrence in the occupied territories and, in fact, within Israel itself are not to be
dismissed as an ephemeral phenomenon. They are the
result of years of frustration, of blighted hopes for
peace and, to a great extent, of inaction on the part
of the international
community. There seems to be no
evidence that would lead us to hope for any improvement in the situation. Indeed, from the declarations
of responsible Israeli leaders and their official spokesmen, one fears the contrary.
42. In the circumstances, my delegation cannot but
lament the fact that on the two occasions when the
Council considered the situation in the Middle East
and the Palestine issue it had to face an overt veto
and on this third occasion something that might be
called a covert veto. Unless this situation is remedied,
the Council will be stultified.

38. Mr. AKHUND
(Pakistan): My delegation cannot
conceal its sense of disappointment
at the outcome of
the debate which has gone on for the better part of the
month. To say that is not in any way to underrate,
underestimate,
not to recognize or not to endorse the
enormous effort that you, Mr. President, personnally
have put into obtaining a constructive and positive
conclusion of the debate.

43. In the search for balance, we should not lose
sight of purpose, nor should equilibrium become more
important than equity. The capacity of the Security
Council to act as the United Nations supreme organ
for the maintenance of international
peace and the
settlement
of disputes will be gravely prejudiced
unless the Council is of one mind and able to take
unanimous action on matters on which there is indeed
unanimity among its members.

39. My delegation is one which shares the quasiunanimous opinions and findings of the Councl contained in the statement which you, Mr. President,
read out at the beginning of this meeting. We must
regret that unanimity
has once again eluded the
Council on a question which is by common consent of
the utmost and most crucial importance to the peace
of the region and, in fact, to the peace of the world
and the welfare of all the people of the Middle East.

44. Mr. PAQUI (Benin) (interpretationfrom
French):
It is fortunate that we have finally concluded our
debate on the question of the occupied Arab territories
with the statement which you, Mr. President, just read
to us, because there was an ever greater risk of thinking
or saying that-to
use a familiar phrase-the
Council
was dying.

40. I have spoken before on the substance of the
question before the Council and I do not intend to
repeat myself. It is necessary to note, however, that
between March, when the situation in the West Bank
was’first brought to the Council’s attention, and the
present date there has been no improvement
in the
situation. On the contrary, it has continued to deteriorate, and my country has watched this deterioration

45. It goes without saying that my delegation would
have liked our discussion to conclude with a resolution.
Nevertheless,
bearing in ” mind that an exceptional
situation requires special measures, my delegation
wonders whether, realistically,
Council debates must
necessarily end with a resolution, especially when
we know in advance that if it were adopted it would
have no chance of being implemented.
5

46. That is why my delegation supports the wise
formula that you, Sir, have just proposed to the
Council. The statement you read out or proposed to
the Council is indeed a minimum,
but it nevertheless
expresses the concern of the United Nations and the
solidarity of the members of the Council with the
population
of the occupied Arab territories in the
tragedy they are experiencing at present. You have
perhaps found a formula that the Council should
consider adopting in the future, especially when it is
faced with a deadlocked debate. It would perhaps be
wise, in order to preserve its credibility,
if future
actions and measures taken by the Council were not
any longer necessarily to reflect the conflicting nature
of the debates of its members.

52. You had a classic example only last week in
Geneva at the World Health Organization
(WHO),
a classic example of the disappearance of natural law
as a basis for the deliberations of the United Nations.
In March I raised this very important issue before the
Council because the present alarming process must
erode what little standing in the world is left to the
Organization.
53. The principle
of the separation of powers,
whereby the executive does not control the judiciary,
applies in all democratic countries and is, in fact, also
part of the United Nations system. This presupposes
the notion of the impartiality
of the United Nations
and also the assumption that a party charged receives
a fair hearing in an atmosphere of impartiality.
These
concepts have, alas, been forgotten in the United
Nations process, where the idea of an impartial hearing
has indeed ‘been replaced by the idea that the United
Nations organs are both prosecutor and judge.

47. My delegation felt it necessary to make this
declaration of principle after its very short experience
within this body, where it has had the opportunity of
becoming aware of the special nature of the Council’s
work. We therefore venture to hope that other Presidents will not fail to be guided by the example you
have just given us.

54. The failure of the United Nations to understand
the operation of the fundamental principles of natural
law. in the international
scene is a tragedy of major
international
proportions,
portending as it does the
Organization’s
decline into an orgy of Orwellian
cynicism.
What an ominous tragedy this process
augurs for mankind. For the issue is not Israel; the
issue is international
society as reflected in its
behaviour towards Israel.

48. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Israel, on
whom I now call.
49. Mr. HERZQG (Israel): As we approach the end
of the discussion, I am convinced, whether or not they
will say so publicly, that the members of the Council
will all agree privately that it has been nothing but a
futile waste of time intended to divert attention from
the major tragedy occuring in the Middle East today,
designed as it was to enable one Arab country, namely
Egypt, to score over another Arab country, namely
Syria.

55. We now have before us the unbelievable
story
of WHO, which remained true to the normal pattern
of events in the United Nations. Every time that a
United Nations body has voted to establish a commission of inquiry to examine some allegations against
Israel, the resolution appointing the commission has
condemned Israel in advance, has prejudged the issue,
has set out the allegations preferred against Israel
as proven facts and has then proceeded blithely to
appoint a committee,
the composition
of which is
invariably
openly biased and which in one case
included a country at war with Israel, to examine the
facts and verify the conditions. Thus WHO, having
condemned Israel in advance on the state of health
administration
in the administered
territories which
we are discussing today, then proceeded to appoint a
committee
of experts composed of three delegates,
representing Governments two of which maintain no
diplomatic
relations with Israel. This fact notwithstanding, Israel agreed to the visit of the representatives of those countries to Israel and the administered
territories to make their inquiries.
Last week the
members of the committee
were left without any
alternative after their visit but to note that medical
care in the Arab territories occupied by Israel has
shown slow but steady improvement
in the nine. years
since the 1967 war. WHO constituted
itself as a
kangaroo court when, by 65 votes to 18, with 14 abstentions, it refused to consider the committee’s
report. The~motion to reject the report was put forward
by India, on behalf of the Arab nations and a.group

50. If that is what makes them happy and if the
Council is prepared to be converted into an instrument
for humouring them, so be it. But at least let us not
have any illusions about all this interminable,
tiresome
and distasteful repetition which has no purpose other
than that of moving the Middle East as far away as
possible from accommodation and peace. If the Council
acquiesces in becoming an instrument for satisfying
the whims of what is, as must by now be obvious, an
immature
and barren political
approach, there is
nothing I can do except truly to regret that the Organization has descended to this unhappy pass and does
not try to encourage a more mature and positive
approach to the problems of our area.
51. Surely you cannot expect today any sophisticated
country to take all this verbiage seriously and to
address itself with any degree of respect to the decisions of the United Nations bodies which are partial,
one-sided, biased and irresponsible when it comes to
Israel. A future historian, when describing the decline
of the Organization, will not credit his own eyes when
he reads the material.
6

of other nations. Furthermore,
before the Indian
motion was voted upon, discussion of the committee’s
findings was blocked by a majority vote.

Human Rights, UNESCO
or WHO,
a few bodies, is allowed to develop?

to mention

but

59. It must now be obvious to all that the basic
problem in the Middle East is not that of Israel and the
Arab world, but of the Arab world itself. The Arab
nation is tom, strife-ridden and disunited to a degree
so far unsurpassed. This problem, basically, is at the
root of the situation in the Middle East. I am not going
to elaborate on it; I did so at a recent Council meeting.
We have read this week of the difficulties involved
even in achieving a meeting to discuss common
problems in the Arab world. Indeed, the situation has
by now .become so confusing that even a seasoned
observer of Middle East affairs must lose track of the
developments.

56. One’s mind boggles at the degree of cynicism
which is reflected in that decision. After all, you are
talking about a country that is, medically speaking,
despite its size, one of the most advanced in the
world. You are talking about a country which has done
more proportionately
than any other country in the
world to help under-developed
countries within the
framework of the United Nations and WHO. You are
talking about a country to which thousands from all
over the Middle East-Arab
and non-Arab, leaders
and common people-come
every month to receive
medical assistance, which is given freely, without any
consideration of the political conditions in the area.
You are talking about the administered
territories
here today, in which the population, thanks to Israel,
enjoys health services which are superior to any
available in any Arab country in the world today. Are
there no limits to the depths to which we can sink in
this Organization?
How can anybody expect us or
anybody else to respect a* United Nations inquiry
after this?

60. This week we read that Iraq accused Syria of
flagrant intervention
in Lebanese internal affairs,
expressing concern over the deterioration
of the
country after a year of civil war. It is indeed encouraging to note that Iraq has finally been moved to
concern about the situation in Lebanon.
61. We were informed last week that units of the
PLO sustained more casualties in the course of one
week in clashes with Syrian and Syrian-controlled
forces than they sustained in the course of two years
of clashes with Israeli forces.

57. Or take UNESCO.
A distinguished
Belgian
professor is instructed to examine the archaeological
excavations in Jerusalem. He returns with a report
which
does not substantiate
the allegations.
Accordingly, a majority votes not to hear his report
and then proceeds to condemn Israel for transgressions which the report has proved did not happen.

62. Now we learn that the Prime Minister of Libya,
who came to Beirut as a mediator last week, asserted
his outstanding qualifications for the role of impartial
mediator
by announcing
that Libya stood firmly
behind the Lebanese alliance of Moslems and leftists,
as well as Palestinians, and endorsed their demands,
which included the withdrawal of Syrian and Syriancontrolled
forces from the Lebanon. His remarks
were seen as an effort to bring about the Arabization
of the Lebanese conflict.

‘58. At a recent meeting of the Security Council,
I raised the issue of the attitude of this body to the
scourge of terrorism. I did so in reaction to the raising
of this issue at this table by a permanent member.
I pointed out that in an indiscriminate
bomb attack
in the streets of Jerusalem a Greek diplomat and his
wife, in addition to Arab and Jewish citizens, were
injured. The credit for this chivalrous act was publicly
claimed by the headquarters of the PLO. Yesterday,
a bomb exploded in the baggage area in Ben Gut-ion
Airport in Lod, killing and wounding indiscriminately.
The credit for this equally heroic act was claimed
publicly by the PFLP [Popular Frontfor the Liberation
of Palestine],
a constituent member of the PLO, and
yet what has the Security Council done?, ,Nothing,
except to seat the representative of, the organization
which claims to have committed these crimes at this
table. How can one expect any intelligent individual
in the world to take this Organization seriously? This
theatre of the absurd is attaining such heights as to defy
all standards of ludicrousness. I know that there are
members here who are ashamed of what is going on
and are dismayed by it, but let me say to them that
by their very involvement
in this terrifying process
they are becoming part of the process. What moral
weight can attach to any United Nations ‘discussion
or resolution when a circus-like atmosphere, such as
characterizes the deliberations of the Commission ‘on

63. Indeed, the terrifying developments in Lebanon
would appear to be completely out of hand, for that
country today is not the scene any more of a brutal
civil war. It is today the battlefield
on which an
international Arab war is being waged. In this war the
driving forces are the national ambitions and the
traditional hatreds and rivalries which dominate in the
Arab world and which are in fact the main cause
for the instability in the Middle East and the tragedies
which have beset the area.
64. In the midst of all this tragedy we read .of
Mr. Farouk Khaddoumi’s
press conference last week
in Geneva, in which he announced that the war in
Lebanon was advancing the cause of the Palestinians.
“We are becoming stronger and more influential in the
area”, he announced with evident satisfaction.
65. In other words, what we are contemplating
now
in Lebanon is a major international
war between
conflicting
Arab armies, a war which is bringing
7

untold tragedy and misery to the people of Lebanon
while this Council is silent. We in Israel cannot be
silent, because many of the wounded refugees who
crossed the frontier are in our hospitals. We see the
tragedy every day. We see the Palestinian Arabs being
used as pawns in the game of inter-Arab rivalry. We
see the world Organization avoiding the real issues of
the Middle East, bypassing and ignoring them in a
manner that will never be forgotten by history.

bring the Middle East nearer to a solution. These
futile and interminable
discussions in the Security
Council will not bring us closer to peace. One-sided
committes
and biased forums will not advance us
towards any solution. Resolutions,
statements-call
them what you will-will
be to no avail. This body
created the basis for an advance towards peace:
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). We have just
heard that the Government of Libya does not accept
resolution 242 (1967) as a basis. The Government of
Israel has accepted these resolutions as a basis, and
they in themselves imply, first and foremost, direct
negotiations between the States parties to the conflict.
They have been ignored to a great extent in this
debate because the Arab delegations want them to be
ignored.

66. Since the series of Council meetings began. three
Arabs have lost their lives in the Wist Bank. We
very much regret this loss of life. We are saddened by
it. The blame lies with those heroic figures, the emigre
leadership in Lebanon, who send children at the head
of demonstrations
in a determined effort to create
another Lebanon in the West Bank. It was not enough
for them to have brought misery, murder and death in
the so-called Black September in 1970 to the streets
of Amman and other parts of Jordan. It was not enough
for them to have brought upon the world the horrifying
tragedy which is Lebanon and which the world ignores.
They want to do the same in the West Bank. They will
not succeed, because as a matter of principle and in
furtherance of our international
obligations
under
international law we shall maintain law and order, and
if as a result there are casualties, we regret it sincerely.
As I said, since these meetings began, three Arabs
have lost their lives in the West Bank. In the same
period, approximately
2,500 Arabs have lost their lives
in Lebanon. As I said, we sincerely regret this loss of
life.

70. The tragedy of the Middle East is compounded
by the fact that everybody looks for facile solutions to
a most difficult problem. Every representative here
-or almost every one-has from time to time produced his solution in clear and unequivocal
terms,
convinced that, given this solution, peace will suddenly descend on the Middle East. A superficial
analysis of most of these solutions reveals a disturbing
degree of ignorance in respect of what is going on in
our area and of the fact that the issues are so complex
that no formula, however well meaning, can bring
about an immediate solution. Most of the solutions
put forward in fact mean nothing less than the destruction of the State of Israel. Countries which do not
even maintain diplomatic
relations with Israel are
busily engaged in formulating policies which they then
urge us to accept. In the circumstances, why should
we be convinced of their sincerity?

67. I would like to hear one Arab representative
who has the inclination and the courage to say for the
first time in the debates in this Council and in this
Organization that he regrets the loss of Jewish life in
Israel or elsewhere at the hands of Arab terrorists.
I and those I represent regret the loss of Arab life,
while condemning
those intransigent
groups which
have created a situation that has led to such loss.
One of the more moving statements
made by
Mrs. Golda Meir, a former Premier of Israel, reflected
so much of our national feeling when she said that she
would never forgive the Arabs, not so much for killing
our youth as for forcing our youth to kill.

71. A mystic sacrosanct character has been given
to the 1967 lines, which we have heard so much about
in this discussion. If only we will pull back to that
line, we are told, all will be solved. I can only repeat,
for the umpteenth time, that for 19 years we sat behind
the 1967 lines and there was no move in that long
period on the part of the Arab Governments towards
negotiations, towards accommodation,
towards peace.
72. The position of the Government of Israel on the
question of borders and territories has been clarified
adequately over the years. We have made it clear
that we see resolution 242 (1967) as the basis for
negotiation for this and other issues, requiring as itdoes
the establishment of secure and recognized horde-rs.
We certainly do not accept the: arguments put forward
by many in respect of the 1967 lines. But let me as a
matter of interest, and without prejudice to Israel’s
clearly defined position on this issue, draw the
attention of the members of the Council to the fact
that, their views notwithstanding,
not one single Arab
Government
or delegation is on record as declaring
that even the 1967 lines would be recognized by it as
final peace borders with Israel. I repeat, my comment
here is without prejudice to Israel’s clear and defined
stand on this issue. But I think it is important
to

68. The majority
statement which you read out,
Mr. President, fohows the usual pattern of one-sided
resolutions passed by the Council and is in their
tradition. On the one hand, it deplores actions in the
West Bank to maintain law and order, and on the other
hand, it calls for the application of a convention which
specifically acknowledges Israel’s right to maintain the
orderly government of the territory and to ensure the
security of Israel, the members and property of the
Israeli forces or administration,
and likewise of the
establishments and lines of communications
used by
them.
69. Let me make it quite clear once again that the
burning of tyres and the throwing of stones will not
8

intermingle freely. The 1967 line is no more evident
than the dividing line between New York State and
Connecticut. Whatever political solution will be
achieved as a result of negotiations between the
Government of Israel and the Governments of the
neighbouring Arab countriesand that depends on
negotiations-we foresee this situation continuing and
indeed could not agree to any change.

make this point to those well-mear@ig,$,lelegationsand
to those less well-meaning delegations: which blithely
produce the preJune 1967 lines as the cure to all the
evils in the Middle East.
73. We are again subject to criticism on the issue of
security settlements. It is, however, conveniently
forgotten that the Arab States maintain that a state
of war exists with Israel. Nevertheless, when we take
steps such as these to ensure our security, they are
deplored. Why? As long as our neighbours maintain
that a state of war exists, are we not entitled to take
all reasonable steps to protect our population? Indeed,
is our Government not required by the- very nature of
its obligations to take such steps? True, there may be
Israelis in our free country who have been quoted
here and who do not accept the validity of such moves,
as there are those who hold opposing views. Neither
are the Government. There is an orderly democratic
process in Israel for electing a democratic Govemment every four years. It is elected by the will of the
people, and it is the duty of the,Govemment to do what
-it sees fit to protect its inhabitants; otherwise it would
be failing in its duty.

76. Why has nobody thrown his hands up in horror
and prepared resolutions and statements deploring the
construction over the past year of some 6,000 rooms
in Jewish districts in Jerusalem for Arabs, including
Arabs from the West Bank? Can you imagine what
would happen if somebody were to propose building
that number of rooms for Jews in an Arab town?
The reason is a complete and fundamental difference
of approach. The reason is the difference between a
civilized Israeli approach, which does not see borders,
minefields and barbed wire as an end in themselves
and instead envisages open borders and free movement
in both directions, and the approach of the Arab side,
which basically refuses to recognize the right to exist
of any Jew anywhere, in any part of the territories we
are discussing, including Israel. Until the Arab nations
accept the right of the Jewish people to national
sovereignty in their own country, we shall continue
these barren exchanges here without any move
towards peace.

74. How long are we supposed to wait until the
Arabs decide to sit down and enter into negotiations?
I repeat, for 19 years we sat behind the 1967 lines.
For 19 years no settlements were established by us in
the West Bank or anywhere else in the territories
administered by us. Did our Arab neighbours discuss
peace? For years we have waited for negotiations.
How long are we supposed to wait? Let me make this
crystal clear: without face-to-face negotiations based
on mutual recognition and respect conducted in a
civilized manner, there will be no advance towards
any accommodation. We ce-rtainly cannot be expected
to pretend. that time stands still and to ignore our
security requirements while the world waits until this
or that Arab leader deigns to open negotiations instead
of sending his representative liere to engage in namecalling and abuse.

77. Finally, Israel rejects the thesis that the establishment of these security settlements is an obstacle to
peace. We reject it out of hand. The obstacle to
peace is not what Israel is doing after having waited
for wellnigh three decades. The obstacle to peace is
the Arab refusal to recognize the Jewish people’s right
to sovereignty in its ancient homeland. The obstacle to
peace is an implacable Arab refusal to recognize Israel,
to negotiate with Israel, to make peace with Israel.
The obstacle to peace is the refusal of the Arab countries to sit down at the negotiating table with Israel.
The obstacle to peace is the immature and puerile
refusal of the Arab delegations even in this Council
chamber to talk to a representative of Israel. The
obstacle to peace is. the constant outflow of barren
diatribe which we hear from the Arab delegations. The
obstacle to peace lies in the Council’s failure to require
both sides to sit down and negotiate. The obstacle to
peace lies in the Council’s encouragement of Arab
intransigence. The obstacle to peace is the innate
obsession of the Arab Governments with their own
self-destruction, as demonstrated today in the
Lebanon. The obstacle to peace is evident daily for
all members to see and listen to in this Council
chamber. The obstacle to peace is a basic Arab
attitude, and until that attitude is changed there cannot be, I regret, any advance towards peace. These
are the obstacles to peace, and any attempt to point a
finger at Israel’s actions and to characterize them as
obstacles to peace is nothing but a cynical falsification
of history.

75. I do not intend to embark on a lengthy statement
on this subject. Let me just make one point. Our
approach to this problem is a civilized approach. The
opposite approach is totally unacceptable because it
envisages a return to the situation of pre-1967, namely,
a return to living under the conditions of a ghetto
behind barbed wire and minefields, without contact
with our neighbours, without freedom of movement,
without free passage, without trade and tourism and
without the normal human intercourse which exists
between nations. We shall never accept a solution
based on the premise that we return to such a ghetto.
For nine years we have lived in co-existence with over
a million Palestinian Arabs. No discernible border
exists on the ground, and the so-called green line is
nothing more than that. It is a green line not distinguishable on the ground. There are no frontier posts, there
are no barriers and there are-no restrictions on movement in either direction. Daily the two populations
9

78. A sincere and constructive solution to the
problem can be achieved only by means of direct
negotiation, No solution between countries has ever
been achieved in any other way. Why should it be so
different in this case? The solution to our problem in
the Middle East lies not at this table, not in resolutions and statements, not in debates or in scoring
one over the other and in maligning and abusing each
other. All of these have their purpose, but it is not
peace.

the myth, inveted and disseminated by Israel, that
there is a situation of normality in the so-called
administered areas; that there is friendly coexistence
between the occupying Power and the occupied people;
that there is no problem, no protest, no anomaly, no
lack of logic in the situation.
84. In most of the third world, this myth had no
wide currency or credibility. Its very basis is unacceptable, in view of their experience, to the former
colonial peoples who have struggled against alien
domination and who reject out of hand the moral,
or rather the immoral basis of the Israeli argument.
But the myth had been widely disseminated in the
Western world, where in some sectors Israel has
enjoyed virtual immunity to criticism, no matter what
it has done and what its policies might be. In those
sectors, too, the myth is disintegrating. The Israeli
experiment is being deromanticized; the illegitimacy
of its conduct is becoming more evident. The uprising
in the occupied territories has- highlighted the central
issue-that Israel is illegitimately occupying an
enormous area inhabited by more than a million people
who are indigenous and deeply rooted in their own
national soil; that Israel’s presence in these areas is
unjustified and indefensible; that the occupying Power
pursues a policy of creeping annexation; that the
occupation is repressive and arbitrary and with no
purpose; and that Israel’s fundamental policy is barren
and negative and bankrupt. This message,delivered by
the uprising in the occupied territories, cannot be
ignored, and it has had its impact.

79. Again and again we shall be summoned by the
Arab representatives to this table to satisfy on each
occasion, as on this occasion, the specific political
idiosyncrasies of various Arab parties. For how long?
To what purpose? The road to peace lies only through
the negotiating table, and as long as the Member
States do not make this crystal clear to the Arab
States, we shall continue to listen to this useless
rhetoric at this table, month after month, while the
tragedy in the Middle East continues.
80. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Jordan.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
81. Mr. SHARAF (Jordan): Mr. President, I wish
to .join with members of this Council who have
extended to you appreciation for and admiration of the
wise and sustained efforts you have extended in
bringing about a conclusion to this debate and near
unanimity on the position to be taken by the Council
on,this vital and urgent question of the occupied territories and Israel’s conduct in them.

85. It is unfortuante that, to judge by the statement
of the Israeli representative a moment ago, this
message has not reached the Israeli Government and
Israel’s policy-makers. Still there remains the obstacle
to peace in the Middle East. The obstacle is Israel’s
dogmatism, its self-destructive self-righteousness and
its insistence that the fault aIways lies with the other
side. In Israel’s statement there is almost a descripk
tion of the Arab world as inherently bad, inherenrly
incapable of coming to terms with reality, inherently
incapable of making peace. It is a symptom of Israel’s
mentality, which defines peace in unachievable terms
because it defines the whore world outside it as
incapable of making peace and inherently hostile.
There is almostjoy in the way the Israeli representative
speaks of differences in the Arab world or tragedies
in the Arab world. These issues, these tragedies, are
irrelevant to the Arab-Israeli probIem. There are
differences within the Arab world; there are occasional
disturbances and troubles within Arab societies, and
there have been tragedies and troubles and disturbances in many societies, perhaps most societies,
of the world. This issue is totally irrelevant to the
situation in the occupied territories and Israel’s
conduct towards the Palestinians and towards the
Arabs.

82. If there is to be any interpretation of this consensus, or quasi-consensus, statement by the Council,
it would be that the message sent by the brave people
of the occupied areas has reached the consciousness
of the international community. The international community has received the message embodied in the
valiant active resistance that has been going on for the
last four months in the occupied areas against the
ruthless suppression and occupation by Israel. There
has been a profound transformation in the situation in
the Middle East, subtle but irreversible. The issue of
the occupation has been restored to the forefront
of the world’s concern. Sectors of the world that
had shown less sensitivity to the agonies of the Middle
East, the Palestinian people and the Arab people, have
come to realize that these issues can no longer be
ignored or suppressed.
83. Even in a quasi-unanimous Council statement,
this expanding and deepening awareness in the world
of the problem of the occupation in the Middle East
is clearly manifested. The sustained resistance
activities of the people of the occupied territories
have raised the level of consciousness in the world,
particularly in the Western world, regarding the moral
issues in the Middle East conflict. It has shattered

86. The Lebanese situation, which has been dragged
into the Council’s deliberations many times, is also
irrelevant. It does not make any difference. It is totally
10

Arab hostility to Israel? If Israel defines the problem of
the Middle East in that way, surely the attainment
of the objective of peace will continue to be elusive.
For, after all, the issue is the sense of grievance of the
Arabs, and particularly
the Palestinians,
about the
violent way in which Israel came into existence, during
which process the Palestinian
people were dispossessed and Israel attempted to repair that problem by
compounding it through its occupation and successive
attacks on its neighbours. When the Arabs ask Israel
to withdraw to the lines of 6 June 1967, they are not
inviting Israel to commit suicide-unless
Israel defines
its security in totally unachievable terms, in terms of
expansion.
Of course, when Israel expands, the
Arab party will not acquiesce in such expansion.
Peace therefore becomes elusive.

irrelevant if there ,is a civil war in art African country,
as far as the situation of apartheid and colonization
is concerned. One cannot blame the Council ‘for
discussing apartheid or decolonization simply because
it does not discuss the domestic situation in another
African country adjacent to the area in which there is
apartheid,
racism and colonialism.
These are two
separate issues. One is irrelevant to the other. It does
not advance Israel’s case to raise such issues, but the
fact that they are raised is symptomatic.
It reflects
Israel’s inability to define the goal of peace in achievable terms, to define peace as something that can be
achieved if there is an imaginative approach to the
question and an ability to reappraise the basic
assumptions.
87. The same thing applies to Israel’s attacks on the
institutions
of the United Nations. We have been
subjected to such attacks for many years now. This
reminds one of the story of the mother who went to
a parade in which her son was marching and, when
she saw that his pace was different from that of the
other persons in the parade, said to her neighbour,
“Everybody
else is out of step”. That is how Israel
views things. Israel now says that the General
Assembly is morally bankrupt, but it was the Assembly
that adopted the partition
resolution which Israel
regards as its birthright. The Security Council is today
subjected to all kinds of attacks simply because, on
occasion, it takes some decisions that are in accordance with the spirit of the Charter. In Israel’s eyes,
UNESCO
commits a crime simply because it asks
Israel to respect the culture and the heritage of the
people in the occupied territories. The same comment
can be made with regard to WHO.

90. The 1967 borders were not inherently bad. The
1967 borders could not be the basis of peace then
because the Palestinian
problem was there, as it
still is. Israel cannot solve the question and achieve
peace unless it does both these things: withdraw from
ail the territories which it occupied in 1967 and still
occupies, and addresses itself genuinely to the agony,
the tragedy and the rights and aspirations of the
Palestinian people. Those are legitimate demands by
the Arabs. They are legitimate
demands by the
Security Council.

88. Whenever a third party-not
Arab or Israeli, and
perhaps even a party that is friendIy to Israel-speaks
one word of criticism of Israel or gives one word of
advice to Israel, it is immediately
subjected to slander.
We have seen such slander directed to a completely
neutral and humanitarian figure like Count Bemadotte.
It was directed to the former Minister of Foreign
Affairs of the United Kingdom, Ernest Bevin, during a
decisive period. The same thing was done to the
Secretary of Defense of the United States, James
Forrestal, in the late 1940s. It was done to people who
were supervising the armistice, like General von Horn
and Commander
Hutchinson.
It was done even to
Mr. Hammarskjiild,
our late SecrewGenerai.
This
criticism of a third party that is neutral and trying to
give Israel some advice was directed at Gunnar Jarring.
Such a leading figure as the late President de Gaulle
was attacked. So was the former Secretary of State
of the United States, William P. Rogers. I am not sure
that even his successor is completely immune from
criticism in Israel and by Israeli spokesmen and by
Israel’s friends; on occasion, when he has given Israel
friendly advice, that has been described as “hostility”.

91. The technical reservations made by one Power
in the Council regarding the Council’s statement does
not change the basic unanimity. Even in the United
States the situation is not static, and the meaningful
message of the Middle East is reaching the nerve
centres. How can Israel’s supporters honestly defend
Israel’s policy in the occupied areas and its general
policies towards the Middle East problem? How can
they defend a decade of occupation of an area more
than three times the size of Israel and inhabited by over
1 million Arab people who own property and live there?
How can they defend Israel’s official policy of
establishing and manning settlements in the occupied
areas and encouraging massive demographic changes?
And these are not security settlements.
Security
cannot be achieved by planting settlements in somebody else’s territory. That is an invitation to continued
conflict. How can Israel’s supporters defend the
repressive and panicky conduct of the occupying
forces against defenceless and unarmed schoolchildren
protesters? How can Israel’s supporters defend the
total purposelessness of the Israeli policy towards
the Arabs and the whole area within which Israel
claims it wants to live? How can they continue to give
Israel blind and unquestioning
support when Israel’s
policies contain no positive elements, give no alternative to conflict, offer no glimpse of hope to Israel’s
friends and threaten disastrous confrontation between
Isreal’s allies and the Arab world, with which those
allies basically have no dispute other than their illadvised identification
with Israel’s folly?

89. Is the problem really the inability of the Arabs
to come to terms with Israel? Is it really the inherent

92. There is a certain irreversible
logic working
against the continuing
acceptance in much of the
11

Western world, including the United States, of the
Israeli myths, .of Israel’s extreme and indefensible
approcah to the issues. The uprising in the West Bank
is advancing that logic. Everybody,
including the
United States, accepts this, or at least cannot deny it.

inhabitants of those territories. The mere fact that the
Council has debated at length on this dangerous situation has been of great moral support to the people
of the occupied territories. They realize that the overwhelming majority of the members of the Council are
with them in their agony and suffering. It is also a
warning, a timely one, to Israel that it cannot continue
unhindered in its policy of repression and defiance of
the will of the international community and evenof the
basic moral ethics which govern the behaviour of
civilized countries. The representative of Israel said
so much about “civilized
countries” a few minutes
ago.

93. We in Jordan have a deep emotional involvement
with the hopes and agony of the people of the occupied
territories. For decades we have had ties of fact and of
feeling with the people of these areas. The echoes of
pain in Jerusalem and Ramallah, in Nablus and AlKhaiil, in Jericho and Tulkarm touch the heart of
every Jordanian. We have striven since June 1967 to
bring about an Israeli withdrawal from the occupied
territories so that the people could exercise their right
of self-determination.
We join the rest of the Arab
world in this effort. We hope that the whole world will
join in the effort, so that a peaceful Middle East can
ultimately
emerge from the present turmoil.
The
Security Council has the duty to keep the situation in
the occupied territories under continuous review and to
give it its constant attention. We hope it will recapture
the initiative and press vigorously towards the ending
of the occupation and the establishment of a just and
durable peace in the Middle East.

98. I have spoken before the Council several times
about the deliberate Israeli policy of contempt for the
Security Council and the United Nations as a whole.
We believe now that the opinion of the majority of the
Council members expressed in the statement that you,
Mr. President, have just read as the result of our
debate is a rebuff to that deliberate Israeli policy and
what it entails and is a clear sign that the Council as
the organ responsible for international
peace and
security will shoulder its responsibility.
99. Of course, we would have liked to see the Council
reach a unanimous decision, but nevertheless the overwhelming majority has made its opinion clearly and
strongly felt in that statement. We hope that the
minority will soon join the majority. The result reached
today is also a clear indication
to Israel that, in
persisting in its policy, it is endangering and undermining the chances for peace in the area. Mr. President, your statement has said in clear terms that the
majority of the members of the Council consider that
Israeli measures and policies in the occupied Arab
territories cannot prejudge the outcome of the efforts to
achieve peace and constitute an obstacle to peace,
whether or not the representative of Israel likes it.

94. The PRESIDENT
(inferprefation from French):
The next speaker is the representative
of Egypt.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
95. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID
(Egypt): This afternoon
we have heard the same boring statement by the representative of Israel in which he repeated the same
falsifications we have become used to hearing from
him. One of the absurd arguments we just heard is
that concerning the last meeting of WHO. The representative of Israel tried to use the WHO deliberations
in Geneva as an argument here. If he is so sincere
and anxious about the health of the people of the
occupied
territories,
why does his Government
refuse to allow the team designated by WHO to go
as a team to that area? Why has his Government until
now refused to allow the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of
the Population
of the Occupied Territories
to visit
those areas and investigate for itself, if he is so sure
about the benevolent treatment of the inhabitants
under occupation? That is one other example of the
crocodile tears of the representative of Israel.

100. I hope that the Israeli Government will get that
clear message and rescind such measures if it really
wants the Council to believe that it desires real peace.
But if, as expected, it continues in its policy of changing
the demographic, geographical and physical character
of the occupied areas and establishing Israeli settlements and evicting the inhabitants of those areas by
force, then it will indicate clearly to the Council that
it has never cared about peace or the search for peace&
The crocodile tears of the Israeli representative here
about peace will be of no use.

96. I do not want to take the Council’s time by
embarking upon a refutation of what we have just
heard. My colleague the representative of Jordan has
taken good care of that.

101. At the same time I should like to assure the
Council that Egypt will always strive for a just and
lasting peace in the area and for the restoration
of the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian
people with the same determination with which it works
for the liberation of all occupied Arab lands.

97. I should like to thank the members of the Council
for convening, at Egypt’s request, to discuss the
rapidly deteriorating
situation in the occupied Arab
territories
owing to the repressive and barbaric
measures taken by the Israeli authorities against the

102. Finally, allow me to thank you personally,
Mr. President, for the patience and skill with. which
you have conducted this important debate, and the
12

overwhelming majority of the members for this result
which will be of great moral support to all oppressed
peoples fighting for their liberation and independence,
and especially to our Palestinian brothers and sisters
in the occupied Arab territories who are fighting
against occupation and repression.

population;
which reaffirms the applicability
of the
Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection
of
Civilian Persons in Time of War to all the occupied
Arab territories;
which deplores the repressive
measures taken by Isreal against the Arab population,
as well as its policies aimed at altering the demographic composition
and the geographical nature of
those territories,
particularly
the establishment
of
Israeli settlements; and, finally, which requests Israel
to refrain from, and to rescind, all measures which
are in violation of the Convention.

103. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
104. Mr. ALLAF (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretationfion French): Mr. President, allow me, at the end
of this debate, to voice the gratitude and satisfaction
of my delegation for the wisdom and patience with
which you have conducted the Council’s debates and
to thank you for all the efforts you have made during
both the formal meetings and the informal consultations among Council members and the representatives
of the parties concerned.
[The speaker continued

109. But even this compromise was not satisfactory
to the delegation of the United States, despite the
fact that the text of that consensus had been tailored
to a great extent to suit its point of view and despite
the fact that many Arab parties had strong reservations concerning the weakness of the text. The text
has now become that of the majority of Council members, and those who support it have, in my opinion,
fulfilled at least a minimum
of the responsibilities
entrusted under the provisions of the Charter to them
as members of the primary United Nations organ
responsible for international
peace and security.

in English.]

105. Permit me also, at the end of this lengthy debate
on the situation in the occupied Arab territories, to
express the rather mixed feelings of my delegation
about the trend which unfortunately
appears to be
characterizing more and more the action--or
rather
the inaction-of
the Council.

110. As for those who do not support the opinion
of the majority,
we do not fail to distinguish two
categories. The first is those who are not quite
satisfied with the text because in their opinion it falls
short of constituting the just and logical response by
the Council to the plight of the Arab inhabitants
suffering under the yoke of Isareli aggression and
oppression. Not only do we fully understand the
attitude of these delegations, we also subscribe to their
position and their points of view, and we consider that
the Council should have reacted much more energetically to the tragedy of the Palestinian people in
the occupied Arab territories. Yet what we do not
understand is the position of those in the second
category, who are not even able to support this very
mild and shy expression by the Council about the
decades-long tragedy of a people under alien occupation. What is in the summary statement that the United
States delegation finds unacceptable? I listened very
carefully to the statement of the representative of the
United States this afternoon, and I can only express
‘satisfaction at those parts of his statement in which
he has reaffirmed the position of his country concerning
the applicability
of the fourth Geneva Convention,’
the importance of the implementation
of all its provisions and the illegality of the establishment of Israeli
settlements in the occupied Arab territories. But then
he went on to say that he found in the summary
statement a certain lack of balance because there was
no reference in it to the rights of the occupying Power
equivalent to the reference to its duties and obligations.

106. In accordance with Article 24 of the Charter,
the Member States confer on .the Security Council
primary responsibility
for the maintenance of intemational peace and security and agree that the Council,
in carrying out its duties under this responsibility,
acts-and I stress the word “acts”+n
their behalf.
107. The permanent members of the Council, because
of their privileges and their veto power, bear special
responsibility
for the Council’s success or failure in
fulfilling its duties. Unfortunately,
the Council has
lately acquired the habit of resigning its responsibibilities and of accepting passively the inaction imposed
on it by the repeated abuse of the veto power by one
of its permanent members.
108. Not only has the American veto been used
time and again to block the otherwise unanimous
decisions of the Council; lately it has also been used
as a constant threat in order to prevent any draft
resolution which is not to the’ liking of Israel from
coming anywhere near the Council table. Under the
pressure of such a threat, and in spite of the deteriorating and tragic situation in the occupied Arab
territories, the overwhelming
majority of the Council
members who are really concerned about what is
taking place in the West Bank and in other parts of the
occupied Arab territories have accepted the compromise of a consensus which reflects the Council’s
grave anxiety over the serious situation in the occupied
Arab territories and its concern about the fate of their

111. But who is complaining about violations of the
rights of the occupying Power? I do not believe there
is any complaint before the Council presented by
Israel against the Palestinian people under occupation
13

that those people are not respecting the rights of the
occupying Power. And who has said that the occupation is an eternal process, which after more than
nine years since the aggression of 1967 should now have
rights associated with it? The mere presence of Israel
in the occupied territories is an act of aggression and
an act of defiance against the Charter and the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, including those often
mentioned
by the Zionist representative,
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). So, really we do not
understand that mention by Ambassador Scranton
to the lack of reference to the rights of the occupying
Power.
112. Ambassador Scranton also said that it was “out
of place in this context and at this time” [para. 35
above] to request Israel to rescind measures taken in
the occupied territories. Here I admit that I am at a
loss to understand why it is not the time and why it is
out of place. Israel, even in the opinion of the United
States, violates the provisions of the fourth Geneva
Convention and creates and plants settlements in the
occupied Arab territories,
settlements which were
rightly considered by the United States as well as
by everybody else to constitute an obstacle to peace.
Now, if the Security Council in its statement requests
that aggressor, which is committing a violation of the
fourth Geneva Convention and of the principles of
international
law, to remedy whatever wrong it has
done, would this be out of context and out of place?
I do not believe so.

during the Second World War, for all those Jews
who fell victim to Nazi crimes. When ,the European
and many other nations remained silent about the
crimes committed by the Nazis, the Arab countries
were, as usual, the haven to which Jewish refugees
went in order to ensure their security. .Also, we have
always maintained and stated that we. have nothing
against the Jew.s, we have nothing against Judaism.
We respect the Jews and we respect Judaism, but
we are entitled, as a people against which aggression
is committed,
to fight our aggressors; we are entitled
to fight those soldiers and aliens who occupy our tenitories, and I dare to say that we even regret the loss
of life of those Zionists who are from time to time
killed or wounded in the struggle’ against our national
heroes and people. We regret this because we believe
that they would have been much better off had they
remained where they came from or had they truly
respected the human and national rights of our people,
thereby saving their own lives. But let not the Zionist
racist representative
expect us to be sorry for the
losses suffered by the enemy which is occupying our
land and usurping our rights.
115. Another claim that has been repeatedly made by
the Zionist representative is that the United Nations
is against Israel, that the specialized agencies from
time to time adopt resolutions condemning Israel, and
that that is why Israel has become the victim and why
the United Nations has gone downhill and its morality
has been brought in question-since
it is always
condemning Israel. I wonder what would be the answer
of our African brothers if the racist regime of South
Africa were to say the same thing. The racist regime
of South Africa could claim the same privileged
position as Israel as the most condemned regime in the
international
community.
Their having been condemned so many times, hundreds of times, is not really
a sign that Israel or South Africa is a victim. It is proof
that Israel and South Africa and all similar aggressors
are really outlaws and are countries or regimes or
entities that are defying the United Nations and the
desires of the overwhelming
majority of the intemational community.

113. As for the representative of Israel, it was said
a while ago by two of my colleagues that, really, his
statement is becoming more and more boring, not
because it is not eloquent,
well written or well
delivered. On the contrary, I think the representative
of Zionist regime, coming from an alien country in
which English is the mother tongue, is a master of
that language, and we apologize, we representatives
who come from that area the cause and the plight of
whose inhabitants the Council is considering, because
we cannot really compete with him in the eloquency
and power of his phrases and speech. But it is boring
because time and again we have listened to the same
lies, to the same falsifications and to the same arguments which, also time and again, have been refuted
not only by the Arab representatives but also by the
overwhelming majority of the members of the Security
Council and the United Nations. Therefore, I shall
confine myself to only one or two of the remarks made
by the representative of Israel.

116. The Israeli renresentative
said. for instance,
that the report of a I?elgian expert to UNESCO
was
not discussed and that UNESCO had adopted a resolution condemning Israel. I was surprised to read today,
even in a Jewish Telegraphic Agency bulletin commenting on that condemnation
by UNESCO,
that
Belgium, Italy, France and Japan were among the
countries that condemned Israel for the first time.
I am noting the fact that Belgium, for the first time,
after realizing the crimes and the violations committed
by Israel, joined the other nations in condemning
Israel. The report was presented by a Belgian:expert,
and here we note that Belgium has condemned.Israel.
The bulletin states: “It is the first time that usually
friendly Belgium voted in favour of an anti-Israeli
resolution”.

114. He challenged
any Arab representative
to
declare officially here that he regrets the loss of Jewish
life just as the Israeli representative expressed regret
for the loss of the lives of those Palestinian youths,
boys and girls, who are killed every day in the
occupied territories by&Israeli soldiers. As the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, I repeat that
the Arabs in general, and my country and people in
particular, have always felt deep sympathy, especially
14

117. The same thing is true with respect to WHO.
The Council has, heard from my brother from Egypt
why the report of the mission that was to inquire
into the situation of the inhabitants ,of the Arab territories was rejected. It was because Israel refused to
receive that mission and only permitted the members
of the mission to enter the occupied territories ‘one
by one. It is strange that a country which for so many
years- has refused to allow committes and commissions
of inquiry established by the United Nations to enter
the occupied territories .now complains about the
natural results of that refusal.
118. The representative of the Zionist regime ended
his statement by also falsifying Israel’s attitude toward
peace and by repeating that the obstacle to peace was
not Israeli occupation of Arab territories or Israeli
violation of human rights, and he repeated many lies
and falsifications about inter-Arab relations and about
Arab reactions to Israel. I should like to say to the
Israeli representative
that the obstacle to peace is
really Israel’s insistance on its colonialist occupation
of the Arab territories. The obstacle to peace is its
Zionist, racist nature which aims to destroy all traces
of non-Jewishness in the occupied territories, to uproot
the non-Jews and to implant in their stead aliens
ingathered from every corner of the world for the sole
reason that they are Jews. The obstacle to peace is
Israeli insistence on denying the existence of the
Palestinian people and the predetermined
pIans of the
Zionists to disperse the Palestinians, to liquidate and
kill them and to bombard their women and children
even in the camps where they have taken refuge from
Israeli aggression and oppression. The obstacle to
peace is Israel’s policy of sabotaging any international
effort to establish a just and lasting peace in the region
in the hope of perpetuating the srarus quo and its own
illegal occupation of the territories of others. The
obstacfe to peace is Israel’s arrogance, defiance and
disrespect for every single principle of international
and humanitarian
law, its constant refusal to abide
by any relevant resolution of the United Nations-all
181 of them-even
the resolution by which its aggressive entity was established. The obstacle to peace is
Israel’s blindness and its failure to realize that its
racist entity cannot very much longer impose death,
destruction, humiliation
and domination on the Arab
nation and that unless it ceases its aggression and
usurpation of Arab rights and lands, there will be no
peace for the aggressor.
119. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization, on whom I now call.
120. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
The current series of meetings of the Council was
convened on 4 May to discuss the situation in the
occupied Arab territories. Several States have taken
part in the debate. In our statement of 5. May [1917th
meeting]
the Palestine
Liberation
Organization
considered these meetings as a continuation
of the
debate held in March last. While the Council was

the -occupation
forces were brutally
debating,
castigating our people under occupation. Our people
under occupation have manifested by peaceful means
their opposition to the perpetuation
of occupation.
Spokesmen for the occupation forces have tried to
blame stray bullets for the death of our people. It is
significant to note that imperfect rifles were to blame
for the murder of our youth and not the trigger-happy,
uncontrollable
and undisciplined
soldiers of occupation. In our opinion, the blame falls solely on “civilized
generals” who dispatched the soldiers with clear
instructions to’suppress the demonstrators regardless
of the method used. While the Zionist movement and
the occupation forces were wreaking havoc with their
whims, provocations and brutality, the Council was
seized of a debate on how best to remedy the situation
and how the Council could be true to its task and
responsibilities.
121. It is saddening that after such a lengthy debate,
and despite all the facts that have been brought to
light in the Council, one particular Government finds
itself in a position to declare that it cannot share with
the Council members an expression of concern about
practices against a people under occupation-a
mere
expression of concern. It is lamentable
that that
particular Government has to renounce the principles
on which its people stands. It really causes us great
grief that the Government of the United States does not*
dare, at this juncture in its domestic presidential
election campaign, to join the rest of the world and
the members of the Council in jointly calling upon the
occupying Power to comply with the provisions of the
fourth
Geneva Convention
and requesting
the
occupying Power to desist from and to rescind all
measures that violate that Convention as well as the
principles of the Charter and the relevant resolutions
of the Council and other organs of the United Nations.
Maybe the representative of the United States Govemment would have liked to see the Council adopt a
resolution praising Tel Aviv for its practices and
policies against the natives of Palestine, a resolution
that would undertake to guarantee the establishment
of settlements in all of Palestine and, more probably,
a resolution to declare and guarantee that the defence
border of Israel should be 500 miles to the east of the
River Jordan, as one of the Zionist generals has
suggested.
122. The Council was told that the occupying Power
had the obligation to maintain law and order and the
right to protect its forces. May I remind the Council
that the General Assembly has affirmed the legitimate
right of all peoples under foreign occupation to resist
such occupation,
including
the right to armed
resistance. It is occupation that engenders resistance,
and not the other way around.
123. Inside the Council and outside it, we are being
told that Palestine is the land of the Jews and that if
the Palestinians do not like it, a final solution should
be worked out to spirit them across the frontiers. Does
this remind us of the seizure of the Sudetenland, or

is it another form of Anschluss that will be followed
inevitably by a Lebensraum policy, as has already
been suggested by another Zionist general? And, who
knows, maybe there will be a pre-emptive war that
would lead to new disasters and catastrophes and
“the creation of new realities”. Does the representative of the United States Government feel that the
Council should recognize the “right” of the racist
Zionists to expand territory? Does he expect the
Council to sign a Munich pact with the Zionists?
Let him make it very clear. Is it not enough that his
Government is financing the Zionist regime in
Palestine? Maybe his courage will help his candidate
in the next election at the price of peace in the world.

,

124. The pattern of the behaviour of the racist
Zionists could be discerned from what was reported
by the State radio in Tel Aviv concerning the request
of a group of Palestinians that plans to take over the
Arab land in the Galilee area be rescinded. Mr. Rabin
is reported to have said, “Instead of dealing with the
past, I should start finding new ways of achieving the
common goals in coexistence”. That statement is very
significant. Let bygones be bygones. Why rescind?
We seize this territory today, and we talk afresh
tomorrow. The Zionists plan ta maintain their plan to
commit more crimes, to seize more land and to expel
more people. And why rescind?
125. The Council has been seized of a very grave
situation. Unless and .untii the root of the situation
-that is, occupation-is seriously dealt with, the
situation will be aggravated and tension will remain
high. We are certain that obstacles are being placed
in the way of the Council’s endeavours to achieve
peace and to eliminate the roots and cause of the
serious situation-that is, occupation. The impression
that the Council is apparently shirking its task should
be corrected and the real culprit unveiIed.
126. In conclusion, my people will keep up their
struggle for national liberation. The entire world will
continue to support our just cause to eliminate foreign
occupation. We shall keep our faith in the usefulness
of resorting to the Council for the alleviation of our
grievances and suffering. We know that the world
has isolated the racist Zionists and that it will not be
long before the main supporter of that system and
regime meets a similar fate.
127. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I call upon the. representative of the Libyan Arab
Republic, who wishes to speak in exercise of his right
of reply.
128. Mr. KIKHIA (Libyan .Arab Republic): I have
some comments to make concerning the allegations
and misrepresentations of the Zionist representative.
129. Invariably, whenever we raise the issue of the
occupied territories, the Zionist representative tries to
divert attention from this very serious problem by
mentioning problems and differences between and

within the various Arab countries and inside.the Arab
nation as a whole. He does so in urder to evade the
issue before the Council and also to place the Arabs
in a bad light by showing them to,be narrow, intolerant
and scruffy-a tactic clearly racist in nature.
130. The inter-Arab problem 3s not within the co&
petence of the Council, but if Mr. Herzog wants the
Council to deal with that Problem and to help the
Arabs to achieve unity, I, as representative of Libya,
will welcome that. But we know that the last person
who would wish-the Arabs to be united and to progress
is the representative of the Zionist entity.
131. Quarrelling and sometimes open. warfare among
different factions seem to be.characteristic of evolving
nations fighting for progress and eventual unity. If we
compare what is happening now in the Arab nation
with what has happened in the past in other nations
-the United States, for instance, orItaly, or Germany,
or even Ireland, the home country of Mr. Herzogwe might almost say that the. Arabs simply have not
yet begun their civil war. It is an entirely different
story from .what is happening in the occupied territories. There, in Palestine, the situation is of a colonial,
settler and racist nature. We are sure that we Arabs
will reaiize our unity and progress and will totally
liberate our land, We, the Arabs, number 150 million
human beings, and we assure Mr. Herzog that the
Palestinians and the Arabs will tievef accept being the
Red Indians of the twentieth- century.
132. The representative of the Zionist entity knows
that in spite of ail the Zionist propaganda and claims,
the Zionist movement has failed in its endeavour.
The future of that racist entity is at least uncertain.
In spite of the Zionist .propaganda and so called military
victories, the Zionists have not succeeded in achieving
their dream of-gathering ahthe Jews-of the world into
Palestine. The- settlers- brought. into Palestine:are still
only a minority of world Jewry and-will always remain
so.
133. The Zionists have not been able to estabhsh a
viable entity in the Middle East. Despite the Zionist
entity’s exploitation of Arab lands, manpower and
resources, it is an entity which cannot survive without
massive.foreign aid, particularly American aid.
134. The Zionist entity has not succeeded in. integrating itself with its neighbours nor in imposing itself
on the- people of the region. Many signs in recent
years have confirmed the fact that the Zionists have
no future in the Middle Easti They cannot have a future
where they are not accepted, and’they wiil never be
accepted by the Arab majority of the area so long as
they refuse to consider themselves .art of the poptfiation but continue to behave like cu.Patria1 settlers. It-is
quite clear that this racist, expansionist, colonial entity
has no-future except to break out af its psychological
and physi_calghetto and try to settle its problems with
us, rather than attempting. to survive in spite of, or
against, its environment, which is the Arab Middle
East.
16

135. The Zionists’ timing has been against them from
the start. Their aggression against the Arab nation
came just when that nation was beginning to awaken.
That is the most important obstacle to the fulfilment of
the Zionist dream, and because of it, that dream will
utlimately fail, in spite of the problems faced by the
Arabs themselves in their own fight for unity and
progress.

140. Previously, even the Arabs themselves suffered
from the influence of Zionist propaganda,
which
convinced them that the peoples of the West were a
lost cause, that the West was too pro-Zionist for any
change to be possible. But the Arabs understood
enough to make a differentiation
between the people
at the top and the people forming the broad base.
People-to-people
contacts began, and their consequences are starting to be seen.

136. The Arabs are moving forward in every way:
. in education, in living standards, in technology. In
these areas the gap between the Arabs and the
European minority settlers in Palestine is constantly
narrowing. Furthermore,
the Arabs have begun to
understand the importance of public relations, and
every day their cause is picking up momentum in the
world. Of equal importance,
we have started to
differentiate
between peoples and Governments,
particularly
in the West, and have begun to have
direct relations with the people, especially in Europe
and, recently, in the United States.

141. People have begun to talk openly in the mass
media about the Zionist lobby and Zionist pressure.
Some years ago, in 1968, an eminent American
pronounced the word “even-handedness”
with regard
to United States policy in the Middle East. He was
accused of being an anti-Semite and was reported to
be eliminated from the political scene at that time.
Now people discuss even-handedness
without any
hesitation, and in the United States in an election year
a pro-Zionist candidate met with defeat, even in some
areas considered to be strongholds of Zionism. It is
interesting to note how little of the election discussion
in the United States this year is centring on the Middle
East. To be sure, a few phrases and sentences are
uttered from time to time to reassure Israel of a kind
of support, in vague and general terms, but the problem
of commitment
to Israel is no longer the main issue
even in the American election.

137. All over the world the truth of the Arab cause
is being seen more and more clearly. The people of the
third world-Asia,
Africa and Latin America-are
now able to understand the real nature of Zionism,
and their solidarity
with the Palestinian
people is
growing every day, particularly
since the alliance
between the colonialist,
imperialist
establishment
in
Israel and the racist regime of South Africa, and since
the exposure of the racist nature of the Zionist entity.

142. Another important phenomenon in the United
States is that Arab Americans have begun to organize
themselves, have started to stand up and declare that
they are proud to be Arabs as well as good Americans
and to protest against the unlimited commitment
of
the United States to the Zionist movement. Only three
weeks ago the Mayor of Cleveland, Ohio, received
the annual convention of the Arab Americans and
presented the keys of the city to the Arab ambassadors. He expressed solidarity with the Palestinian
cause. The Mayor of another American
city, in
Michigan, declared 15 May “Palestine
Day” in his
community.

138. In the socialist countries the true nature of the
Zionist entity has become obvious because of its ties
to the imperialist,
reactionary forces of the world.
The socialist countries are now able to see Israel as
an agent of those imperialist, capitalist forces, and all
over the world, socialist and progressive nations and
movements have undergone a change regarding the
Arabs, whom they now see as a driving force in global
progressive liberation movements.
139. In the Western world the Arabs are still suffering
from the unlimited commitment
of the United States
and some other Western countries to the Zionists.
The Zionist movement is able to exert a direct influence
on the Western establishment by means of intimidation,
financial and economic pressure, corruption, its hold
on the mass media and by means of blackmail and
exploitation of the guilty conscience of the Christians
in regard to the traditional European anti-Semitism
and
the events connected with nazism. Nevertheless,
in
recent years, and particularly
since 1973, there has
been a slow but clear and steady shift among the
peoples of those countries, who have begun to question
their leaders and politicians about their commitment
to
the Zionist entity and to the Zionist movement and
who have started to understand that at least there is
an Arab case. Those peoples are no longer afraid of
a frank discussion on the Middle East. We notice that
there is pressure from the grass roots which has started
to impose itself even on the pro-Zionist mass media.

143. In the United Nations and other international
organizations we are also able to see the progress of
the Palestinian
cause in their recognition
of the
Palestinian people and the Palestine Liberation Organization as the legitimate
representative
of that
people, in their condemnation of Israel’s policies and in
their condemnation of the Zionist movement as racist.
144. All those things to which I have briefly referred,
taken together, lead to the conclusion that, as we have
said before, the Zionists have no future, no alternative
in the Middle East but to break loose from the artificial
prison in which they have placed themselves and to
make peace with us, with a view to being accepted by
us as Jews, -as human beings, and not as Zionist
settlers.
The meeting

rose at 6.05 p.m.
Notes

’ United Nations, Treaty Series,

17

vol.

75,

p. 287.

l

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les hbmiries et la agences depositaims du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
21: Nations Units, Section
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAE

IIOJIY’UiTlj

MBAAHEiR

OPrAHIZ

3AvZIH

OL;%EA%iHEHHMX

HAIl?Sa

Mananna
Opranu3auww
06%enmreHHbIx
Haqnn
MOXWO xynn~b
B KHWXHbIX
Yaraamrax
n arenrc-rnax
no ncex pafionax
r.rwpa. Haso&ui’re
cnpanxn
06 n?Mannnx
B
aamelrr KHWXHOM r4araakme
anw nmnnre
no anpecy:
Opraunaauna
06’be~nnenabrx
HanuR.
Ce~uu~ no nponame
usnanufi,
Hero-FIopit
mm XCeuena.
COMO

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccibn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00400

83-60801-September

l984-2,200
