UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FORTIETH

YEAR

2604th

MEETING:

12 SEPTEMBER

1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2604)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*............

Expression of welcome to the new Permanent Representatives of China and Peru to
..................................................
the United Nations
Expression

of thanks

to the retiring

Adoption

of the agenda

President

.............................

. . . . . . . . . . . ..‘..................................

Date of elections to fill a vacancy in the International

Court of Justice (S/17433)

..

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 11 September 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17456). .

YPV.2604

and Corr. 1

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfficiaI Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance .with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.
’

2604th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,

12 September

1985, at 4.20 p.m.

President: Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

Date of elections to fill a vacancy in the
International Court of Justice (S/17433)

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, ‘United States of America.

3. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them document S/17433, which contains a note by
the Secretary-General.
4. The resignation of J.udge Platon D. Morozov has
created a vacancy on the International Court of Justice
that has to be filled. It will be recalled that Judge Morozov
had been elected to the Court by the Security Council and
the General Assembly for a term starting on 6 February
1970 and re-elected for another term starting on 6 February 1979, which was to expire on 5 February 1988. The
Vice-President of the Court, by a cable dated 23 August
1985, confirmed by a letter of the Deputy-Registrar of the
same date, informed the Secretary-General of the resignation of Judge Platon D. Morozov of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2604)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2.

Date of elections to fill a vacancy in the International
Court of Justice (S/17433)

3.

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 11 September 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Qatar to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17456)

5. 1 am sure that 1 am expressing the sentiments of all the
members of the Council in extending our appreciation to
Judge Morozov, and to the delegation of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, for his contribution to the deliberations of the International Court of Justice.

l’he meeting was called to order at 4.25 p.m.
Expression of welcome to the new Permanent Representatives
of China and Peru to the United Nations

6. Under article 14 of the Statute of the Court, the Security
Council is required to fix a date for the election to fill any
vacancy in the Court. Members of the Council have before
them in document S/l7457 the text of a draft resolution
prepared in the course of the Council’s consultations. It is
my understanding that members of the Council are ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution. Unless 1 hear
any objection, 1 shall put the draft resolution to the vote
now.

1. The PRESIDENT:
On behalf of all the members of the
Council, 1 should‘like to extend a warm welcome to the new
Permanent Representatives of China and Peru to the United
Nations. We look forward to co-operating with them in the
Council’s work. They are very welcome to what are normally described as our “august” proceedings but which are
often, it seems to me, rather more arduous than august.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The draft resolution was adopted unanimously (resolution
570 (1985)).

2. The PRESIDENT:
1 should also like to place on
record my.personal and formal thanks, and those of the
other members of the Council as a whole, to my predecessor, Mr. Oleg Aleksandrovich Troyanovsky, Permanent
Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
for the usual excellence with which he discharged the
duties of the office of President for the month of August. 1
am sure that 1 speak for all members in expressing deep
appreciation to Mr. Troyanovsky for the great diplomatic
skill with which he guided the Council’s work.

7. The PRESIDENT: The Council has thus concluded its
consideration of this agenda item.
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 11 September 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Qatar to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17456)

Adoption of the agenda

8. The PRESIDENT:
1 should like to inform members of
the Council that 1 have received letters from the representatives of Israel and Qatar in which they request to be invited

The agenda was adopted.
1

to participate in the discussion of this item. In conformit;
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

14. The PRESIDENT:
If no other member of the Council wishes to speak at this stage, I shall take it that the
Council is ready to vote on the proposal by. Qatar.
A vote was taken by show of hanA.
In favour: Burkina Faso, China, Egypt, India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Repubhc, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. AI-Kawari (Qatar)
took a place at the Council table; Mr. Netanyahu (Israel)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
&amber.

Against: United

9.. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received from the representative of
Qatar a letter dated 12 September 1985 [S/17460] which
reads as follows:

States of America.

Abstaining: Australia, Denmark, France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The proposal
abstentions.

“I have the honour, in my capacity as Chairman of the
Arab Group, to request that the Security Council extend
an invitation to Mr. Riyad H. Mansour, Observer for the
Palestine Liberation Organization, to participate in the
discussion of the item entitled ‘The situation in the occupied Arab territories*.*’

was adopted by IO votes to I, with 4

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour (Palestine
Liberation Organ&ion)
took a place at the Co&i1 table.

15. The PRESIDENT:
The Council is meeting on this
item today in accordance with the request contained in the
letter dated 11 September 1985 from the representative of
Qatar to the President of the Council [s/174563.

10. The proposal by Qatar is not made pursuant to rule
37 or rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, but, if
approved by the Council, the invitation to participate in
the debate would confer on the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) the same rights of participation as
those conferred on Member States pursuant to rule 37.

16. I should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to the following documents: S/17412 and
S/17448, containing the text of two letters dated 21 August
and 9 September respectively, from the representative of
Israel to the Secretary-General;
S/17439, S/17445,
S/17451 and S/17452, containing the text of letters dated
5,6 and 10 September, from the representative of Qatar tc
the Secretary-General; and S/17455, containing the text of
a letter dated 11 September from the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People addressed to the Secretary-General.

Il. Does any member of the Council wish to speak on
this proposal?
12. Mr. WALTERS
(United States of America): The
United States has consistently taken the position that,
under the provisional rules of procedure, the only legal
basis on which the Council may grant a, hearing to persons
speaking on behalf of non-governmental entities is rule 39.
For 39 years the United States has supported a generous
interpretation of rule 39 and would certainly not object
had this matter been raised under that rule. We are, however, opposed to special ad hoc departures from orderly
procedure. The United States, consequently, opposes
extending to the PLO the same rights to participate in the
proceedings of the Security Council as if that organization
represented a Member State. We.certainly believe in listening to all points of view, but none of that requires violating
the rules. In particular, the United States does not agree
with the recent practice of the Council, which appears
selectively to try to enhance the prestige of those who wish
to speak in the Council through a departure from the rules
of procedure. We consider this special practice to be without legal foundation and to constitute an abuse of the
rules.

17. The frrst speaker is the representative of Qatar, who
wishes to make a statement in his capacity as Chairman of
the Group of Arab States at the United Nations for the
month of September.
,
18. Mr. ALKAWARI
(Qatar) (interpretation porn
Arabic): Mr. President, I am happy at the beginning of my
statement, on behalf of the Group of Arab States and on
behalf of my delegation, to extend to you our warmest
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency for
the month ‘of September. We are absolutely certain that
you will conduct the proceedings of the Council objectively and competently and that you will discharge your
functions in the best possible fashion.
19. I should also like to express our gratitude to your
predecessor, the representative of the Soviet Union, for the
way in which he conducted the proceedings of the Council
last month.

13. For these reasons, the United States requests that
you, Mr. President, put the terms of the proposed invitation to the vote. Of course, the United States will vote
against.

20. On behalf of the Group of Arab States I should also
like to express our appreciation to the members of the
2

Council for having granted our request for an immediate
meeting of the Council and to thank you, Sir, for having
invited me to speak on behalf of the Group of Arab States.
21. The Council is meeting to consider the grave situation in the occupied Palestinian territories, a result of the
arbitrary Israeli practices against the civilian population of
those territories. These practices now constitute an escalation of acts of oppression and persecution practised by
Israel ever since the occupationof these territories in 1967.
The observer for the PLO mentioned in his letters, which
have been distributed as documents of the Council, all the
details of these practices as communicated in the media. I
shall therefore confine myself to mentioning only some of
them.

sion being committed by the South African Government
against citizens of that country. Both r&imes are based on
the same ideology: racism and racial discrimination. Both
deny their peoples’ inalienable rights, including the right to
self-determination and equality. Both ‘disregard current
history which is liberating all peoples and establishing
equality among nations. Cooperation between the two
racist r&imes in all fields-including
military and
economic-is familiar to us all. There has been established
between the Pretoria and Tel Aviv regimes co-ordination
and an exchange of experiences in order to divert world
attention from the campaign of repression pursued by the
South African Government and to reduce the impact of
the international pressure exerted to compel it to stop such
repression.

22. Recently Israel imposed a curfew on a large number
of Palestinian towns and refugee camps. It forbade their
inhabitants to move freely and gave free rein to settlers to
sow disorder and to commit crimes against Arab civilians,
destroying their goods and their resources, in accordance
with their Fascist doctrine and their hatred of and complexes vis-&is the Arab population.

27. International
law, particularly humanitarian
law,
including the Geneva Convention on the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,’ is
aimed at protecting the people of a region who are living
under military occupation. That protection pertains, first
of all, to persons; secondly, to , resources; thirdly, to
institutions.

23. Free rein has also been given to the naratroooers.
who are known for their bru&ty through&t the Pales:
tinian territories in sowing terror and panic. This has been
manifested in shots fired at four Palestinian children in
Al-Khalil who were seriously injured; several persons put
under administrative detention; and deportation orders
also issued against some of them.

28. Israel’s acts of repression undermine that protection
in occupied Palestinian territory. These measures demonstrate Israel’s contempt for the spirit and letter of the provisions of that Convention, despite the commitment of the
international community to ensure protection for civilians
against the crimes of occupying authorities, especially in
the light of the bitter experience of the Second World War.

24. All these recent Israeli practices are but one link in
the chain of Israeli crimes committed against the Palestinian population. These acts are aimed at emptying the
Palestinian territories of their population and compelling
the Palestinians by force to leave in order to fulfil the
Zionist dream of creating a pure Jewish State on Palestinian soil.

29. As a party to that Convention, having signed it on 6
July 1961, Israel is committed to implement its article 2,
which provides that the Convention shall apply in all
cases of armed conflict, whether it be a declared or undeclared war, and in all cases of occupation, partial or total.
Israel is also committed to implement article 1 of the
Convention, which provides that States shall undertake to
respect, and to enforce respect for the Convention in all
circumstances.
’
’

25. Past and current statements of the Israeli leaders are
sufficient proof of these aims. Israel justifies these acts as a
normal response to resistance manifested by the Palestinian people against the occupation of their territories. In
this it resembles the Nazi-Hitler regime, which invoked the
same arguments for moving against the resistance of peoples who were the victims of occupation in the Second
World War. If we are to accept this kind of Israeli justification, it would mean our accepting the arguments put forward by the Nazis in their practices against the peoples of
the territories they occupied, some of whom are represented in the Council. We reject that kind of response as
we denounce and reject also the Nazi arguments against
the heroic national resistance manifested by these peoples.
In this regard we are surprised that some refrain from
condemning these Israeli acts of repression, thus forgetting
their own history of resistance to imperialism and foreign
occupation-resistance
which led to their own independence.

30. Obviously, Israel neither respects nor implements this
Convention. In this regard, member States of the Council,
as parties to the Convention, should take the necessary
measures to prevail upon Israel to respect the Convention,
in accordance with its article 1. Under the Charter of the
United Nations, members of the Council, particularly the
permanent members, bear primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. Clearly,
the perpetuation of Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
territories, and of Israel’s human rights violations, constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
31. The eyes of those suffering in occupied Palestinian
territory are upon the Council. People who have for so
long suffered from the brutality of occupation, people who
have been the targets of inhuman practices, including
murder, detention, imprisonment, expulsion, displacement
and other forms of persecution, expect the Council to sympathize with their sufferings and to adopt effective measures to remedy the injustice, rebuff the aggressor and

26. It is no accident that these Israeli acts of repression
should be taking place concurrently with the acts of repres3

prevent it from continuing its arbitrary, oppressive acts of
persecution. They expect the Council, on the occasion of
the forthcoming fortieth anniversary of the founding of the
United Nations, to act on the basis of the preamble to the
Charter, on the subject of fundamental, equal human
rights and human dignity by adopting measures to guarantee those rights to the Palestinians, just as they are guaranteed to all peoples and individuals.

any reason he deems fit, although additions to these laws
do grant the persons against whom an expulsion decision
is taken the right to appeal that decision before the military
courts, including the Supreme Court of Military Justice.
Those additions are purely formal in character, because
they are not binding on the military governor. And invoking them so far has failed to rescind the expulsion of any of
those against whom expulsion decisions have been taken.

32 The unanimous adoption of the draft resolution
before the Council will consolidate the principles of equality and legitimacy and halt injustice and aggression. The
world and the Palestinian people in particular expect
nothing less from the Council.

40. As the Israeli lawyer Amon Zachroni indicated last
August, expulsion or deportation has been illegal ever
since the 1945 Nuremburg trials established the process of
expulsion or deportation as a war crime. The Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August l949,’ also defined
deportation-or
expulsion-as illegal.

33. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the observer
for the Palestine Liberation Organization, on whom I now
call.

41. The fust victim of these practices was that freedom
tighter, brother Ziad Abu Eain, who needs no introduction, since a number of General Assembly resolutions were
adopted in his case and he was released in a prisoner
exchange arranged by the International Red Cross. On 8
August 1985, the military occupation authorities took a
decision to deport brother Hilal Abu Ziad from Jerusalem.
He had just served a IO-year sentence, after which he spent.
3 years outside prison, and it has ended up with him living
far from his homeland, Palestine.

34. Mr. MANSOUR (Palestine Liberation Organization)
(interpretation from Arabic): Let me at the outset, Sir, on
behalf of my delegation, congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency for the current month. My delegation, real&g your great diplomatic competence, is certain
that you will guide the Council with experience, honesty
and professionalism.
35. We would also like to emphasize our great appreciation to your predecessor, the representative of the Soviet
Union, a ,loyal friend of our people and revolution, Mr.
Oleg Troyanovsky, who conducted the business of the
Council with outstanding skill last month.

42. That action was preceded at the beginning of the year
by the deportation of our brother Shaheen from the Gaza
strip to Jordan. The decision was also taken to expel 11
Palestinian freedom fighters who were among those liberated after the last prisoner exchange. On 10 August a curfew was imposed on Al-Khalil.
Four students in the
Al-Najah University were detained under the administrative law and the university was closed down until further
notice. Those practices were accompanied by the imposition of house arrest on 14 national leaders who were not
allowed to leave their towns and villages.

36. Moreover, I cannot fail at the outset to thank all of
the friendly States which voted in support of our partidipation in the proceedings of the current meeting.
37. Once again the Security Council is meeting to examine the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories after
a new wave of oppression and terrorism against the sons of
the Palestinian people at the hands of the forces and
authorities of the Israeli occupation.

43. Since 28 August the Fascist campaign of escalation
and repression and the iron fist policy have assumed a
more brutal and intense dimension. We have given, in
several letters to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council from our brother Yasser Arafat,
Chairman of the Executive Committee of the PLO, the
details of that escalating wave of oppression and terrorism
by Israel against the sons of our Palestinian people in the
occupied Palestinian territories.

38. Since 4 August 1985, the occupied Palestinian territories have been witnessing a marked escalation of the “iron
fist” policy designed to suppress the Palestinian mass resistance movement against the occupier and its policies. On
that day the Israeli Government adopted a set of oppressive, fascistic laws and procedures: it revived the state of
emergency originally introduced in 1945 by the British
mandatory authorities in Palestine, especially those aspects
relating to administrative detention, selective deportation
and the closing down of Palestinian newspapers and
bulletins.

44. In a period of one week, from 28 August to 3 Septem-her, administrative detention was imposed on 56 Palestinian freedom fighters, the sons of our people, in four
consecutive groups, at the rate of 12 detainees for the first
three groups, and culminating on the night of 3 September
in 20 detentions. Those detentions were concentrated on
particular sections of the population, especially trade
unionists and university students.

39. These laws grant absolute authority to the military
Israeli governor to arrest whomever he wants, without
trial, and without giving any reason for the arrest, and to
renew the detention once every six months indefinitely.
Similarly, the deportation law, based on article 112 of the
state of emergency of 1945, gives the military governor
absolute authority to deport whomever he wants and for

45. In our letter of 3 September we emphasized:
“These arrests are the initial stages of the Israeli occupation authorities’ decision, on 4 August, to reintroduce
4

ments against their expulsion. The Government has
therefore decided to resume consideration of the case
soon.

administrative detention without trial and denortations
as a means of maxim&g
repression of the Palestinian
population living under Israeli military occupation.
Such ‘laws’ are in contravention of all norms of intemational law and c&zed behavior.” [see S/l 7439, annex.]

50. The period since 4 August has witnessed an escalation characterized by an intense Fascist tendency in Israel,
flagrantly embodied in the statements of Kahane, who,
with others such as Sharon, advocates the expulsion of 1.3
million Palestinians from the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967 and another 700,000 Palestinians known as
the Arabs of 1948.

Moreover, most of the occupied territories have experienced a curfew. Armed patrols of Zionist settlers have
multiplied
and they have intensified their aggression
against Palestinians, destroying their homes and property.

51. The application of the expulsion laws gives hope to
all those who believe in the rationale of Sharon that they
will achieve their dream of building a purely Jewish State
with no Arabs in it. In August there were attempts at
settlement in Al-Khalil,
in, the heart of the city. Six
members of the Knesset staged a sit-in in the heart of that
city, and Sharon and Arens visited it in solidarity with the
settlers. The visit of those Ministers emphasized a marked
escalation in Israel’s attempts finally to annex the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip.
’

46. On 5 and 6 September the Israeli military occupation
authorities imposed administrative detention on another
24 Palestinians, in accordance with the notorious procedures of 4 August. They also blew up several houses in
Al-Khalil on 5 September, and they reimposed the curfew
on the city. Groups of Palestinians were fired upon. Large
numbers of citizens of the city were arrested. Thus, the
Israeli occupation authorities have inflicted mass punishment, in violation of international norms, rules and resolutions. Those actions were repeated, in the city of Gaza,
where the occupation authorities continued their oppression on’7 and 8 September, when the border guards were
replaced by the Fascist paratroopers. Those forces immediately implemented their brutal practices of oppression
against our people in Gaza, Jenin, Nablus, Al-Khalil and
other cities, which led to their opening fire in Al-Khalil
directly on four children, who were seriously wounded.
Those forces attacked the civilian population in the streets,
beating them and abusing them and their property, which
caused terror among the civilian population.

52. That was accurately expressed by Peres when, during
a discussion of events at AliKhalil at a recent cabinet meeting, he shouted at Shamir when the latter opposed his
position: “The Likud has been running the Government
for many years. Why did you not annex the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip then?”

48. On 9 August the occupation authorities carried out
another 20 administrative detentions. The situation has
become very grave in the occupied territories as a result of
the escalation of collective acts of aggression and the
increased provocation by the Israeli settlers in the Palestinian cities. The occupation authorities closed down a
press office in Jerusalem, in accordance with the notorious
decisions of 4 August.

53. The growing influence of the far right and Fascist
sector in Israel has prompted since 4 September the
oppressive acts which culminated in the introduction of an
actual legislative bill to execute Palestinian freedom fighters. This escalation, designed to suppress our mass movement and strike at our people’s resistance against
occupation, will not succeed. This was acknowledged by
the ruling Zionist circles, some of whom described the
situation in the occupied territories as having reached the
stage of a swelling popular revolution which Israel, no
matter how many people it deports and detains, cannot
contain. On 30 ~August Rabin stated that Israel had
released 896 Palestinian detainees in a prisoner exchange.
But since then, it has arrested 900 Palestinian freedom
fighters. In spite of all this, Israel will not be able to crush
the spirit to resist among the freedom-fighting sons of our
Palestinian people.

49. In the evening of 9 September the occupation authorities decided, after the American Government
had
obstructed the issuing of a statement by the President of
the Security Council on the events, to convene a meeting of
the Supreme Court of Justice today-12 September-to
take a final decision in the case of those against whom
deportation orders had been issued. The Court held a
lengthy session today, in which the occupation authorities
exerted the utmost pressure to accelerate the final decision
on the question, before the convening of the current meeting of the Council. The Israeli Supreme Court took a final
decision to expel 11 freedom fighters who had been
released as a result of the recent exchange of prisoners. The
expulsion decision will be carried out at any moment.
There are three freedom fighters-Nazal,
Makbul and AlJainsi-whose lawyer has not yet advanced all the argu-

54. Israel’s recent Fascist oppressive practices call not
only for condemnation and denunciation by the Council
but for the adoption of measures to end those practices and
redress their consequences, especially since they run counter
to international conventions and resolutions, most notably
the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to the protection of civilian persons by occupation authorities, which
includes Israel. Our people look to the United Nations,
which symbolizes justice and right and expect it not to stand
idly by while this new campaign of oppression is being
waged by the occupation authorities; we expect every assistance to and evidence of solidarity with, our struggle to expel
the occupier and achieve our full national rights of return,
to self-determination and to the establishment of an independent State under the leadership of our sole, legitimate
representative, the PLO.

47. That escalation was preceded by official statements
by the Israeli Government and by Rabin in person threatening the PLO with attacks on all its headquarters and
oflices, including those in Amman and Tunisia.

5

55. Israel’s arrogance enjoys all sorts of encouragement
and aid through full economic, military and political support from the United States Administration,
which gives
proof every day of its blatant hostility towards our people
and their legitimate rights and aspirations. The United
States Administration still rejects the United Nations resolutions calling for the convening of an international peace
conference on the Middle East featuring the participation
of all parties to the conflict, including the PLO, the sole,
legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, on a
footing of equality with the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and the United States of America-a conference
aimed at finding a just solution of the conflict in the Middle East based on the United Nations resolutions relative
to the question of Palestine.

of recent events in Israeli-occupied territories, specially in
the West Bank and Gaza, once again documenting the
increasing numbers ‘of acts of repression being perpetrated
there by the Israeli authorities agaiqt the civilian Palestinian population.
62. Under the Administrative
Detention Law of 4
August 1985, the Israeli authorities have carried out a massive campaign of detention. In addition, several detainees
have been served with notices of deportation. Curfews
have been imposed on several areas under Israeli military
occupation, including the Palestinian refugee camps. There
is apprehension that hurried decisions of the Israeli court
may result in the immediate forced deportation of several
Palestinians. Such actions by the Israeli authorities are in
flagrant violation of the 1948 Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, the 1949 Geneva Conventions2 and several
United Nations resolutions.

56. Thus the United States Administration continues to
obstruct the process of establishing a just peace in the
Middle East and constantly encourages Israel’s persistent
disregard of the international will, United Nations resolutions and international law. This Administration,
which
sometimes repudiated its own former positions, is preparing to increase economic and military aid to Israel from
$2.06 billion this year to $4.5 billion, according to the
statement made by a Republican Congressman, Mr.
Sloane. This aid and the hostility towards our people will
not stop their struggle to achieve their goals.

63. Over the years, Israel has been relentlessly pursuing
its policy of consolidating its stranglehold over the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories and intimidating its
Arab neighbours with the threat and use of massive force.
Israel has pursued also a vigorous policy of establishing
settlements in the occupied territories. Indeed, there is sufficient evidence to conclude that there is a serious danger
of the situation in the West Bank, Gaza and the Golan
Heights assuming tragic proportions unless the intemational community raises its voice in outrage at Israeli policies and practices and takes appropriate action to restrain
Israel. The time has come for the Council to take resolute
action to deal with the present situation, which undoubtedly is a breach of international law by Israel and poses a
threat to international peace and security.

57. Finally I should like from this rostrum to express to
all of our brave sons who are being detained in the enemy’s
prisons, and to -the sons of our struggling people in AlKhalil, Nabhrs, Ramallah, Jenin, Tulkarm, Gaza and all
the other towns, our highest appreciation of their steadfast
and heroic struggle. To the wounded children of Al-Khalil
we send all our affection and our pledge to continue the
struggle until victory.

64. The need of the hour is to put an immediate end to
the bloodshed and continuing harassment of the Palestinians and to restore order and peace in the occupied territories. Israel should be made to discharge its obligations
under the relevant international conventions that dictate
civilized behaviour on the part of occupying Powers
towards the people of occupied territories.

58. Miss KUNADI
(India): This is the second occasion
during India’s current membership of the Council that you,
Sir, are presiding over our deliberations. It is not from the
earlier occasion alone that we know of your outstanding
diplomatic skills and your capacity for’leadership: we have
admired these qualities of yours for a’long time. Our two
countries enjoy close and friendly relations and multifaceted co-operation and are fellow members of the Commonwealth. It is therefore a pleasure to welcome you once
again to the Chair.
*.

65. At the same time, it is imperative that the intemational community should seek a comprehensive, just and
lasting solution to the conflict in West Asia without which
peace cannot prevail in the area. The fundamental principles of and the basic framework for such a solution already
exist in the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council, the Arab peace plan adopted at
Fez on 9 September 1982 at the twelfth Arab Summit
Conference [see S/15510, annex] and the final documents of
the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government
of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi from 7 to 12
March 1983 [S/15675 and Corr.1 and 2, annex]. Those
well-recognized fundamental principles are: first, that the
question of Palestine is at the heart of the problem of the
Middle East, and no solution to that problem can be envisaged without taking into account the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people; secondly, that the implementation
of these inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to
return to their homes and property and to exercise their

59. Your ready response, and indeed that of the
members of the Council, to the request for the convening
of the Security Council to consider the situation in the
occupied Arab territories bears testimony to the Council’s
sensitivity to the gravity of the challenge faced by the hap
less Palestinians under Israeli occupation. We sincerely
hope that under your presidency we will be able to come
up with an appropriate and adequate response.
60. We wish also to pay a warm tribute to the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics for the very
able manner in which he guided our work last month.
61. The representatives of Qatar and the PLO who spoke
before me have placed before the Council a detailed expose
6

right to selfdetermination,
including the establishment of
a State of their own, will contribute to a final solution of
the Middle East crisis; thirdly, that the participation of the
PLO, the sole and authentic representative of the Palestinian people, on an equal footing, is indispenable to all
efforts at finding a solution to the Middle East problem;
and, lastly, that no just and lasting peace in the Middle
East can be established without the withdrawal of Israel
from all the Palestinian and other Arab territories it has
occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, and without the
guarantee for all States in the region to live within secure
and recognized borders.

72. Once again the occupied Arab territories of the West
Bank and Gaza are the scene of an intensification in the
past few weeks of acts of expulsion of Palestinian inhabitants and of repression by the occupying Power. Those acts
have culminated in the imposition of a state of emergency
and a curfew in towns and villages of the West Bank and
Gam, and there have been a number of victims, including
children, as reported even in the United States press.
73. The news agencies have carried some reports, which
were confirmed by the recent letters sent to the Council by
the observer for the PLO and by his statement here a few
minutes ago when he gave a painful account of the actions
taken by the occupying Power, which has used administrative detention to arrest Palestinians without charges for
periods of up to six months, threatening them with expulsion from their homes. Israel has also turned a number of
West Bank towns and other population areas into military
zones used for strictly military operations under the control of paratroopers and other military forces. Those
accounts have been reported in the media, indicating the
deterioration of the situation in the West Bank, and the
Gaza Strip.

66. These fundamental principles were reiterated and
endorsed at the recently concluded Conference of Foreign
Ministers of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Luanda
[S/176&7, annex rJ. We underscore the importance of the
early convening of the proposed international peace conference on the Middle East for securing a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the region.
67. The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries attaches
paramount importance to the achievement of a just, comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East. At the
Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi in March 1983,
the question of Palestine and the situation in the Middle
East were extensively examined. Fundamental principles
for the solution of the problem were again reaffiied. Our
firm and consistent support for the struggle of the Palestinian people for the realization of their inalienable rights
derives from these fundamental principles.

74. Unfortunately, this is not the first time the Council
has considered the tense situation in the occupied territories, and it will not be the last-as long as the occupation
continues. The reasons behind the worsening of the general situation in those Arab regions are well known: as has
been repeated here, it is owing to the fact that Israel has
been persisting in its occupation of those territories and is
yielding to the promptings of various segments of Israeli
society which would have Israel extend its domination
over those territories by establishing settlements in them
and encouraging settlers in the occupied territories+zven
to move into wholly Arab areas and towns.

68. It is well known that the primary reason for the lack
of progress in finding a comprehensive solution is the arrogance and intransigence of Israel, which has deliberately
defied the will of the international community. The Security Council should take effective and urgent action to put
an end to the situation and to strive for a just, durable and
comprehensive peace which would enable the Palestinian
people to exercise their rights in freedom and sovereignty
in their independent homeland. India, as the current Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement and as a country
which has stood by the Palestinians in their legitimate
struggle for nationhood, stands ready to co-operate with
the Council in its endeavours in this direction.

75. My country continues to believe that the policy of
settlement pursued .by Israel in the occupied Arab territories can only heighten tension in those territories. Recent
events prove that that policy is responsible for the violence
which prevails there. In the occupied Arab territories,
extremely fanatic groups have called for the expulsion of
Arab inhabitants from towns and villages, the expropriation of their property, the destruction of their houses, and
the closing of their schools and universities. They have
even organized armed groups which have issued dire
threats throughout the area.

69. Mr. RHALIL
(Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
First, it is my pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, on your
r-e-assumption of the presidency of the Council. I am sure
that your skill, with which we in this hall and outside it are
familiar, will help us secure results worthy of the prestige
and stature of the Council.

76. Everyone in this chamber knows that for years the
Council has known the danger of this policy of coloniiation and its possible destructive impact on stability and
calm in the region and on efforts to bring about a peaceful
political settlement of the Palestinian problem. That is why
the Security Council adopted resolution 446 (1979) in
which it determined the illegality of the Israeli settlements
in occupied Palestinian and other Arab territories, and
aftirmed that they constituted a serious obstruction to a
just and lasting peace settlement in the Middle East. That
same resolution also confirmed the applicability to the’ territories occupied by Israel of the Geneva Convention rela-

70. I should like also to thank your predecessor, the rep
resentative of the Soviet Union, for the manner in which he
discharged his functions as President last month.
71. Earlier, you welcomed on our behalf the representative of China and Peru, and the delegation of Egypt is
pleased to associate itself with your words of welcome.
7

tive. to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,
of 12 August 1949.’

82. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Israel. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

77. In 1980, the Security Council adopted further resolutions, chiefly resolution 465 (1980), which reaffirmed the
illegality of measures taken by Israel to change the demographic composition, institutional structure and status of
the occupied territories. Resolution 468 (1980) expressed
deep concern at the expulsion by the Israeli military occupation authorities of mayors and other leaders of certain
West Bank towns and called for their return. Resolution
469 (1980) deplored Israel’s failure to implement the latter
resolution.

83. Mr. NETANYAHU
(Israel): Mr. President, I should
like to congratulate you on the very excellent manner in
which you have led the Council this month.
84. I also wish to congratulate your predecessor, Mr.
Troyanovsky, on his equally fine stewardship of this
Council.
85. We all know who worked behind the scenes to convene this meeting. It was an unusual collusion and collaboration between two forces: Syria and the PLO. One would.
have to go back to the 1930s when Hitler and his cronies
called Churchill a warmonger and castigated the democracies for oppression, to find a suitable parallel to the hypocrisy that is being perpetrated here to&y. There are few
things more offensive to one’s basic sense of morality and
decency, more insulting to one’s elementary intelligence,
than to have the Syrian Government and the PLO accusing others of human rights violations.

78. The list of such resolutions is a long one, but it is our
duty and that of the Council to demand that they finally be
implemented. The Council has adopted several other resolutions affirming the illegality and illegitimacy of the settlements, denouncing the activities of the settlers who carry
weapons and threaten Arabs and condemning the
attempts on the lives of mayors of the West Bank. I wish to
stress that the reasons for the deterioration of the situation
are nothing new. They include the actions of the settlers
and the absence of a firm response by the Israeli Govemment to those actions. The Government of Israel, rather
than implementing its avowed intention to respond to the
activities of Israeli extremists, has wielded an iron fst
against the peaceful inhabitants, whom it has been expelling, arresting, oppressing and persecuting.

86. In the nast decade, the Syrian Government has murdered 20,006 of its own.citizens in the city of Hama. They
have slaughtered tens of thousands of Lebanese and Palestinians. They have incited internecine massacres in Lebanon, some of which have just taken place in the last few
days-in fact, hours. They have been responsible for the
bombing of diplomatic missions and for countless assassination attempts against political leaders throughout the
Middle East.

79. It is imperative that we put an end to the current
situation in the occupied territories. We, and the United
Nations, have been striving for years to bring about a just
and lasting settlement of the Palestinian problem; one of
the basic conditions for such a settlement is a feeling of
trust among the Palestinian population of the occupied
territories. Unfortunately, once again the conduct of the
Israeli authorities in the occupied Arab territories has
failed to provide the framework within which we need to
act in order to achieve such a settlement.

87. The PLO, in turn, is responsible-responsible
is not
enough, it has made it an art form-for blowing up schoolhouses and schoolchildren, murdering young women,
blowing up aeroplanes and the like. It has also liquidated
thousands of Muslims and Christians in Lebanon, and,
with impeccable impartiality, has also engaged in wholesale killings of its own members, as at Tripoli and Beirut.

80. In order to halt the deterioration of the situation,
Israel must take steps against the reckless actions of the
settlers and remove them from the areas where they are
attempting to settle. Israel must abide by the Fourth Geneva Convention, which applies to the occupied Arab
territories.

88. I should add that outside this forum both Syria and
the PLO have accused each other of heinous crimes
against humanity, including as recently as Arafat’s interview in Der Spiegel last July. For once, they are absolutely
correct.

81. Egypt has repeatedly affirmed that a just and lasting
solution necessarily requires a serious attempt to establish
trust. We have repeatedly called upon Israel to take steps
which could help establish trust in the West Bank and
Gaza and on numerous occasions we enumerated such
steps. Let us look forward to the future. Peace and stability
require dialogue with the legitimate representatives of the
Palestinian people. No one can deny the need for such a
dialogue. For its part, Egypt continues to support all
efforts to bring about a peaceful settlement, but it continues to oppose all the oppressive measures carried out by
the occupation authorities in the occupied Palestinian territories of the West Bank And Gaza, and in all the other
occupied territories.

89. So what we are witnessing today is a twofold abuse
of this forum.
90. First, there is the abuse of truth. Among the torrent
of false charges hurled here this afternoon, I will respond,
for the sake of brevity, to only a few choice morsels. I
believe, however, that they capture the essence of the larger
slander that is being perpetrated here today. Several representatives have attempted to draw a picture of a mighty
Israel attacking defenceless Palestinian Arabs. The opposite is true. It is defenseless Israeli civilians who are being
remorselessly attacked by PLO Arab territories. Now, if
8

these attacks were confined exclusively, or even in the
main, to military targets, that would be one thing. But they
are not. They have been directed with murderous precision
against defenceless children and women and men.

to take over the country. But Israel must also take action
against the terrorist perpetrators themselves. We have
taken steps to apprehend the killers and their collaborators, and to prevent them from committing
further
atrocities.

91. In fact, the PLO has instructed its agents to seek out
such targets and has boasted of its responsibility for the
assaults on them. What kind of targets? A cab driver on
his way home, a couple on a picnic, a woman schoolteacher on a drive, a utility man making a delivery, and, as
always, the PLO’s perennial favourites since the massacre
at Maalot: children, specifically five children as young as
eight years old, stabbed in the face and in the neck repeat/ edly in the heart of downtown Jerusalem.

95. These steps include detention of suspected terrorists
and, in a few cases, the selective deportation of the terrorists and their collaborators. Contrary to today’s allegations, or at least some of the allegations I have heard
today, these actions are fully legal under the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949.’ Article 78 allows for the
internment of protected persons for “imperative reasons of
security” and it adds, “The decision regarding detention or
internment shall be made . . . by the occupying power , . .“.
Article 49, the very article dealing with deportation, also
permits the evacuation of a given area “if the security of
the population or imperative military reasons so demand”.
And it also provides under special circumstances for the
displacement of protected persons. But I suggest that we
focus even more closely on the issue of deportation. What
was the purpose of Article 49-because, of course, every
law has to be interpreted with a view’to its purpose? Article
49 was enacted to prevent mass deportations of entire civilian populations, not the expulsion of a handful of active
terrorists. But how many such terrorists has Israel actually
deported to this moment? Listening to the charges today I
would think that we are talking about hundreds of thousands, tens of thousands, thousands, perhaps hundres. In
the last four years, the grand total has been: one. So much
for mass deportation. What possible relation does this
have with the provisions of the Convention? None, none
whatsoever. And everybody here knows that.

92. The more innocent and unwary the victim,‘the better;
the further removed he is from the military or from the
source of conflict, the better. For the goal of the PLO
terrorist is to terrify, and that is best achieved by assaulting
innocent civilians. This is not an incidental activity of the
PLO but one that relates to its very purpose. Indeed, it
defines it. Because the PLO’s business is terror, not military confrontation, not even guerrilla war-which is also
directed against soldiers-but
pure, sheer terror, which
means the systematic and deliberate killing, maiming and
menacing of innocent civilians.
93. In the past year, PLO murderers-under
the personal instruction of Arafat, I might add-have attempted
dozens of times, sometimes successfully, to blow up, shoot,
stab and mutilate Israeli citizens. I have already given
accounts of such attacks in my recent letters to the President of the Council, which have been distributed to the
representatives. What is the genesis of this escalation of
terror? It is not merely the PLO’s intention to murder
Jews. That, I am afraid,. has been a constant, unchanging
and openly proclaimed objective of the PLO since its
inception. By itself it would not be enough to account for
this renewed onslaught on defenceless Israelis, which, Mr.
President, if you have been tracking my letters, has been
going on now for many months-not
one month, not a
few weeks. It is the marriage of intention with capability
that makes this campaign possible. And this capability has
been provided by the bizarre embrace bf the PLO and
Jordan. The PLO -is permitted to establish headquarters
and bases in Jordan, with the limited proviso that it refrain
from armed incursions across Israel’s borders. That would
involve an open clash with Israeli soldiers, and that, as we
have seen, is to be avoided as a matter of prudence.
Instead, the PLO smuggles its killers and their instruments
of terror across those very bridges which Israel keeps open
for the welfare of the Arab residents of :Judea, Samaria
and Gaza. And these killers and the overseers of killers
have proceeded to perpetrate their systematic savagery.

96. Not only are our’ actions legal, but we provide the
terrorists with all the judicial protection present in a
democracy. The terrorist suspects can appeal to an impartial and independent judiciary, the:kind of judiciary that
does not exist anywhere in the Arab world-for example,
in Qatar. And in fact the Israeli Supreme Court has on
occasion overturned the Government’s decisions in these
matters.
97. So what we have here is this: the terrorist savages his
victim and then condemns him for defending himself. The
boastful murderers of women and children dare invoke
international law. This is indeed a theatre of the absurd.
98. But there is also a second way in which this forum is
being abused. The Charter of the United Nations stipulates
that the Security Council should have primary responsibility for maintaining international peace and ,security. In
recent years, one million casualties have been sustained in
the war between Iraq and Iran. In. Lebanon, in the past
decade, one hundred thousand Arabs have been killed and
hundreds of thousands have been injured by Arabs, by
Syrians, by Palestinians, by Lebanese. This tradition is
very much alive. In the past few months, thousands of
Lebanese and Palestinian Arabs have been massacred and
maimed in the intramural slaughter in Lebanon-a slaughter that, as I have said, is cynically encouraged by Syria.

94. Israel has made it clear that it will not tolerate the
establishment of new terror bases on its borders and that
such terror bases will not remain immune. And Jordan
should bear in mind the consequences it suffered the last
time it allowed the PLO to roam free inside its territory.
This, as I am sure all the representative here recall, ended
with Black September in 1970, when the PLO threatened
9

.

And I have confined myself only to two examples in
Israel’s immediate region. In the midst of all this
bloodshed, the Security Council has been convened only
six times to address the unbelievable carnage in the Persian
Gulf, and one fleeting, stuttering, oh-so-delicate meeting
to deal with a decade of Arab atrocities in Lebanon.
99. That is the most compelling proof that today’s exercise relating to the possible legal deportation of three suspected terrorists-a handful of suspected terrorists-and
the detention of their collaborators is an insult and an
affront to the very purpose for which this body was
founded.
:
100. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter, dated 12 September
[S/17&4, from the representative of Qatar to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:
“I have the honour, in my capacity as Chairman of
the Group of Arab States, to request that the Security
Council extend an invitation, under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, to Mr. Clovis Maksoud,
Observer of the League of Arab States, in connection
with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled
‘The situation in the occupied Arab territories’.”
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees
to grant that request.
It was so decided.
101. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
Council that I have just received a letter from the representative of Jordan in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion on the item on the agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Salah (Jo&n) took
the place reservedfor him at the side of the Council chamber.
I invite the representative of Jor102. The PRESIDENT:
dan to take a place at the Council table in order to make a
statement in exercise of his right of reply.
103. Mr. SALAH (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic):
Mr. President, at the outset of my statement, I should like
to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the current month and on your
outstanding conduct of the business of the Council. Since
we have worked together in the Council, we know full well
your competence and your diplomatic skill.

104. I should also like to extend congratulations to your
predecessor, Mr. Troyanovsky, for his outstanding conduct of the business of the Council last month.
105. The Israeli representative tried once more today, as
he tried in his letters, to slander Jordan and level baseless
accusations against it. On this occasion I would like to
read out to the members of the Council the text of a letter
which I addressed today to the Secretary-General, in this
regard.
Uhe sneaker read the text of the letter circulated as documen t Gl7462.1
”

106. I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to the implicit threat against my country
made by the Israeli representative. That threat is out .of
order and reveals Israel’s real intentions-to
prevent the
achievement of a just, comprehensive and honourable
solution to the Middle East problem. Jordan will continue
to work for a just and comprehensive peace and will preserve its sovereignty, security and stability.
107. I saw fit to take this opportunity to answer the statement made by the representative of Israel about Jordan. I
hope, Sir, I shall be afforded another opportunity, when
the Council meets tomorrow or on some other occasion to
participate in discussing the arbitrary Israeli practices in
the occupied territories’ of the West Bank and the Gaza
strip.
108. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Jordan for his statement made in exercise of the right of
reply-and that answers the question that he has just put.
109. I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to the draft resolution which has been distributed in document S/17459. Subject to any developments
that may intervene, I intend to put the draft resolution to a
vote tomorrow afternoon.
110. Mr. ALZAMORA
(Peru) (interpretation from Spanish): Before you adjourn, Mr. President, I should like to
thank you for your words of welcome and to express my
gratitude for the words of welcome from other delegations.
I extend my most cordial greetings to all members of the
Council, and wish to say how pleased I am to be entering
the Council under your skilled and competent leadership,
Sir. I promise all delegations that I shall cooperate fully
with the Council in its important work.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

NOTES

’ United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
2 Ibid., Nos. 970-973.
