S/PRST/2017/20

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 October 2017
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 8070th meeting of the Security Council, held on 17 October 2017, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The question
concerning Haiti”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“As the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
completes its mandate on 15 October 2017, the Security Council recognizes
the achievements made by Haiti since 2004.
“The Security Council takes note of the report from the Secretary General of 5 October (S/2017/840) and the assessments, recommendations,
and lessons learned contained therein. The Security Council expresses its
intention to take them into account in the framework of its ongoing work to
enhance the overall effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping and
transitions.
“Recalling resolutions 2350 (2017) and 2313 (2016), the Security
Council welcomes the notable progress made by Haiti towards stability and
democracy. It underlines the improvements in strengthening the security and
humanitarian situation. The Security Council also welcomes the presidential
elections held in 2016 and 2017, which have paved the way to consolidate
Haiti’s democratic institutions through a peaceful transfer of power.
“The Security Council recognizes the contribution of MINUSTAH in
restoring security and stability in Haiti throughout its thirteen years. The
Security Council expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the United
Nations Country Team, under the leadership of the Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General, and MINUSTAH personnel for their dedication. The
Security Council also expresses its gratitude to the troop - and policecontributing countries for their support over the years.
“The Security Council recalls the primary responsibility of the
Government of Haiti for ensuring stability in Haiti and reaffirms in particular
the need for political dialogue as a peaceful resolution to help defuse tensions
between competing groups and to address ongoing socioeconomic grievances.
It emphasizes the importance of prioritizing strengthening the rul e of law,
judicial reform, the respect for human rights, including the empowerment of
women and their full participation in decision-making, and further developing
the capacity of the Haitian National Police (HNP) to enable it to improve
Haiti’s security environment, all of which are critical to achieving long -term
stability. Further, the Security Council expresses confidence that the new

17-18404 (E)

181017

*1718404*

S/PRST/2017/20

mission will work closely with the Government of Haiti and calls upon the
Government to facilitate the mission’s mandate and functioning.
“The Security Council recognizes the United Nations ‘New Approach to
Cholera in Haiti’ and continued progress in reductions of suspected cases of
cholera.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support for the United Nations zero tolerance policy on all forms of sexual exploitation and abuse and affirms the
importance of supporting victims of sexual exploitation and abuse.
“The Security Council stresses that there is important work ahead to
further advance Haiti’s long-term security, democratic consolidation, and
sustainable development. The Security Council underscores the importance of
continued support to Haiti as it embarks on the next stage of the United
Nations’ engagement, and welcomes the work of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) to consolidate progress made as
Haiti transitions to a non-peacekeeping UN presence.
“The Security Council welcomes the use of a range of different tools to
support Haiti as it seeks to address its political, economi c, social, and security
challenges. It emphasizes the importance of MINUJUSTH developing a
clearly benchmarked projected two-year exit strategy to a non-peacekeeping
UN presence in Haiti to continue supporting the efforts of the government of
Haitian in sustaining peace and peacebuilding”.

2/2

17-18404
