UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL
RECORDS
\ N LIERARY

THIRTY-FOURTH

YEAR
SEP 7 - 1982

2170

th MEETING:

NEW

2 NOVEMBER

&J\N/SA COLLECTION

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2170)

.......................................
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 31 October 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13595) .

Page
1
1

SIPV.2170

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with tigures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
‘.,f.W ,‘. I y ( i
’ ?; I-,. ‘-‘j ! -: Documents of the Security Council (symbol W...) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the Official Record of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
~~~;.~: .. , ., ;
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
.4:y 8** -7 ^i , ,.-adopted Jn 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and DeckionJ of the
:;.
1 -: , ‘b
. .rSebufity’ &wncil. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2170th MEETING

Held in New York on Friday, 2 November 1979, at 4 p.m.
President:

Mr. Sergio PALACIOS

de VIZZIO

(Bolivia).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia,
France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2170)
1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 31 October 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13595)
The meeting was called to order at 4.45 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 31 October 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/13595)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation porn Spanish): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2169th meeting, I
invite the representative of Angola to take a place at the
Council table; I invite the representatives of Brazil, Cuba
and Liberia to take the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola) took a place at the Council table: Mr. Con2a da
Costa (Brazil), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba) andMr. Tubman (Liberia) took the places reservedfor them at theside of the Council
chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom Spanish): I wish
to inform members of the Council that I have received
letters from the representatives of Colombia, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Mozambique, Viet Nam and Yugoslavia
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the agenda. In accordance with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant

provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. LiPvano (Colombia),
Mr. Muntasser, (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Lobe (Mozqmbique), Mr. Ha Van Luu (Viet Nam) and Mr. Komatina
(Yugoslavia) took the places reservedfor them at the side of
the Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
Members of the Council have before them the text of a draft
resolution sponsored by Bangladesh, Jamaica, Kuwait,
Nigeria and Zambia which is contained in document
S/13601. The sponsors have asked me to announce that
Gabon has also become a sponsor.
4. I also wish to bring to the attention of the members of
the Council the text of a letter dated 2 November addressed
to the Secretary-General by the Permanent Representative
of South Africa [S/13604j.
5. The first speaker is the representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, who wishes to make a statement in his
capacity as Chairman of the Group of African States forthe
month of November. Accordingly, I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
1
6. Mr. MUNTASSER
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): Mr.
President, permit me, first of all, to congratulate you on
your presidency of the Council for the month of November
and to thank you and, through you, the other members of
the Council for giving me the opportunity to make a statement in my capacity as Chairman of the African Group for
the month of November.
7. In a letter dated 31 October [S/13595], the Permanent
Representative of Angola requested an urgent meeting of
the Security Council in connexion with the question of the
South African racist regime’s aggression against his country. The Group of African States at the United Nations, of
which my delegation is honoured to be chairman this
month, met yesterday morning and decided also to urge the
Council to meet to consider this matter. The Group
expressed its solidarity with the Government and people of
Angola against the flagrant aggression committed by the
racist minority regime of South Africa on 28 October.
8. In this flagrant aggression, the racist regime of South
Africa used massive forces of airborne and ground troops,
causing the death of many innocent people in Angola and
destroying vital economic sites at Leba. The aggressors
destroyed railway tracks, the tunnel leading to the railways

at Leba, four bridges, live automobiles and one bus. And at
Port0 Alexandre, 11 Puma helicopters unloaded special
troops who carried out acts of sabotage, blocking main
highways and subjecting the’unarmed population to criminal acts of intimidation. Railway tracks in the vicinity of
Lubango, Covango and Tengo were also destroyed and
mines were planted in the highways through Lubango,
Jamba and Tchamutete.

ment issued on 26 October 1979, the President of the United
Nations Council for Namibia drew the attentjon of the
international community to the awesome implications for
international peace and security, particularly in southern
Africa, resulting from the revelation that South Africa had
detonated a nuclear device on 22 September:
“This action by the colonialist and racist Pretoria
regime constitutes an ominous sign of defiance by a
tigime obsessed with perpetuating insane policies of
racist domination and colonial exploitation against the
indignant protests of the international community.‘*
[S/13590, annex, para. 1.1

9. The racist regime of South Africa has committed frequent and flagrant acts of aggression against the front-line
countries in general and against the People’s Republic of
Angola in particular for several reasons, inter alia, the
following. It wishes to destabilize the front-line countries in
order to weaken the unrelenting support those States have
extended to the liberation movements of the peoples of
South Africa, Namibia and Zimbabwe. It also wants to
prevent those countries from developing their economic
and social welfare.

16. Those States which enabled the racist regime of South
Africa to develop its nuclear power must now carry the
responsibility for this heinous act. Those who are helping
the South African regime must know that they are helping
our enemy, our worst and bitterest enemy in Africa. They
must choose between Africa and the enemy of Africa.

10. The question under discussion is very clear. The racist
regime of South Africa has once again committed a flagrant
act of aggression against an African State, the People’s
Republic of Angola, which is a member of the Organization
of African Unity and a Member of the United Nations.

17. The African Group urges the Council to take effective
and relevant action against the racist regime of South Africa
and calls upon the Council to condemn South Africa for its
flagrant aggression against the People’s Republic of Angola,
demand that South Africa respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola and take effective
action against the racist regime of South Africa in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter.

11. This flagrant aggression is not the first instance of
aggression. The racist regime of South Africa habitually
commits acts of aggression against the neighbouring countries, defying numerous resolutions of the Security Council
and the Charter of the United Nations.

18. Mr. LUSAKA(Z.ambia):
I wish to begin bycongratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of November. My delegation is confident that you will ably conduct our deliberations and bring this meeting to a successful conclusion. You
are a man of wisdom and great diplomatic skill.

12. Just after the people of Angola had gained their inde+
pendence, after many years of struggle and through the
sacrifice of countless lives and resources, the racist regime of
South Africa committed a serious act of aggression against
the newly independent African State. This occurred during
the month of March 1976. At that time, the Security Council adopted its resolution 387 (1976) in which it condemned
the flagrant aggression by the South .African racist regime
against the People’s Republic of Angola. In paragraph 2 of
that resolution, the Council demands “that South Africa
scrupulously respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola”.

19. I also wish to pay a tribute to your predecessor, my
“good friend Ambassador Kaiser of Bangladesh. He is well
known and greatly admired for his outstanding abilities and
dedication to the work of the Security Council. Not unexpectedly, he was an effective spokesman of the Council in
the meetings and functions at which he represented us.
20. The People’s Republic of Angola has brought to the
attention of the international community the serious acts of
aggression committed against it by the Fascist minority
regime of South Africa. The facts before us, as indicated in
the communique issued by the Political Bureau of the Central Committee of the MPLA-Workers’
Party [S/Z3599j,
are that on 28 October 1979, the racist South African troops
carried out a massive airborne and ground assault against
Angola in the southern provincial capitals of Port0 Alexandre, Mocamedes and Lubango, which left 18 civilians and a
number of soldiers dead. This barbaric attack also resulted
in the destruction of vital economic projects and communications networks.

13. The racist regime of South Africa is inherently aggressive, and it is clear that the peace and security of the region
are continually threatened by the existence of the racist
regimes in southern Africa. Those racist regimes are determined to keep the peoples of the region under eternal
subjugation. They are trying desperately to contain the
rising tide and to stop the wave of national liberation sweeping through South Africa, Namibia and Zimbabwe.
14. It is abhorrent and appalling that the aggressive racist
and Fascist regime of South Africa is still supported by
some Western countries. Those countries claim to be
friends of Africa, but, at the same time, they still increase
their investments in and economic and technological assistance to the racist regime of South Africa, despite the resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly,
which’call for an arms embargo on South Africa.

21. The gravity of the South African act of aggression
against Angola was further attested to by my brother and
colleague the Ambassador of Angola in his comprehensive,
clear and sobering statement yesterday [22691h meeting].
The facts are clear. The Security Council is once again
challenged to live up to its responsibilities as the organ
charged with the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security.

15. The technological and economic assistance of some
Western countries has enabled the racist minority regime of
South Africa to develop its nuclear capability. In his state2

22. Let no member of the Council profess unawareness of
the threat that South Africa poses to international peace
and security. Let no member of the Council persist in
minimizing the gravity of the conflagration looming in
southern Africa because of the very existence and policies of
racist minority regimes in Namibia, Zimbabwe and South
Africa itself.

29. Let us not side-track the issues. Anybody genuinely
concerned that such Security Council meetings could complicate the negotiations should direct his attention and
efforts at preventing the recurrence of the acts of aggression
against the front-line States. Without the acts of aggression
against us we should have no reason to come to the Council
to complain. Prevent aggression, and in that way it may be
possible to prevent Council meetings on aggression.

23. South Africa’s aggression against the People’s Republic of Angola is yet another in a series which constitute a
consistent and sustained pattern aimed at the destabilization of the front-line States in the hope of weakening our
steadfast support for the liberation movements of Namibia,
Zimbabwe and South Africa. The racist minority regimes at
Pretoria and Salisbury have similarly stepped up their
unprovoked attacks against Botswana, Mozambique and
Zambia, killing thousands of innocent civilians and destroying valuable property.

30. All the front-line States remain committed to the
search for negotiated settlements in Zimbabwe and Namib
ia. The problem is not with us or the liberation movements.
The problem is precisely that the racist minority r6gimes
continue to resist change, even by peaceful means. Namibia
is a case in point, in which we have bent over backwards to
facilitate the implementation of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the basis of resolution 435 (1978). To date South
Africa has not accepted, even in principle, the commendable proposal of the late President Neto of Angola on a
demilitarized zone.

24. Only last week, we in Zambia were the victims of a
well co-ordinated two-pronged
attack by the PretoriaSalisbury axis, simultaneously launched in our southern
and western provinces. Our defence forces had to repel the
400 rebel Rhodesian troops in the southern province and
the 600 South African troops in the western province.

31. There is also evidence that South Africa is bent on
frustrating a genuine solution to the problem of Southern
Rhodesia. The Pretoria regime has threatened to invade
Zimbabwe militarily if there should be a settlement which is
not favourable to its puppets at Salisbury. The international
community, and in particular the Security Council, must
not take such threats lightly as they have ominous consequences for international peace and security.

25. Today the victim of aggression is Angola; yesterday it
was Zambia; tomorrow it may be Botswana or Mozambique or, indeed, all of us. As front-line States, we greatly
value and appreciate the concrete material support given to
us by many of our friends in the international community as
well as their unambiguous expressions of solidarity with us
in the struggle for the liberation of southern Africa.

32. The ambition of South Africa to become a nuclearweapon Power must also be seen in the context of its intent
to perpetuate white minority rule in southern Africa. South
Africa’s aim is to use its nuclear capacity to blackmail and
intimidate Africa into abandoning its support for the
oppressed people. That South Africa has been assisted in its
nuclear programme by some members of the Security
Council is indeed a deplorable fact. Once again, such collaboration arouses suspicion. We wonder how it can be
construed as compatible with any genuine desire or effort to
achieve peaceful change in southern Africa.

26. To be candid, we are at the same time deeply disturbed
by the attitude of a number of major Western Powers. Their
reactions to the acts of aggression against us by the racist
minority regimes leave a lot to be desired. Literally, thousands of people have died and thousands continue to die at
the hands of the racist minority regimes in southern Africa.
Millions continue to languish under the brutal oppression
perpetrated by those regimes.

33. My delegation will have more to say on this matter in
due course. Suffice it to say now that we believe the Security
Council should act urgently on the recommendations ofthe
Seminar held in London in March 1979 on the question of
nuclear collaboration with South Africa [see S/13157].

27. The reactions of the major Western Powers constitute
at best mild reprimands of the racist minority regimes.
More often than not, by their ambivalence and ambiguity,
they leave themselves open to suspicion. Indeed, it seems
more fashionable for some of these Western Powers to react
strongly to the alleged victimization of individuals in certain
countries. Their eyes remain closed to the dastardly acts of
the white minority regimes of southern Africa. Their consciences do not seem to bother them. Yes, they seem to have
double standards as to the value of the human being.

34. I now have the honour of introducing the draft resolution in document S/13601, on behalf of the delegations of
Bangladesh, Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait and Nigeria and of
my own, the Zambian, delegation. In drafting this resolution we have taken into account resolutions 387 (1976) and
447 (1979), in which the Council condemned some of the
earlier South African acts of aggression against Angola and
demanded that the Pretoria regime scrupulously respect the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of that
country. Since South Africa, by these renewed acts of
aggression against Angola, is clearly in violation of the
Council’s resolutions, we felt the temptation to submit a
stronger and action-oriented text in the context of Chapter
VII of the Charter.

28. The Pretoria and Salisbury regimes are continuing to
commit these acts of aggression against front-line States in
the midst of negotiations on Zimbabwe and Namibia. Some
become sensitive and jittery when the Security Council is
just called upon, as in the present case, to react to these acts
of aggression in accordance with its responsibilities under
the Charter. We hear suggestions that meetings like this one
could complicate the negotiations. What hypocrisy!

35. The draft resolution now before the Council is very
mild in the light of the grave situation created once again by
3

proposals made by the late President Neto of Angola. The
strategy of intimidation by violence and terror which was
executed at Cassinga is being repeated in order to sabotage
the international effort towards a negotiated settlement of
the Namibian question.

South Africa’s aggression against Angola. It has a limited
political objective. For the present all that we are asking the
Council to .do is: (a) strongly condemn South Africa’s
aggression against the People’s Republic of Angola; (b) call
upon the Government of South Africa to cease immediately
all acts of aggression and provocation against the People’s
Republic of Angola and forthwith withdraw all its armed
forces from Angola; (c) demand that South Africa scrupulously respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola; (d) demand
also that South Africa desist forthwith from the utilization
of,Namibia, a Territory which it illegally occupies, to launch
acts of aggression against the.People’s Republic of Angola
or other neighbouring African States; (e) request Member
States urgently to extend all necessary assistance to the
People’s Republic of Angola and other front-line States, in
order to strengthen their defence capacities.

41. The issue now before the Council is whether it will
continue to allow South Africa to pursue its lawless and
savage campaign of aggression. It is evident that those who
still remain friends of South Africa will continue in effect to
protect it. The Pretoria Fascists thus feel no constraint as
they attack at will the neighbouring African States. Jamaica
continues to hold the view that only forceful action by the
Council and the use of its powers under the Charter will be
effective in halting the South African threat. In particular,
we believe that the imposition of comprehensive sanctions
against South Africa under Article 41 of the Charter would
curb its appetite for aggression and deprive it of the means
of repeating the acts which are once again the subject of our
meeting today and which we hope to condemn,

36. The Security Council will soon have to consider the
question of South African aggression against Angola in all
its aspects. Such a comprehensive and thorough consideration of this grave problem will of course be the basis of the
Secretary-General’s report to be submitted in accordance
with resolution 447 (1979). I hope we shall all be able to live
up to our expectations and justify the confidence the AngoIan people continue to place in the Council.

42. The draft resolution which is before the Council, and
of which Jamaica is a sponsor, represents, in our view, the
minimum action that the Council can take in the circumstances. Indeed, the Council should do far more in the face
of persistent aggression by South Africa and the continued
murder of innocent people. The Charter contains the
appropriate provisions in Chapter VII to meet the demands
of the present case. But the threat of the veto, which hangs
over any attempt to deal realistically and effectively with
South Africa, has reduced the Council to virtual impotence.

37. On behalf of the sponsors, I commend draft resolution
S/13601 for unanimous adoption by the Council as an
interim response to the continuing South African aggression against Angola.
38. Mr. MILLS (Jamaica): Mr. President, let me first
congratulate you on your assumption oPthe offtce of President of the Security Council. My delegation is particularly
gratified that a representative of a sister Latin American
country and a diplomat of your distinction is presiding over
our work at this time.

43. It can only be small comfort to the people of Angola to
hear that South Africa is once more condemned. At a time
when lives are being lost or placed in jeopardy by a nuclear
threat, the Council’s action can only be seen as feeble. This
is so because the friends of South Africa have both the will
and power to shelter it .from the full force of international
action.

39. I should like also to thank your predecessor, Ambassador Kaiser, who occupied the office of President during
the month of October. It was a quiet month for the Council
in terms of meetings, but we had the certainty that Ambassador Kaiser’s special qualities as a diplomat and his considerable experience were available to us.

44. But the people of Angola and of the other front-line
States should know that they have friends also. We know
that they are shouldering a great burden and are making
immense sacrifices, and they deserve our full support and
assistance in building their defensive capability to resist the
relentless force of Soltth African aggression. The people of
Angola, who showed such heroism in their victorious struggle against colonial domination, have had to defend their
hard-won freedom from the very beginning of their independence. Jamaica will continue to stand in unshakable
solidarity with them and with the liberation struggle in
southern Africa.

40. The Council is meeting in response to a request by the
Permanent Representative of Angola, who yesterday gave a
full account of the latest criminal aggression against his
country launched by South Africa on 28 October and resulting in heavy loss of civilian life and property. This is only the
latest in a series of brutal and calculated assaults which time
and time again have been brought to the attention of the
Council. There is no further proof needed that the policies
of the racist regime of South Africa represent a threat to
international peace and security. The racists have consistently demonstrated their contempt for the principles of
international law and for the Charter of the United Nations
by their persistent acts of armed aggression against their
neighbours. The timing of these attacks usually bears some
significant relation to international efforts for a solution of
the problems of southern Africa. At the present time negotiations are being conducted with all interested parties on the
question of the independence of Namibia, on the basis of

45. Mr. ALGWRD (Norway): Mr. President, permit me
to extend to you my congratulations on your assumptionof
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. Your
able leadership has already successfully passed the test during the last two days, and we look forward to working with
you on the Council’s tasks during the month of November.
46. I should also like to express my delegation’s admiration for the effective way in which Ambassador Kaiser, the
representative of Bangladesh, conducted the affairs of the
Council during the month of October. He demonstrated
4

here the same skill and wisdom that I have been privileged
to observe in other and equally delicate situations.
47. The new attacks carried out by South Africa against
the People’s Republic of Angola should be condemned by
the Council. Norway, for its part, is ready to support measures by the Council to bring South Africa’s aggressive
policies towards her neighbours to an end. We shall do this
out of sympathy with those subjected to the human sufferings brought about by those attacks. We shall do it also
because of the wider implications of those attacks. The
attacks reported to us yesterday by the representative of
Angola represent a direct challenge to the Council, which
has already declared unacceptable such violations of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of an independent
country.
48. The Council, involved in the efforts to seek peaceful
solutions to problems in southern Africa, cannot fail to note
that the recent attacks coincide with new and important
initiatives for a peaceful settlement, both in Namibia and in
Zimbabwe. We regret in particular that such attacks are
currently being made against the country of the late President Neto, who just before his untimely death took new,
bold initiatives which raised hopes for progress towards a
peaceful settlement in Namibia. We welcome the Angolan
Government’s renewed commitment to these proposals,
reconfirmed yesterday by the representative of Angola. We
express our full support for the efforts that are under way to
break the present impasse in the Namibia negotiations. We
support the draft resolution before us, but we should like to
reiterate the observations we have made on previous occasions concerning operative paragraph 5.
49. Mr. PENAZKA
(Czechoslovakia)
(interpretation
fi-om Russian): May I, first of all, congratulate you most
sincerely, Sir, on behalf of the delegation of Czechoslovakia, on your assumption of the important position of President of the Security Council for the present month and
express our confidence that under your experienced leadership the Council will deal successfully with the tasks
entrusted to it. I am very happy to be able, in this connexion, to recall the fact that co-operative ties between Bolivia
and Czechoslovakia are being developed successfully in the
interests of the peoples of both our countries.
50. I should also like to take this opportunity to thank
your predecessor as President, the representative of Bangladesh, Mr. Kaiser, for his competent discharge of the affairs
of the Council during the past month.
51. The Security Council has on a number of occasions
during the past few years considered the question of the
aggressive actions of the racist regime of South Africa
against Angola and other sovereign African States. Similarly, it has frequently adopted resolutions which firmly
condemned South Africa’s aggressive attacks upon these
countries as a flagrant violation of their sovereignty and
territorial integrity and as a serious threat to international
peace and security. As recently as last March in its resolution 447 (1979), the Council again demanded that South
Africa cease immediately its provocative armed invasions
against the People’s Republic of Angola and that it respect
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of

that country. However, as the course of events, and particularly the events of recent days, clearly demonstrates, since
the adoption of that resolution the apartheid regime of
South Africa has continued to disregard completely the
demands of the Council, and this is eloquent proof of its
contempt for the views of the international community and
the Organization. That is why we deem it essential for the
Council not only to examine in detail the complaint by
Angola against South Africa but also to discuss urgent,
effective measures to prevent similar acts of aggression in
the future. The adoption of such measures is long overdue
and we can no longer procrastinate if we indeed wish to put
an end to the constant threat that looms over the southern
portion of the African continent.
52. The representative of the People’s Republic of Angola
presented to us at yesterday’s meeting a complete picture of
the most recent bloody acts of aggression by the racists
against Angola and at the same time exposed the true
purposes of the criminal actions of the South African apartheid regime. The Czechoslovak delegation fully shares his
appraisal of the racist’s acts.
53. The characteristic nature of these successive and
systematic acts of aggression by South Africa against
Angola and other front-line States launched from the international Territory of Namibia is evidence of the fact that
they cannot be viewed in isolation and without taking into
account the general situation in that part of the world. By
the unceasing acts of aggression against Angola, the racist
regime of South Africa is striving to destabilize the situation
in that independent African country, to hamper its free,
independent development and to weaken the consistent
support which Angola, in spite of all the sacrifices it has had
to make, is giving to the national liberation struggle oy the
peoples of Zimbabwe, Namibia and South Africa. At the
same time, the aggressive actions of South Africa against
Angola and other African countries are directly aimed at
disrupting the process designed to lead to the free exercise
by the people of Namibia of its inalienable right to selfdetermination, and at ensuring the establishment in Namibia of its own puppet neo-colonialist regime and maintaining the existing colonial and racist regime in southern
Africa.
54. It is possible to draw only one definite conclusion
from all this, and that is that as long as the apartheidregime
exists in South Africa, as long as it unlawfully occupies the
international Territory of Namibia and as long as it is able
to carry out with impunity aggressive attacks upon independent African States, there will be no peace or security in
that region.
55. The legitimate question automatically arises: how has
it been possible for the racist regime of Pretoria stubbornly
to refuse for so long to carry out the decisions of the Security
Council, and to continue to carry out its aggressive policy in
regard to neighbouring independent African States and the
African peoples of Namibia, Southern Rhodesia and South
Africa itself7 This has undoubtedly been possible only
because it has received comprehensive support and assistance from a number of Western countries. It is precisely
those countries that armed South Africa. It is precisely
those countries that, by their unceasing economic, financial

matter also expressesmy Government’s position of principle, which is always to support any requestfor the convening of the Council madeby any sovereignState Member of
the Organization.

and other support and cooperation, have assisted it in
setting up the enormous military-industrial complex upon
which it relies in conducting its aggressive policy. At the
same time, those countries ate hampering the adoption of
effective measures against the racists and thus putting the
Organization in a situation in which it cannot act in the face
of the defmnt attitude of the apartheid regime.

62. Virtually all the representatives who have already
spoken have quite rightly emphasizedthat the backdrop,
the root cause,of the unhappy events with which we are
now dealing is the problem of the decolonization of Zimbabwe and Namibia, which are the last bastionsof colonialism in Africa and the legacyof a time longpast. ‘Ibis almost
total unanimity in the judgement of theseevents makesit
necessaryfor the Council to conduct a thorough examination, followed by an appropriate responsereflecting the
hopesthat we the small countrieshave placed and continue
to place in the United Nations.

56. The Czechoslovak delegation firmly condemns the
ceaseless
armed attacks by South Africa againstAngola and
wishesto state once again quite definitely that it totally
supports the People’sRepublic of Angola in its struggleto
strengthenits independenceand in its efforts to protect the
sovereignty of its country and ensureits security.
57. In condemningthe aggressiveacts of the racists,we at
the same time support without qualification the just
demand of the overwhelming majority of the Members of
our Organization that the Security Council, in accordance
with its responsibilities,do everything necessaryto eliminate the threat to international peaceand security which the
continuing unlawful occupation of Namibia by South
Africa and its aggressiveactions directed againstindependent African States represent. In our opinion, this can be
achieved only by the Council’s adoption of the most decisive and effective measuresagainstSouth Africa in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter.

63. The dastardly, criminal incursionsof the South African soldiery into Angolan territory have becomeabsolutely
routine; indeed, they have becomethe daily fare of South
African troops in needof exercise.It will berecalledthat last
September the South African war machine viciously
attacked the town of Lubango, the capitol of the Angolan
province of Huila, and the city of Xangongo in Cunene
province, leaving behind scoresof dead and destroying a
number of -civilian economic and social targets. They must
be madeto pay for all that villainy. Only a few days ago, to
be specific, on 28 October, South African aircraft once
againcarried out criminal military sorties,whoseresultsare
too tragic to expressin words.

58. Mr. N’DONG (Gabon) (interpretatimfim
French):
My delegation warmly congratulates you, Sir, on your
accessionto the presidencyof the Security Council for the
month of November and wishesto expressto you its deep
satisfactionat seeingyou presidingover the Council’s work
while it is examining a problem so crucial for international
peaceand security in the southern part of our continent.

64. The goal of South Africa’s policy of aggression
towards its neighbours has been evident to everyone for a
long time now. An attempt-all the more vain sinceit is
desperate and blind-is being made to destabilize these
front-line countries, in particular Angola, which are guilty
of the crime of solidarity towards their brothers who are the
victims of injustice and the vilest possibleoppression.In
that respect,I should like to recall the solemncommitments
undertaken by two distinguishedAfrican headsof State. On
14 October 1977, His Excellency El Hadj Omar Bongo
stated the following to the General Assembly:

59. My delegation is so pleasedto seeyou in the Chair
because,in the first place, our two countries belong to the
non-aligned movement and, in the secondplace, we have
such friendly and co-operative relations in all the bodiesof
the United Nations. My delegation is convinced that with
your competenceand experiencein international affairsso well known to all of us-the Council will take a decision
capableof putting an end once and for all to the vile actsof
aggressionby South Africa and of strengtheningpeacein
that region, which is so sorely in need of it.

“Our peopleswill spareno effort to assisttheir unfortunate brothers. Their fate involves not only justice but
the security of the continent. That security will remain
uncertain, vulnerable and illusory as long as such a
source of international crisis remains at our very
doorstep.“l

60. I should like alsoto pay a well-deservedtribute to your
predecessor,Ambassador Kaiser of Bangladesh, for the
very wise, knowledgeableand competent way in which he
fulfilled his duties last month.

More recently, the late, lamented President Neto statedonly a few months before a relentlessmalady carried him
away:

61. My delegation was deeply moved by the clear and
highly detailed statement made to the Security Council by
the representativeof Angola. That statementconfirms once
again that the present situation in the southern part of
Africa isparticularly explosive. If that stateof tensionisnot
rapidly brought under control, it will inescapablylead to a
genuine conflict, with incalculable consequences.In other
words, in my delegation’sopinion, this situation constitutes
a real threat to international peaceand security. And it was
for that reasonthat my delegation strongly supported the
request for the convening of the Council made by the
representative of Angola. My delegation’sattitude in this

“Our contribution to peacein Africa cannot excuseus
from supporting the Namibian people . . . .Whatevcr
threatsmay be made,whatever measuresthe South Africansmay take, no matter how many air and land attacks
and acts of aggressionthey may carry out, we will resist
until Africa is completely free.”
65. Those two quotations, chosenfrom among so many
others, express-if there were any need still to do so-the
I Ojficial Recor& of the General Assembly,
Plenary Meetings, 34th meeting, para. 81.

6

Thirty-second

Session,

opportunity to push their scheme for “internal settlement”.
Following the illegal elections they stage-managed last
December, the South African racist author&s renamed the
“Constituent Assembly” the so-called “National Assembiy” last May, in an attempt to set up a puppet regime under
a legal cloak. At the same time, they continue to build up ”
arms, practise white terror and step up their brutal repression of the nationalist forces led by SWAPO and the Namibian people. Furthermore, they have ceaselessly subjected
the neighbouring African States to military pressure and
armed aggression. All this is designed to obstruct a settlement of the Namibian question and to facilitate the scheme
of an “internal settlement*‘.

irreversible commitment of the African countries to help
their oppressed brothers struggling against colonialism and
aparrheid. It is not through repeated acts of aggression by
South Africa that our countries will be diverted from their
sacred goal: the l&e&ion of the southern part of our
continent.
66. As we have said on a number of occasions, the longterm survival of the white minority in South Africa will
depend not on its blindness but on its understanding of
African realities-isolated
as that white minority is both
geographically and politically.
67. Therefore we believe that this new challenge flung at
the international community at the very moment when it is
using all its ingenuity here, as elsewhere, to find an appropriate solution to the painful problem of Namibia, must not
go unpunished-all
the more because these excesses are a
flagrant violation of the principle of respect for the sovereignty and integrity of States, in this instance Angola.

72. However, the Namibian and all the other great African peoples are not to be bullied. The evil deeds of the South
African racist authorities are arousing the Namibian and
other African peoples to more resolute struggles, which will
land the South African racists in greater isolation.
73. The Chinese Government and people have always
firmly supported the Namibian people in their just struggle
for national independence and liberation and have firmly
supported the front-line African States in their legitimate
position of giving active support and assistance to the struggle of the Namibian people. In our view, the Security Council should severely condemn the South African racist
authorities for their armed aggression against Angola and
other African States, call upon them to withdraw immediately all their invading forces and adopt effective measures, including all those rightly proposed by the African
countries, to prevent the recurrence of similar incidents.

68. In conclusion, my delegation fully associates itself
with the majority of the preceding speakers, who have
called on the Council strongly to condemn South Africa
and to oblige it to withdraw its forces from Angola and to
abstain in the future from such excesses.

’

69. Mr. CHOU Nan (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Mr. President, fast of all, on behalf of the Chinese
delegation, I wish to extend our warm congratulations to
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the current month. I would also like to take this
opportunity to express our admiration to Ambassador
Kaiser of Bangladesh, President of the Council for the
month of October, for his ability in handling the affairs of
the Council.

74. We are convinced that, with the support of front-line
African States and all the justice-upholding countries and
peoples, the Namibian people, strengthening their unity,
stepping up their struggle, guarding against and firmly
excluding interference and sabotage from outside forces,
will certainly frustrate all the evil acts and conspiracies on
the part of the South African racist authorities and win final
victory for national independence and liberation.

70. On 28 October, the South African racist authorities
sent armed airborne forces to carry out another flagrant
armed aggression against Angola. This is a fresh act of
glaring armed aggression committed by the South African
racist authorities in the wake of their recent continued
harassment and armed invasion of the neighbouring African States of Angola and Zambia. They have grossly violated the sovereignty and territorial integrity of those States,
causing serious damage to the lives and property of the local
population. The Chinese delegation feels greatly indignant
and condemns these acts strongly.

75. In the spirit of the foregoing, the Chinese delegation
will vote in favour of the draft resolution contained in
document S/13601 co-sponsored by Bangladesh and five
other Member States.
76. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): I should like to express very
briefly the views of the Government of Kuwait on this issue.
There is nothing new in that, and I do not want to reiterate
our position.

71. It must be stressed that the South African racist
authorities have launched their armed invasion of neighbouring African States from their bases in Namibia, with
the criminal design of preventing and obstructing the African States concerned from giving support and assistance to
the Namibian people’s struggle for national independence,
so as to realize their ambition of perpetuating their illegal
occupation of Namibia. Over the past year, despite the
important efforts made by SWAPO, the front-line countries
and other African States as well as the international community for a just and peaceful settlement of the Namibian
issue, no progress whatsoever has. been made so far. The
basic cause lies in the lack of a sincere desire for negotiation
on the part of the South African racist authorities, which
have clung to their reactionary position and seized the
/

77. At the outset, Mr. President, the deIegation of Kuwait
would like to congratulate you very warmly on the assump
tion of the presidency of the Council for this month. It is a
high o&e which places an enormous responsibility on your
shoulders, but we are certain that with your ability, discretion and experience you will discharge it with skill and
effectiveness, and we pledge our support to you.
78. We should also like to thank the outgoing President,
Ambassador Kaiser of Bangladesh, for his efforts during
the month of October. There were no meetings, but there
were a lot of contacts behind the scenes, and to him we give
the credit.
7

79. The renresentative of Angola gave a full account vesterday of what had happened-1 endorse what he said and
therefore I shall not repeat it. But, listening to his passionate, emotional and moving speech, in which he asked what
he should tell the orphaned children and the widowed
mothers, those whose relatives and supporters fell victim to
South Africa’s barbaric attack on his country, I was
reminded of the Greek poet, Sophocles, and his famous
exhortation: “Who is the slayer? Who the victim? Speak!“.

84. Hence the *Council has before it a toothless draft
resolution, which my delegation has sponsored reluctantly
and in the full knowledge that we are moving in circles
instead of taking steps forward. However, I would say that
there is a consensus in the world that South Africa is
pursuing a self-defeating policy. Some of us want itnmediate action in order to show South Africa that its policy is
self-defeating; some of us think that time and time alone will
tell it that.

80. And we shall speak. We shall speak because there is
nothing else left for us. There is no point in repeating what
we think of South Africa, which will remain an outcast,
responsible for bloody deeds. Its policy remains expansionist, suppressive, ruthless, insensitive and cowardly. There is
undoubtedly no bravery in attacking Angola, whose military power is limited and whose only defence is the determination of its people. There is international recognition of
Angola’s and other front-line States’ adherence to principles, and alsp an international consensus that such adherence to such principles
has cost those front-line
States-Zambia,
Angola, Botswana, Mozambique and
others-much.
We know that Angola and others, because
of geography and because of conviction, pay a high price for
defending principles in which all ofus believe. It is, as we say
in Kuwait, the fate of some of us to suffer for the good of all.

85. It is always useful to come to the Council. Therefore I
say to my friend, Ambassador Elisio de Figueiredo, that
this debate is not in vain. In life the guilty are more allergic
to criticism than anybody else. No doubt South Africa
knows this fact, and its impact is not lost on its rulers.
86. The reports about the nuclear blast should not cause
unjustified panic. After all, South Africa has nuclear capability regardless of the authenticity of the events of the last
two weeks.
87. Finally, we say in Kuwait: “In the end nothing triumphs more glaringly than the truth.” The truth is that the
struggle for equality, for justice, for equity and for selfdetemination will triumph in southern African.
88. Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): Mr. President, please
accept my warmest congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. In
welcoming you to this high offtce I am particularly conscious of the many qualities that you bring to bear in the
performance of your duties. I am confident that, given your
experience, efficiency and dedication, the affairs of the
Council will be directed fruitfully and purposefully. Bangladesh enjoys close and friendly relations with Bolivia and a
mutual identity of interests in virtually all fields. I wish you
all success.

81. The representative of Angola asked yesterday what he
should transmit to his people, who are the primary victims
of the aggression of the ugartheid regime. In such circumstances, I say to my friend Elisio, there is nothing better than
hope, for in life even the desperate live on glimpses of hope,
and in southern Africa there is a lot ofhope. If we speak out
with despair the mood will never change; but if we speak out
with determination and hope even the cynical will eventually reconsider their position. Political cynicism has given
rise to the saying “God is for the weak but the strong make
their own calculations”. We say that in Kuwait.

89. Once again brutal ground and air attacks have been
launched by South Africa against the People’s Republic of
Angola, exacting a bitter toll of death and human suffering
and causing widespread damage and destruction to property. There can be no doubt that these barbarous assaults
constitute not only a fundamental violation of international
law and a threat to international peace and security but also
studied defiance of the pronouncements of the Council,
calculated provocation and a challenge to its authority.

82. South Africa is a State which invites disdain and fear
because of the concept of apartheid. There is nothing more
dangerous in international relations than an evil-ridden
monster, armed to the teeth, who wreaks havoc on his
neighbours simply on the ground that they follow a policy
contrary to his. This is the case with South Africa. The
question is, how can the Council assist South Africa to
come to reason?

90. As my delegation has repeatedly stated, these attacks
are clearly not isolated instances. They are not simple reprisals in the face of alleged provocations. They are not spontaneous counter-actions. They are obviously part of a larger
design, a consistent premeditated pattern of action executed
in accordance with a calculated plan of escalating aggression. The indicators are obvious and manifold, the timing
precise and the objectives transparent.

83. The Western Powers have a primary responsibility in
this respect. Without their sound relationship with Pretoria,
things would have been better or at least different. South
Africa does not attach much importance to its relations
with the rest of the world, but it attaches enormous importance to its relations with the Western countries, whose
culture, beliefs and pattern of life it thinks it is defending.
Therefore, there is a moral obligation on the Western countries to prevail upon South Africa to put an end to its
inhuman policy. The problem we are facing is that it is hard
to distinguish between responsibility and interest. Responsibility in the case of South Africa means action; interest
means the opposite. The Security Council is caught between
those who defend action and those whose interest would be
threatened by action.

91. Previous speakers have alluded vividly to past acts of
aggression by South Africa against Angola which are inimical to its very emergence as a sovereign State and thereafter
to the continued viability and consolidation of its political
and economic independence. These attacks have been carefully synchronized by the racist regimes of Salisbury and
Pretoria and are aimed not only at Angola but also at all the
8

front-line States, in a determined effort to destabilize their
Governments and weaken and isolate their unrelenting support for the liberation struggle of the peoples of Namibia,
Zimbabwe and South Africa itself. More important, these
attacks have been focused on excluding, negating and even
wiping out the presence and influence of the genuine representatives of the peoples of the region, in particular
SWAP0 and the Patriotic Front.

The Council must now actively begin this process and fulfil
its responsibilities for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
96. The: concrete expression of our views is reflected in the
draft resolution now before the Council of which we have
the honour to be a sponsor. It is evident that this draft has
been allowed to fall far short of our expectations that it
might enjoy unanimous support.

92. For over a year the Governments of the racist regimes
in southern Africa have been playing the game of intemational co-operation in effecting a genuine, free and democratic transition to independence in Namibia and Zimbabwe.
But it is a game riddled with duplicity and prevarication,
whose fundamental objective is to impede and frustrate the
negotiating process and maintain in perpetuity, directly or
indirectly, domination, exploitation and the privileged status quo. This is the heart of the matter, the true substance
and motivation of the latest wave of aggression launched
against Angola. It is no longer an academic question of the
denial of human rights and the fundamental right of peoples
to freedom and independence. The situation today has
assumed the proportion of a full-fledged war involving
major military operations across international frontiers.
The consequences to peace and security in the region are
incalculable, particularly in the wake of reports on South
Africa’s nuclear capability.

97. In conclusion, my delegation, in expressing its deepest
condolences to the people and Government of Angola over
the tragic consequences of South Africa’s latest armed
incursion, reaffirms its solidarity with Angola and through
it with all the liberation forces in southern Africa. We
believe that the racist r&imes can never dampen the determination of oppressed peoples for freedom and independence, nor discourage the front-line States in their unrelenting
support of that liberation struggle. We pledge our fullest
support in the belief that the outcome is inevitable: victory
and triumph for the people of southern Africa.
98. Mr. BLANKSON (Nigeria): Mr. President, the Nigerian delegation has great pleasure in congratulating you on
your assumption of the high office of President of the
Security Council for the month of November. The diplomatic skill which has so far characterized your approach to
the demands of your high office assures us that you will
successfully direct the Council in its onerous duties. We are
also pleased that you represent Bolivia, a member of the
non-aligned movement, to which my country attaches great
importance.

93. There is no doubt that the failure of the Council to
take resolute action by means of measures provided for in
the Charter has not only not inhibited the racist r@imes in
committing their flagrant and continued acts of aggression
but has encouraged their defiance. Bangladesh believes that
it is imperative for the Council to go beyond the rhetoric of
recrimination and proceed to action. Not only must South
Africa be strongly condemned for its unjustifnble and criminal acts of aggression, but those acts must be stopped. The
1immediate demand is for the withdrawal of all its armed
forces from Angolan territory and for scrupulous respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s
Republic of Angola. The Council must stress unambiguously that the presence of South Africa in the international
Territory of Namibia is illegal and that it cannot with
impunity continue to use the Territory as a spring-board for
launching unprovoked attacks against independent frontline States.

99. I should also like to pay a tribute to Ambassador
Kaiser of Bangladesh, the immediate past President of the
Council, for the wisdom and diplomatic finesse with which
he conducted the business of the Council during his tenure.
100. Only last March, the Security Council met to consider the complaint lodged by the Permanent Representative of Angola against South Africa. The Council is now
meeting to consider yet another specific case ofunprovoked
South African aggression against the People’s Republic of
Angola. My dear friend and brother, Mr. de Figueiredo,
has, in his usual moving and eloquent manner, given us
another detailed account of the latest outrage perpetrated
against his country by the vandals and vampires of the
Pretoria racist rCgime.

94. It is also our confirmed belief that the Council must
hold South Africa accountable for the damage anddestruction wreaked on these States and exact due reparation and
compensation for its wanton acts. These States have for a
long time carried an unreasonably heavy burden politically,
materially and financially, in their support of the just liberation struggle in southern Africa. The international community has a duty to assist in alleviating this burden and to
provide all necessary assistance to strengthen their combined capability to support the liberation struggle until
freedom and independence are achieved in all States of this
beleaguered region.

101. His statement has added flesh to the communiquC
issued only a few days ago by the Political Bureau of the
Central Committee of the MPLA-Workers’
Party [S/135991.
From various accounts, South Africa’s latest criminal airborne and ground assaults have been directed against three
southern provincial capitals-those
of Porto Alexandre,
Mo&medes and Lubango-and
have left, inter alia, a toll of
20 dead, only two of whom were soldiers, and have caused
the destruction of railroad tracks, highway facilities, four
bridges and a number of automobiles. News accounts also
indicate that South African forces raided Angola in September, leaving a death toll of 50 and destroying facilities in
housing and industrial estates. These facts do not fully
reflect the extent and intensity of the atrocities committed
against Angola and other independent front-line African

95. The time has come for the Council seriously to consider acting upon its own repeated warnings to the racist
regimes that continued aggression could lead to the adoption of effective enforcement measures under the Charter.
9
,.

States. More than anything, these systematic and wilful acts
of aggression reveal South Africa’s idle pipe-dream of stemming the tide of freedom and justice in southern Africa.
They also reveal the racist’s sinister designs of creating a
constellation of pliant States in southern Africa.

108. As the Chairman of my delegation stated in the
General Assembly on 11 October:
“One area in which we intend in Nigeria to subject to
the acid test all professions of friendship by each and
every State for Africa is in southern Africa . . . . That a
minority racist regime in a country which has no claims
to be a world Power can defy the United Nations at will
has ominous impiications for the survival of our Organiration. How else can one judge the efftcacy of the international will, if the United Nations cannot give effect to
its decisions arrived at unanimously and in accordance
with the provisions of its Charter? What recourse is there
for the peaceful resolution of the problems of southern
Africa, when South Africa, in violation of international
law, bombs refugee camps and invades territories of
neighbouring countries in naked pursuit of a policy of
aggression, intimidation and terrorism?‘*

102. Why does Pretoria continue to defy the will of the
African community and persist in its marauding incursions
into neighbouring independent African States?The answers
are many and obvious, but it will suffice to mention a few.
The racist regime remains convinced that its friends in the
Western bloc will always stand ready to invest in and otherwise support its economy. The regime has no doubt that its
friends will continue to transfer resources and technology to
South Africa. The racists know that their friends will
directly or indirectly frustrate the efforts to strengthen the
military capability of the front-line States.
103. In my delegation’s judgement, possibly the best support and protection that the racist regime enjoys in the
Organization is the use of the veto by its friends. The
number of occasions when the veto has been used to fNStrate the will of the majority of the membership of the
Organization is only too well known. Secure in this knowledge, Pretoria is encouraged to carry out its acts of piracy
and aggression, Because of their complicity, these friends of
South Africa must share the responsibility for the present
tragic and unforeseen consequences of South Afri~a’s
actions.

109. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): Mr.
President, first I extend to you on behalf of my delegation
our warmest congratulations on your assumption of the
office of President of the Security Council for this month. I
should like also to express my warmest thanks to my good
friend Ambassador Kaiser of Bangladesh for guiding us so
peacefully and skilfully through the month of October.
110. The United Kingdom is tirmly and unswervingly
committed to negotiations leading to a peaceful and early
settlement of the problems of southern Africa. These especially include the need to achieve negotiated settlements in
Rhodesia and Namibia. We deplore attacks and violence
from any quarter. We sympathize warmly with the bitterness and rage so eloquently expressed by the representative
of Angola in his statement yesterday. We in my country
know all about the horrors of war and the miseries which it
brings in its wake.

104. Nigeria vigorously condemns the most recent act of
armed aggression of South African forces against Angola,
Zambia and other front-line States, These irresponsible acts
constitute a defiant violation of thesovereignty and territorial integrity of those countries. We demand that the Security
Council for once take a firm and resolute stand in keeping
with the provisions of the Charter.
105. Because of the principles they uphold, the front-line
States, all dedicated to constructing new economic, social
and political systems for the well-being of their populations,
have been made to bear too much of the burden caused by
South Africa’s reckless and wicked invasions. They have
paid too high a price in lives lost, in property damage and in
intimidation.

111. We believe that the best way to bring about an end to
the violence is to be found in the early implementation of
resolution 435 (1978). The cease-tire provided for in the
proposal of the Western Five, as endorsed by the Council,
should be put into effect with the greatest urgency. Actions
contrary to the spirit of resolution 435 (1978) must cease.
We deplore any escalation of violence, either within Namibia or in neighbouring countries. Recent South African raids
inside Angola have caused the death of innocent people and
the destruction of property, in clear violation of Angolan
sovereignty.

106. The Charter is unambiguous regarding the way to
handle errant Member States, like South Africa, which
_ constitute an abiding threat to international peace and
security. For its aggression against neighbouring States, for
its apartheid policy, for its piratical hold over Namibia, for
its prodigal usurpation of Namibia’s resources and for its
many other crimes against the conscience ‘and dignity of
mankind, South Africa has more than earned the invocation of the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter in its
entirety.

112. We are now in discussions with the SecretaryGeneral and with the parties about ways to bring about an
end to the violence through the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). This means a settlement in accordance with
the proposal of the Five supplemented by the establishment
of a demilitarized zone. Progress towards such a settlement
and the all-too-necessary cease-fire can be achieved only if
all those involved are prepared to turn aside from the road
of violence and to return to the road of negotiations.

107. Many nations look up to the Security Council as the
final arbiter, the final court of appeal in certain aspects of
matters involving inter-State relationships. The authority
and honour of the Council and the respect due to it could be
restored, and indeed increased, only if Member States with
the power of the veto would place the interests of intemational harmony and justice above narrow national interests
in the exercise of their veto privileges.

113. The initiative on Namibia to which my Government
and the Governments of Canada, France, the Federal
2 Ibid.,

90.

10

Thirty-fourth

Session. Plenary

Meetings.

30th meeting, para.

loss of life and destruction of valuable infrastructure, cannot be justified.

Republic of Germany and the United States are committed
must continue. We are ready to lend our full support to the
Secretary-General in his efforts to implement resolution435
(1978). We are determined to pursue a peaceful solution for
Namibia that will win international recognition. This initiative is now again at a’crucial stage.

120. Moreover, these attacks on towns from 120 miles
north of the .Angolan-Namibian
frontier can only be
considered a serious escalation of the level of con&t at a
time when the efforts of the United Nations to find a
peaceful solution in Namibia, in accordance with resolution 435 (1978), are at a,crucial stage. The SecretaryGeneral, with the co-operation of the Governments of
Canada, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, the
United Kingdom and the United States, is pursuing a
further initiative to solve the remaining problems which
impede the implementation of the United Nations settlement plan. Consequently, the United States deplores South
Africa’s action. Such actions, and any repetition or escalation of hostilities, not only endanger the settlement itself
but further poison South Africa’s relations with its neighbours and with the international community.

114. I now turn to the draft resolmion before us
[S/1360Z’j. I confess myself both surprised and disappointed at the procedure which has brought us to the point
at which we now stand. For many years it has been my firm
belief that the Council is only effective when it acts on a
basis of full consensus. Resolutions which divide the Council, even if they are adopted, seldom if ever lead to practical
action.
115. I do not dispute the urgency of the problem with
which we are faced. But I do dispute the need to press on to
a vote at less than 24 hours’ notice on a draft resolution
which has been presented to us as a virtual ultimatum, with
no serious attempt to engage in negotiation. There is wording in the draft which my delegation cannot support for
broad reasons of principle. It could have been changed
without altering the main drive of the resolution itself.
Indeed, certain delegations made suggestions to thii effect.
But those suggestions were swept aside, and we were told
that the sponsors were not prepared to negotiate one word.

121. At this delicate juncture we urge South Africa to
exercise the utmost restraint and to make a positive contribution towards establishing peace with its neighbours by
achieving an internationally
recognized settlement in
Namibia.
122. We hope that all parties to this conflict understand
that by trying to resolve differences through the barrel of a
gun rather than through democratic processesand peaceful
negotiation they contribute to the problem rather than to
the solution. We must break the cycle of violence and
instead aim at a comprehensive resolution of the problem.

116. I vividly remember the negotiations in the Council
which followed the major war in-the Middle East in June
1967. Throughout that long period of negotiation, lives
were still being lost and property destroyed. But the Council
worked patiently until, in November 1967, it was able to
emerge with a consensus which has since become the almost
universally accepted basis for a settlement of the Middle
East problem. If the Council had been obliged to vote at less
than 24 hours’ notice on the first draft before it immediately
.following that war, that firm basis for a settlement would
not now exist.

123. Once again, then, we call upon South Africa to desist
from these attacks. In the long run they achieve nothing of
benefit to anyone. They lead only to pain, death, continued
turmoil and a determination to exact retribution. We urge
restraint and patience on all parties so that negotiations will
have an opportunity to produce the desired effect.

117. Earlier today, I was full of hope that the Council
would emerge from today’s meeting with a full consensus.
But the rejection by the sponsors even of minor changes to
the draft and the insistence that a-vote must be taken
tonight, with no more room left for negotiation, has made
this impossible. For the above reasons, my delegation will
be unable to support the draft resolution and, if it is
adopted, we shall not regard it as having constituted .a
determination under the Charter.

124. We are convinced that the goal of peace in Namibia
and the fulfilment of the hopes of the people of Namibia can
only be realized by the conscious will of the parties to make
peace. For its part, the United States is determinedfo press
forward in the initiative on Namibia which we have undertaken with our colleagues and the United Nations.

118. Mr. PETREE (United States of America): Mr. President, I am happy to join other members in welcoming you
to the presidency of the Council. You have already amply
‘- demonstrated your skill in handling the Council’s activities
during these first two days of November. I should also like
to express to your predecessor, Ambassador Kaiser, the
deep appreciation of my delegation of the efficient manner
in which he dealt with the Council’s business last month.

12.5. In closing, I want to express my regret that the sponsors of the draft resolution before us have been unable to
accept the few changes which would have allowed us to
support the draft resolution. The result is that the Council .
has missed the opportunity to send South Africa the stem
warning which its actions merit. .It is important, however,
that South Africa take no comfort from this divided Council. The fact is that we join others in deploring South Afrita’s armed invasion of Angola. South Africa’s action and
the similar actions it has taken in the past can only earn it
the continuing condemnation of the entire world community.

119. At the outset I want to express my sincere condolences to the Government and people of Angola on the loss of
life which has occurred as a consequence of recent South
African raids into Angola’s territory. Such attacks, launched
across an internationally recognized border and resulting in

126. Mr. LEPRETTE
(France) (inrerpretation from
French): Allow me first, as I am speaking for the first time
this month, to congratulate you Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council. Knowing your experience and your talents, we are certain that the debates will
11

be guided ably and competently. I should also like to take
this opportunity to greet our colleague, Ambassador Kaiser,
and to extend our congratulations to him on the expert and
conciliatory way in which he discharged his functions last
month.

em partners, continues to play an active role in the settlement of the Namibian question, will abstain in the vote on
this draft resolution.
135. The PRESIDENT (interprerurionfram Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

127. The debate which has taken place yesterday and
today has allowed us to hear several speakers and, in particular, the representative of Angola, who submitted the complaint of his country against South Africa. We listened to hi
testimony with great attention and we learned from it that
once again the South African army has launched a series of
attacks against Angolan territory.
128. France can only condemn such acts of force. They
are really scandalous, and they must cease. My delegation
would like to express its profound sympathy with the families who have been affected by these latest ordeals.

136. Mr. KOMATINA
(Yugoslavia): Mr. President. mav
I say how gratified I am to have this opportunity to address
to you my warm congratulations on the occasion of your
assumption of the responsible function of President of the
Security Council. My satisfaction is the greater in that I am
able to greet in your person the representative of a country
that has recently become a full-fledged member of the nonaligned movement.

129. The South African attacks have infringed the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola. This inadmissible
behaviour will seriously jeopardize the security ‘of the
region.

137. I am also very pleased to convey my congratulations
to your predecessor, Ambassador Kaiser of Bangladesh,
who guided the work of the Council so successfully during
the month of October.

130. Moreover, these armed incursions seriously complicate the peaceful settlement of the Namibian question. It is
obvious that that settlement is at the core of the problem.
Indeed it is clear that the northern borders of Namibia will
continue to be the theatre of tension and serious incidents
unless Namibia accedes to independence as a result of an
internationally acceptable solution based on the implementation of resolution 435 (1978).

138. I should like to thank the Council for having given
me the opportunity to set forth the views of my country in
connexion with the item at present on our agenda and to
pledge our full solidarity with non-aligned Angola, which
has again become the victim of aggression on the part of
South Africa.
139. The dastardly terrorist acts carried out by South
Africa have been described with eloquence and passion by
the representative of Angola, Ambassador Elisio de
Figueiredo. These acts have been perpetrated at a moment
when the thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly is
dealing actively and constructively with problems of decolonization and when the international community is endeavouring to ensure the realization of the right of the peoples
of Namibia and Zimbabwe to self-determination and independence through support for the liberation struggle of the
peoples of southern Africa andthe creation of conditions
for political solutions. In all cases,when trying to find the
reason why problems in this area remain unsolved, we are
bound to come to the conclusion that South Africa constitutes the only obstacle and is the main cause of instability
and of the crisis situation in the African continent. What is
more, South Africa is constantly asserting itself as the direct
perpetrator of brutal acts ofaggression against peace-loving
and independent Angola, a Member of the United Nations
and an active member of the non-aligned movement.

131. Recent events have shown how:urgent and necessary
it is to take steps to demilitarize the border zone so as to
make the repetition of such crimes impossible.
132. At a time when the possibility of reaching a settlement of the Namibian question is becoming clear, my delegation feels that it is more than ever imperative that the
parties concerned refrain from any act of violence both in
Namibia and in the neighbouring countries. Everything
must be done to attain the basic goal: the holding as soon as
possible of free elections under United Nations supervision.
In this cannexion we should like to reaffirm our complete
confidence in the Secretary-General.
133. Regarding the draft resolution submitted by the nonaligned States which are members of the Council [S//3604,
my delegation shares the spirit and the general ideas behind
it. It associates itself with the concerns mentioned therein
and endorses many of the recommendations. However,
some of the wording which was used seems to us inappropriate. My delegation regrets the fact that certain amendments were not made to the text which would have made
possible a unanimous vote. We are aware of the legitimate
impatience of the sponsors of the draft, who want the
Council rapidly to take a stand on this problem clearly and
speedily. We respect their feelings, but we deplore the,fact
that not all Council members were able to make their
contribution to preparing the text. That slip might cause
concern in the future.

.140. We are now faced with yet another brutal challenge
to the international community, the United Nations and the
principles of the Charter and of the non-aligned movement.
All the more urgent, then, are the tasks facing the Organization and all of us and all the greater the moral and political
responsibility of those Western Powers that maintain close
relations with South Africa and enable it constantly to defy
the world.
141. Angola, which is a constant victim of acts of aggression committed by the Pretoria regime, has several times
addressed itself to the Organization, seeking our support in
the defence of its independence and territorial integrity. I do

134. Council members will understand, therefore, that for
these various reasons my delegation, which, with its West12

not doubt that the Security Council will express its solidarity with the victim of aggression. However, I wonder
whether its words of condemnation will be again held up to
ridicule tomorrow through a new provocation by the racist
regime, or whether this is the moment when-in addition to
expressing condemnation-we
should adopt urgent and
effective measures with a view to bringing the aggressor to
reason. It is obvious that we are faced not with one incident
or series of incidents, but with deliberate action aimed at
checking the process of liberation of southern Africa and at
perpetuating relationships based on racial and colonial
subjugation.

the world. Owing to the aggressive policy of the Pretoria
rtgime, southern Africa has been transformed into a dangerous focal point of crisis which could very easily expand
into an international conflict. All this underscores still
further the responsibility of the United Nations and calls
for prompt and unequivocal action by the Security Council. The decision of the Council should be taken in the spirit
and on the basis of the very large consensus of the whole
international community. Ordinary and customary condemnations may no ionger be sufficient, and it is therefore
indispensable to begin to think about imposing sanctions
under Chapter VII of the Charter.

142. It is evident that Angola today, like Zambia and
Mozambique and other front-line States yesterday, is the
victim of such a policy, the final aim of which is to prevent
the full emancipation of the whole of Africa. These countries are the main bulwarks of the struggle for national
independence and social progress. They are also a constructive factor in the solution of the whole complex of the crisis
in southern Africa on the basis of the minciules of the
United Nations.

146. The non-aligned countries are constantly assuming
their share of responsibility for the liquidation of the vestiges of colonialism and racism. They are supporting the
struggle of peoples for national liberation and their liberation movements, SWAP0 in Namibia and the Patriotic
Front in Zimbabwe, upholding all solutions in harmony
with the distinct objective of achieving for those peoples
the right to freedom and independence.
147. My country is in solidarity with the people of
Angola and with the sacrifices it has been making in the
common struggle against colonialism, racism and racial
discrimination.
In consistency with its policy of nonalignment and the decisions adopted by conferences on
non-aligned countries, Yugoslavia will, within the limits of
its capabilities, lend all-out assistance and support to the
People’s Republic of Angola and the front-line States victims of acts of aggression and terrorism perpetrated by the
racist regimes of Pretoria and Salisbury.

143. Unsettled within by the liberation struggle and isolated without, the racist regimes feel menaced. The reaction
of these regimes-typical
of their colonial and racist
nature-takes
the form of punitive expeditions, bombing,
terror and intimidations, by which means they strive to
postpone the day of .reckoning. Their aim is clear. It
amounts to an attempt to destabilize the front-line States, in
this case Angola, and to create problems in that country,
folIowing the death of its great President Agostinho Neto,
so as to bring about a change in the active anti-racist and
anti-colonial policy of.principle being pursued by that wuntry. It is also characteristic that the new act of aggression
should have taken place precisely at this moment when, in
the case of Namibia and Southern Rhodesia, action is under
way with a view to finding peaceful solutions by means of
negotiations on Zimbabwe and by the implementation of
the United Nations plan on Namibia. Such solutions and
their implementation are obviously not to the liking of the
racist authorities, as they would prevent them from maintaining colonial rule and would eliminate the system of
oppression on which the policies and practices of apartheid,
racism and racial discrimination are based..

148. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Mozambique. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
149. Mr. LOB0 (Mozambique): Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of November and to express
the gratitude of the People’s Republic of Mozambique to
you and, through you, to the members of the Council for
ailowing my delegation to participate in the debate of this
important body of the world Organization.
150. Once again the People’s Republic of Mozambique is
taking part in the proceedings of the Security Council in the
search for appropriate and effective measures for the solution of an important problem which is becoming a serious
threat to international peace and security in general and to
the peace and security of southern Africa in particular.

144. Another reason for our concern is the fact that the
racist regime of Pretoria has mastered the nuclear-weapon
technology and is getting ready to become-or has already
become-a nuclear Power which poses a direct threat to the
whole of Africa and also a ‘threat to world peace and
security. All those who, for selfish reasons or greed for
profits, or out of erroneously conceived strategic considerations, continue to co-operate with the racist regime and
intentionally or unintentionally make it easier for it to
manufacture nuclear bombs should become concerned
about the consequences of this fact.

151. In March of this year we had the opportunity to
denounce before this august body the overwhelming escalation of the acts of aggression committed by the racist minority regime of Pretoria against the People’s Republic of
Angola, a front-line State. Nevertheless, the aggression, the
massacres and the destructive acts committed against
Angola continue to occur.

145. The facts enumerated and the behaviour of South
Africa which has, as a result of its policies, long ago
removed itself from the international community, impose
the logical conclusion that the Security Council must react
to this new provocation in accordance with the Charter
and its mandate as the defender of peace and security in

152. Today, as in March, South Africacontinues to utilize
the international Territory of Namibia as a spring-board for
the armed invasion of the People’s Republic of Angola.
13

.

.

Today, as in March, South Africa shows no respect of any
kind for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola. Today, as has been the case since its independence, Angola supports and will continue to support the
people of Namibia in their just and legitimate struggle.
Today, as was the case in March, the racist regime of South
Africa continues its persistent and sustained armed invasions of the People’s Republic of Angola, resulting in a
tragic loss of human life. From all points of view, these are
condemnable acts. These analyses have been made and
these considerations expressed more than once in the Council. We are still waiting, however, for the Council to act on
its warning that it would
“meet again in the event of further acts of violation ofthe
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s
Republic of Angola by the South African racist rtgime in
order to consider the adoption of more effective measures, in accordance with the appropritate provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations, including Chapter
VII thereof’.
The world is now watching to see if the Council lives up to
its promises.
153. The racist r@ime of South Africa continues to be the
main factor in the present dispute, which is endangering the
peace and security of the African continent as a whole, and
particularly that of southern Africa. The brutal and rep&sive nature of the South African regime and its stubborn
persistence in its policies of apartheid is serving to encourage
and support the military incursions carried out in the area
by the rebel and illegal Smith-Muzorewa r&ime. Senseless
killings of civilians and barbaric massacres of refugees have
spread progressively from Nyazonia to Botswana and from
Cassinga to Zambia in a short period of time.
154. All this is happening because the South African racist
r&ime still insists upon defying the international community. It still continues to occupy Namibia illegally in flagrant
violation of all the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly.
155. The recent events in Mo@rnedes and Port0 Alexandre would never have taken place without the complicity of
some members of the Council which maintain close ties of
military and nuclear co-operation with the racist.r&ime of
Pretoria. We hold those countries responsible for. the victims of Mo@medes and Port0 Alexandre. We hold those
countries responsible for the victims of the massacres carried. out with Bell helicopters and Mirage bombers in
Mozambique.

attack on Angola should not be seen as an isolated o&urence. The truth is that this entire wave of co-ordinated acts
of military aggression by South Africa and Rhodesia
against Angola, Zambia and Mozambique is aimed at destabilizing the current revolutionary process taking place in
these States. These attacks are intended to destroy the international solidarity which the people of the area are extending to the national liberation movements of southern Africa
in their just struggle.
158. We know very well that the role of South Africa in
the area is part of an old global imperialist strategy aimed at
perpetuating the domination and exploitation of the people
of southern Africa. It is very regrettable, however, that the
racists of South Africa and Rhodesia have adopted the
method and tactics of defying the peace efforts of the international community by systematically intensifying armed
aggression against the people of Angola, Botswana,
Mozambique and Zambia every time a negotiated solution
for Namibia and Zimbabwe is in process or at hand. We the
people of the front-line States, together with all other African States and the peace-loving peoples of the world, will
continue to play our role with respect to the peoples of
Rhodesia, Namibia and South Africa regardless of intimidation by the racists of Pretoria and Salisbury.
159. Bkfore concluding my brief statement I should like to
reafliim our militant solidarity with the People’s Republic
of Angola, that sister State which is devoted to the total
liberation of the African continent and is collaborating
closely with the United Nations in the search for a negotiated solution $0 the problem of Namibia. Before this
important body, created for the preservation of world peace
and security, we reaffirm to the party, to the people and to
the Government of the People’s Republic of Angola our
readiness to fulfil the duties which unite us in the common
struggle against imperialism, colonialism, neo-colonialism,
racism and upurtheid. We hope that the international community and particularly the Security Council will take effective and appropriate measures to put an end to this criminal
aggression, which can seriously affect the peace and security
-of .the world.
160. The People’s Republic of Mozambique’is and will
always be prepared to fulfil its international duty as regards
the national liberation struggle of the peoples of southern
Africa until their final victory. We vehemently condemn the
South African racist &ime for its armed attack on Angola,
and we urge the Security Council to take strong measures
against South Africa so that these provocative actions will
not be repeated in the area.

156. This is not the first time that South Africa has carried
out a massive invasion of Angola using plane& helicopters,
bombs and heavy artillery against economic and strategic
targets. It is time for the Council to prove to the world in
general, and to the Angolans in particular, that the international community does not condone the barbaric actions of
the racists of Pretoria against their country.

161. A hta continz&
162. The PRESIDENT (i&pretationfrom
Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Viet Nam. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

157. The recent armed acts of aggression by the racist
regime of South Africa against the People’s Republic of
Angola clearly reveal the bellicose nature of the minority
regime of South Africa. It is important to note that the

163. Mr. HA VAN LAU (Viet Nam) (interpretationfrom
French): Mr. President, I should like at the outset to express
to you and the members of the Security Council my delegation’s gratitude for allowing me to participate in the Council’s debate on the question of the &cent aggression by

South Africa against the People’s Republic of Angola. I
should like also to extend heartfelt congratulations to you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of November.

and South Africa in their struggle against the Pretoria and
Salisbury racist apartheid regimes.
167. The armed aggression on 28 October last by the
Pretoria regime is not only a further crime against the
Angolan people, a flagrant violation of Angola’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, but also a serious threat to
peace and security in southern Africa and in Africa as a
whole.

164. This is not the first time that the Council has had to
examine the acts of aggression by the racist South African
and Rhodesian regimes against the People’s Republic of
Angola and the other front-line States. The communiquC of
the Political Bureau of the Central Committee of the
MPLA-Workers’
Party published on 30 October 1979
[S/135991 and the major statement made yesterday by the
representative of Angola have proved the extremely grave
nature of this further racist attack and justified the deep
disquiet of the international community at Pretoria’s policy
of aggression and expansionism towards the neighbouring
countries. As pointed out in the communique to which I
have just referred, on 28 October last the People’s Republic
of Angola was once again the victim of a massive attack by
airborne and ground troops of racist South Africa on several provincial capitals in the southern part of the country,
leaving dozens of victims among the civilian population and
the soldiers of FAPLA, destroying means of communication and causing severe material damage to the country’s
economy.

168. It must be pointed out that the fresh armed act of
aggression by Pretoria against the Angolan people and that
by Salisbury against Zambia coincide with the new and
extremely serious challenge flung at the international community by the apartheid r&ime. I am referring to the reports
that South Africa has recently detonated a nuclear device.
Despite the warnings and the vehement protests by the
international community, the Pretoria regime, which is
already armed to the teeth, has, it seems very likely,
acquired nuclear weapons. There is no need to be a military
strategist to understand what nuclear weapons in the hands
of the racists mean.
169. It is no secret to anyone that, without the protection
and complicity of imperialism and international reaction,
the South African racists could not so arrogantly and cynically scorn world public opinion and all the resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council. The economic collaboration between South Africa and certain
Western countries has been growing; their military and
nuclear collaboration has never stopped. The Security
Council resolution regarding the arms embargo against
South Africa has not been respected. Economic sanctions
against Pretoria cannot be adopted by the Councilnotwithstanding
the unanimous demands of the international community-because
of the threefold veto by the
Western countries permanent members of the Council. One
effective means to compel the apartheid regime to heed the
will of the international community is to implement comprehensive sanctions in accordance with Chapter VII of the
Charter and to put an end forthwith to all forms, of economic, military and nuclear collaboration with Pretoria.

165. The Council will remember that, since the time
immediately after its accession to independence and up to
the present day, the People’s Republic of Angola has been
the subject of constant military pressure by the apartheid
regime of South Africa: border provocations, aerial bombardment, long-range artillery barrages, ground invasions,
and so forth. The sinister design of the Pretoria regime is to
seek by all possible means to intimidate and destabilize
Angola and the other front-line countries in order to
weaken the constant support that these States receive from
the national liberation movements of the peoples of Nami-’
bia, Zimbabwe and South Africa.
166. Confronted by the repeated and barbaric acts of
aggression by the Pretoria and Salisbury racist regimes, the
heroic people of Angola, under the wise guidance of the
MPLA-Workers’
Party, led by the late, lamented President
Agostinho Neto and the new President, Jose Eduardo dos
Santos, has responded energetically, has driven the aggressors out of the country and has successfully defended its
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, thereby
safeguarding the achievements of the revolution and the
successes of national reconstruction.
The people and
Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam wish to
reaffirm on this occasion their unshakable solidarity with
the fraternal people of Angola. We would like to express
our admiration to the people and Government of Angola
for the staunch way in which they have defended their
independence and their freedom, and for the ever-growing
support that they unfailingly give to SWAPO, the Patriotic
Front and the African National Congress in their just and
legitimate struggle. We pay a resounding tribute to the other
front-line countries for their active solidarity with the peoples of southern Africa and for the sacrifices they have
made in supporting, by all the means at their disposal, the
national liberation movements of that region. Their
valuable aid and support are important factors, contributing to the final victory of the people of Namibia, Zimbabwe

170. My Government indignantly condemns the new act
of aggression perpetrated by South Africa against the People’s Republic of Angola and strongly enjoins the Security
Council to take effective steps under Chapter VII of the
Charter to meet the just request made yesterday by our
colleague Ambassador Elisio de Fiieiredo, representative
of the People’s Republic of Angola. My delegation joins
others in urging the Council to condemn the acts of aggression committed by the racist regime of South Africa and to
take steps that could halt any further military attacks
against the People’s Republic of Angola and the other
front-iine countries. The South African regime should be
compelled to respect the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Angola and the other neighbouring
countries.
171. The PRESIDENT (interpretatiunjkm
Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Colombia. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
15

A vote was taken by a show of had.

172. Mr. L&VAN0
(Colombia) (interpretation from
Spanish): The delegation of Colombia wishes to refer to the
complaint by the Government of Angola conveyed in a
letter from Ambassador Elisio de Figueiredo on the attacks
by South African military troops against several regions of
his country, attacks which were carried out with sophisticated modem weapons and in particular with aerial equipment. There have been massive unexpected assaults against
three provincial capitals in which ground troops were
brought in by helicopter.
’

In favour:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia

Against:
Abstaining:
and Northern

None
France, United Kingdom of Great Britain
Ireland, United States of America

The draft resolution wasadopted by 12 votes to none, with 3
abstentions.’

.173. My delegation emphatically condemns this violation
of clear rules of international law and considers it to be one
more challenge by the Government of South Africa to the
United Nations. An act of aggression has been committed
against the territory of a sovereign nation, a Member of the
Organization. We have here, quite simply, a policy of armed
coercion in Angola and at the same time, bellicose threats
against what are known as the front-line States, which have
had to endure similar aggression on other occasions. In this
manner, the Government of South Africa is once again
responding with violence to United Nations gestures aimed
at seeking a just solution to the problem of the independence of Namibia.

178. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation fram Spanish):
Since there are no further speakers, I shall now make a
statement in my capacity as representative of BOLIVIA.
179. The delegation of Bolivia expresses once more its
strong condemnation of the acts of aggression committed
by the South African r&me against Angola, acts which
constitute a serious violation of world peace and of one of
the basic principles of international relations: respect for the
territorial integrity and the sovereignty of States. Consequently, the violation calls for a prompt response from the
United Nations, and in particular from the Security Council. Bolivia decidedly supports all efforts leading to an end
of South African aggression in Angola. On the speed and
dynamism with which the Council acts will depend the
effectiveness of its resolutions.

174. This question of Namibia, as has been repeatedly
stated by my delegation, in particular in the United Nations
Council for Namibia, can only be resolved through the free
exercise of the right of its people to self-determination by
means of elections in which the entire population may
participate without pressures of auy kind and under United
Nations supervision. That is the frame of reference which
the United Nations insists on in order to accept as just and
legitimate the solution to the question bf the Territory
placed under its legal administration. It is only within those
parameters that legitiinate independence for Namibia will
be obtained, and not iIp obedience to the nostalgic wish of
the Pretoria Government to return to outmoded forms of
colonialism or neo-colonialism.

180. The above statement is sufficient explanation of the
vote of my country.
181. In conclusion, I wish to stress that Bolivia stands in
firm solidarity with the people of Angola in its ceaseless,
relentless struggle for the attainment of its sovereignty and
its right to live in peace.
182. Resuming in my duties as PRESIDENTofthe
Council, I call on the representative of Angola, who has asked to
be allowed to speak.

175. Attacks such as those committed against Angola; the
internal repression and the suppression of all forms of
freedom are intended to force the people of Namibia to
accept a rhgime imposed by South Africa, so that the latter
may continue to use and exploit the natural wealth of the
Territory and, under the apartheid regime, to obtain cheap
labour-quasi-slaves.

183. Mr. de FIGUEIREDO
(Angola): Does not the African man bleed? How long must Africa and the rest of the
third world wait for sanctions and punitive measures to be
adopted by the Security Council? How long, Mr. President?
How long, Mr. Secretary-General?

176. The delegation of Colombia calls upon the Security
Council to condemn these acts of aggression by the Govemment of South Africa because this is certainly not an isolated conflict, a conflict lost in the sands of Namibia and the
territory of Angola, far away from the capital cities in which
the fate of mankind is determined. Today such bilateral
conflicts do not exist, since all conflicts are universal. The
attack by South Africa against Angola undoubtedly
endangers iatemational peace and security and, bearing this
in mind, the Council must act effectively, as the Charter
demands and as the international community expects.

184. At this point I should like to express the appreciation
of my Government and my delegation to those of our
friends here at the United Nations who responded with
statements of solidarity during the Council’s debate to our
complaint of South African racist attacks and aggression
against the territory and people of the People’s Republic of
Angola.
185. Mr. President, through you I wish to thank those
members of the Council who supported my country’s quest
for justice and respect for the Charter by a condemnation of
the violation of Angolan territory and sovereignty by the
racist imperialist minority r&ime of Pretoria.

177. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish): I
understand that members of the Council are now ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution which is before
them [S/13601].

3 See resolution

16

454 (1979).

186. A report was compiled recently by the SecretaryGeneral [S/Z3473J on the basis of information supplied by
my Government, which outlines the human, material and
financial losses suffered by Angola as a result of various
South African attacks. However, no amount of statistics,
reports, facts or figures can fully relate the sum total of what
the constant racist-imperialist attacks mean in terms of the
national life of my country, in terms of Angola’s efforts to
overcome the handicaps of the past and the immense difficulties of the present. Figures certainly do no justice to the
human suffering of the people of Angola as their loved ones
die, as the fruit of their labour is destroyed time and time
again. Nor do they illustrate what it means to live under the
constant threat of attack by racist troops and aerial
bombardment.

188. I do not wish to sound unnecessarily pessimistic, but.
I cannot help feeling that we have not seen the last of South
Africa’s imperialist military adventurism and, therefore, I
do not think that this is my last appearance before the
Security Council.
189, Not until South Africa is made to change its imperialist posture, not until the people of Namibia is free and
independent, not until Zimbabwe is truly decolonized and
has a freely elected majority Government, will peace and
stability come to southern Africa. Until then the people and
the Government of Angola are ready to continue their
support for the liberation of all of southern Africa.
190. The PRESiDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
There are no further speakers. The Security Council has
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the item
on the agenda.

187. Even as I speak now, my Government is discovering j
and compiling the full extent of the damage and destruction
wrought by South Africa, especially in terms of the dead
and the injured and the vast laying of mines which will
continue to cause death and injury in the months to come.
At this moment the South African racist Air Force continues to violate Angolan air space.

The meeting rose at 7.15 p.m.

.

17

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
throughout
Section,

Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
New York or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

may
your

LES

PUBLICATIONS
be obtained
bookstore

or

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
write
to: United

DES

NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
sont
en vente
dans
les
d&ositaires
du monde
entier.
Inforrnez-vous
aupr&s
de votre
g : Nations
Unies.
Section
des ventes.
New York ou GenBve.
KAK

COMO

IIOJIYVHTb

CONSEGUIR

H3AAHHfl

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las
buidoras
en todas
partes
Unidas,
Seccidn
de Ventas.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

OPrAHEt

3A4EiU

DE

LAS

Naciones
Unidas
estin
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

00250

distributors
Nations,
Sales

UNIES

librairies
libraire

OIi-bEAHHEHHhIX

NACIONES

and

et les agences
ou adressez-vow

HAUlfR

UNIDAS

en venta
en librerfas
a su librero
o didjase

y casas distria: Naciones

79-7#02-May

1982-2.250
