248

General Assembly- Thirty-ninth Session

ration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly
resolution I 514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Recalling also its resolution 38/49 of 7 December 1983,
in which it requested the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution
1970 (XVIII),
I. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting oflndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by the
General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing Territory has attained a full measure of self-government under
the terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering
Power concerned should continue to transmit information
under Article 73 e of the Charter with respect to that
Territory;
3. Requests the administering Powers concerned to
transmit, or continue to transmit, to the Secretary-General
the information prescribed in Article 73 e of the Charter,
as well as the fullest possible information on political and
constitutional developments in the Territories concerned,
within a maximum period of six months following the
expiration of the administrative year in those Territories;
4. Requests the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under General Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with established procedures, and to report thereon to the Assembly
at its fortieth session.
87th plenary meeting
5 December 1984

39/42.

Activities of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
in Namibia and in all other Territories under
colonial domination and efforts to eliminate
colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Activities of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in
Namibia and in all other Territories under colonial domination and efforts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and
racial discrimination in southern Africa",
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the item, 42
Taking into consideration the relevant chapters of the
report of the United Nations Council for Namibia, 43
Recalling its resolutions I 514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 2621 (XXV)
of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action
42 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session, Suppl,·ment No. 23 (N39/23), chap. V.
43 !hid., Supplement No. 24 (A/39/24), part two, chap. II, sect. C chap. Ill,
sects. D and G; and chap. IX, sect. C'.
4 4 See Report of the International Conference in Support of the Struggle o/
the Namibian People for Independence. Paris. 25-29 April /98.1 (Ai
CONF. I 20/13), part three.

for the full implementation of the Declaration, and 35/118
of 11 December 1980, the annex to which contains the
Plan of Action for the Full Implementation of the Declaration, as well as all other resolutions of the United Nations
relating to the item,
•
Reaffirming the solemn obligation of the administering
Powers under the Charter of the United Nations to promote the political, economic, social and educational
advancement of the inhabitants of the Territories under
their administration and to protect the human and natural
resources of those Territories against abuses,
Taking into account the relevant provisions of the Paris
Declaration on Namibia and the Programme of Action on
Namibia, 44 adopted at the International Conference in
Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for
Independence,
Reaffirming that any economic or other activity which
impedes the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples and obstructs efforts aimed at the elimination of
colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa and other colonial Territories is in direct violation of the rights of the inhabitants and of the principles of
the Charter and all relevant resolutions of the United
Nations,
Reaffirming that the natural resources of all Territories
under colonial and racist domination are the heritage of
the peoples of those Territories and that the exploitation
and depletion of those resources by foreign economic
interests, in particular in Namibia, in association with the
occupying regime of South Africa, constitute a direct violation of the rights of the peoples and of the principles of
the Charter and all relevant resolutions of the United
Nations,
Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of the Economic Declaration and other documents of the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at New Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983, 45
Taking into account the relevant provisions of the Bangkok Declaration and Programme of Action on Namibia, 40
adopted by the United Nations Council for Namibia on 25
May 1984 at its extraordinary plenary meetings held at
Bangkok, and the conclusions and recommendations of
the Seminar on the Activities of Foreign Economic Interests in the Exploitation of Namibia's Natural and Human
Resources, organized by the Council at Ljubljana, Yugoslavia, from 16 to 20 April 1984,47
Noting with profound concern that the colonial Powers
and certain States, through their activities in the colonial
Territories, have continued to disregard United Nations
decisions relating to the item and that they have failed to
implement, in particular, the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolutions 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970
and 38/50 of 7 December 1983, by which the Assembly
called upon the colonial Powers and those Governments
that had not yet done so to take legislative, administrative
or other measures in respect of their nationals and the
bodies corporate under their jurisdiction that own and
operate enterprises in colonial Territories, particularly in
Africa, which are detrimental to the interests of the inhabitants of those Territories, in order to put an end to such
enterprises and to prevent new investments that run
45 See N38/l 32-S/ I 56 7 5 and Corr. I and 2, annex.
46 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session, Supple

men/ No. 24 (N39/24), part two, chap. III, sect. B.
47 Ibid., sect. D.

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

counter to the interests of the inhabitants of those
Territories,
Condemning the intensified activities of those foreign
economic, financial and other interests which continue to
exploit the natural and human resources of the colonial
Territories and to accumulate and repatriate huge profits
to the detriment of the interests of the inhabitants, particularly in the case of Namibia, thereby impeding the realization by the peoples of the Territories of their legitimate
aspirations for self-determination and independence,
Strongly condemning the support which the racist
minority regime of South Africa continues to receive from
those foreign economic, financial and other interests which
are collaborating with the regime in the exploitation of the
natural and human resources of the international Territory
of Namibia, in the further entrenchment of its illegal racist
domination over the Territory and in the strengthening of
its system of apartheid,
Strongly condemning the investment of foreign capital
in the production of uranium and the collaboration by certain Western States and other States with the racist minority regime of South Africa in the nuclear field which, by
providing that regime with nuclear equipment and technology, enable it to develop nuclear and military capabilities and to become a nuclear Power, thereby promoting
South Africa's continued illegal occupation of Namibia,
Reaffirming that the natural resources of Namibia,
including its marine resources, are the inviolable heritage
of the Namibian people and that the exploitation of those
resources by foreign economic interests under the protection of the illegal colonial administration, in violation of
the Charter, of the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council and of Decree No. I
for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia,
enacted by the United Nations Council for Namibia on 27
September 1974, 48 and in disregard of the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 2 I June I 971, 49
is illegal, contributes to the maintenance of the illegal
occupation regime and is a grave threat to the integrity and
prosperity of an independent Namibia,
Concerned about the conditions in other colonial Territories, including certain Territories in the Caribbean and
the Pacific Ocean regions, where foreign economic, fmancial and other interests continue to deprive the indigenous
populations of their rights over the wealth of their
countries, and where the inhabitants of those Territories
continue to suffer from a loss of land ownership as a result
of the failure of the administering Powers concerned to
restrict the sale of land to foreigners, despite the repeated
appeals of the General Assembly,
Conscious of the continuing need to mobilize world
public opinion against the involvement of foreign economic, financial and other interests in the exploitation of natural and human resources, which impedes the independence of colonial Territories and the elimination of
racism, particularly in southern Africa,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
dependent Territories to self-determination and independence and to the enjoyment of the natural resources of
their Territories, as well as their right to dispose of those
resources in their best interests;
2. Reiterates that any administering or occupying Power that deprives the colonial peoples of the exercise of their
legitimate rights over their natural resources or subordinates the rights and interests of those peoples to foreign
48 !hid., Thirty-Jitih Si•sswn. Supp/emenr No 24 (A. 35 24), vol. I. annex II

249

economic and financial interests violates the solemn obligations it has assumed under the Charter of the United
Nations;
3. Reaffirms that, by their depletive exploitation or
natural resources, the continued accumulation and repatriation of huge profits and the use of those profits for the
enrichment of foreign settlers and the perpetuation of colonial domination and racial discrimination in the Territories, the activities of foreign economic, financial and
other interests operating at present in the colonial Territories, particularly in southern Africa, constitute a major
obstacle to political independence and racial equality, as
well as to the enjoyment of the natural resources of those
Territories by the indigenous inhabitants;
4. Condemns the activities of foreign economic and
other interests in the colonial Territories impeding the
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), and the
efforts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial
discrimination;
5. Condemns the policies of Governments that continue to support or collaborate with those foreign economic and other interests engaged in exploiting the natural
and human resources of the Territories, including, in particular, illegally exploiting Namibia's marine resources,
violating the political, economic and social rights and
interests of the indigenous peoples and thus obstructing
the full and speedy implementation of the Declaration in
respect of those Territories;
6. Strongly condemns the collusion of the Governments of certain Western States and other States with the
racist minority regime of South Africa in the nuclear field
and calls upon those and all other Governments to refrain
from supplying that regime, directly or indirectly, with
installations that might enable it to produce uranium, plutonium and other nuclear materials, reactors or military
equipment;
7. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples to continue to monitor closely the situation in the
remaining colonial Territories so as to ensure that all economic activities in those Territories are aimed at strengthening and diversifying their economies in the interests of
the indigenous peoples and their speedy accession to independence and, in that connection, requests the administering Powers concerned to ensure that the peoples of the
Territories under their administration are not exploited for
political, military and other purposes detrimental to their
interests;
8. Strongly condemns those Western States and all
other States, as well as the transnational corporations,
which continue their investments in, and supply of armaments and oil and nuclear technology to, the racist regime
of South Africa, thus buttressing it and aggravating the
threat to world peace;
9. Calls upon all States, in particular certain Western
States, to take urgent, effective measures to terminate all
collaboration with the racist regime of South Africa in the
political, diplomatic, economic, trade, military and
nuclear fields and to refrain from entering into other relations with that regime in violation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and of the Organization of
African Unity;
49 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence "i South A/n, a

in Nam1hia !South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Counol Rcsoluti, •11

276, /9 7 0! . .4dvisorr Opinwn. IC J Reports. /971. p. 16.

250

General Assembly- Thirty-ninth Session

10. Calls once again upon all Governments that have
not yet done so to take legislative, administrative or other
measures in respect of their nationals and the bodies corporate under their jurisdiction that own and operate enterprises in colonial Territories, particularly in Africa, which
are detrimental to the interests of the inhabitants of those
Territories, in order to put an end to such enterprises and
to prevent new investments that run counter to the interests of the inhabitants of those Territories;
11. Calls upon all States to terminate, or cause to have
terminated, any investments in Namibia or loans to the
racist minority regime of South Africa and to refrain from
any agreements or measures to promote trade or other economic relations with that regime;
12. Requests all States that have not yet done so to take
effective measures to end the supply of funds and other
forms of assistance, including military supplies and equipment, to the racist minority regime of South Africa, which
uses such assistance to repress the people of Namibia and
their national liberation movement;
13. Strongly condemns South Africa for its continued
exploitation and plundering of the natural resources of
Namibia, in complete disregard of the legitimate interests
of the Namibian people, for the creation in the Territory of
an economic structure dependent essentially upon its mineral resources and for its illegal extension of the territorial
sea and its proclamation ofan economic zone off the coast
of Namibia;
14. Declares that all activities of foreign economic
interests in Namibia are illegal under international law and
that consequently South Africa and all the foreign economic interests operating in Namibia are liable to pay damages to the future lawful Government of an independent
Namibia;
15. Calls upon those oil-producing and oil-exporting
countries that have not yet done so to take effective measures against the oil companies concerned so as to terminate the supply of crude oil and petroleum products to the
racist regime of South Africa;
16. Reiterates that the exploitation and plundering of
the marine and other natural resources of Namibia by
South African and other foreign economic interests, including the activities of those transnational corporations
which are engaged in the exploitation and export of the
Territory's uranium ores and other resources, in violation
of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council and of Decree No. I for the Protectior, of the Natural Resources of Namibia, are illegal, contribute to the maintenance of the illegal occupation regime
and are a grave threat to the integrity and prosperity of an
independent Namibia;
17. Condemns the plunder of Namibian uranium and
calls upon the Governments of all States, particularly
those whose nationals and corporations are involved in the
mining or enrichment of, or traffic in, Namibian uranium,
to take all appropriate measures in compliance with the
provisions of Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia, including the practice of requiring negative certificates of origin, to prohibit and prevent
State-owned and other corporations, together with their
subsidiaries, from dealing in Namibian uranium and from
engaging in uranium prospecting activities in Namibia;
18. Requests all States to take legislative, administrative and other measures, as appropriate, in order effectively to isolate South Africa politically, economically,
militarily and culturally, in accordance with General
Assembly resolutions ES-8/2 of 14 September 1981, 36'

121 B of 10 December 1981, 37/233 A of 20 December
1982 and 38/36 A of 1 December 1983;
19. Calls once again upon all States to discontinue all
economic, financial and trade relations with the racist
minority regime of South Africa concerning Namibia and
to refrain from entering into any relations with South
Africa, purporting to act on behalf of or concerning
Namibia, which may lend support to its continued illegal
occupation of that Territory;
20. Invites all Governments and organizations of the
United Nations system, having regard to the relevant provisions of the Declaration on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, contained in General
Assembly resolution 3201 (S-VI) of 1 May 197 4, and of
the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, contained in Assembly resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, to ensure, in particular, that the permanent sovereignty of the colonial Territories over their natural
resources is fully respected and safeguarded;
21. Calls upon the administering Powers to abolish all
discriminatory and unjust wage systems and working conditions prevailing in the Territories under their administration and to apply in each Territory a uniform system of
wages to all the inhabitants without any discrimination;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake,
through the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, a sustained and broad campaign with a view to
informing world public opinion of the facts concerning the
pillaging of natural resources in colonial Territories and
the exploitation of their indigenous populations by foreign
monopolies and, in respect of Namibia, the support they
render to the racist minority regime of South Africa;
23. Appeals to all non-governmental organizations to
continue their campaign to mobilize international public
opinion for the enforcement of economic and other sanctions against the Pretoria regime;
24. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine this question and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session.
87th plenary meeting
5 Decemher /984

39/43. Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions
associated with the United Nations
The General Assemhly,
Having examined the item entitled "Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and
the international institutions associated with the United
Nations",
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, and the Plan
of Action for the Full Implementation of the Declaration.
contained in the annex to its resolution 3 5/1 I 8 of I I
December 1980, as well as all other relevant resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly on this subject, in particular resolutions 38/51 of 7 December 1983 on the item
and 38136 of I December 1983 on the question of
Namibia,
Having examined the reports submitted on the item by
