TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:,27
NEW

MARCH 1969

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1466/Rev: 1)

Page

..... ,,.... .. ,. .. ... .....

1

........,,.,..,.,,....................

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 26 March 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/91 13) . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 27 March 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/91 14) . . . a . . . . . . . .

3

Adoption of the agenda

S/PV. 1466

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

HUNDRED AND SIXTY-SIXTH

URTEEN

MEETING

eld in New York on Thursday, 2’7 March 1969, at 10.30 a&.
President: Mr. Kriroly CSATORDAY

(Hungary).

headings would appear a reference to the two letters which
have been received.

Pvesent: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

6. The PRESIDENT: To reply very briefly to the remarks
made by the representative of the United States, I wish to
point out that the practice of the Security Council has not
always been the same. There have been several instances in
which the different complaints have been combined, and
there have also been instances when they have been dealt
with separately, as different agenda items, as on the last
such occasion-which was on 29 December 1968-in document S/Agenda 1460/Rev.l. Thus, there are precedents
for both courses of action, and that is why the President
suggested that the letter of the Permanent Representative
of Israel be included as item 3. But I leave thisquestion to
the members of the Council.

Provisional agenda’rS/Agenda/l466)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 26 March 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Securitv Council [S/91 13).
Adoption

7. Does anyone else wish to make observations concerning
this question?

of the agenda

I. The PRESIDENT:
The provisional agenda for this
morning’s meeting is before the Council in document
S/Agenda/l466.

8. Mr.. ,AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated from French): The
agenda now before the Security Council is correct, in our
opinion, in the sense that the delegation of Jordan wished
to dravy.the Council’s attention to a specific point, namely,
the aggressionwhich his country has suffered. It is true that
for the past two years the item on the agenda has been
entitled “The situation in the Middle East”, but for
eighteen years the item on the Security Council’s agenda
was always entitled “The Palestine question”. I do not see
why the agenda which we are considering today should not,
be labelled “The Palestine question”.

2. The meeting has been convened in accordance with the
urgent request addressed to me yesterday afternoon by the
Permanent Representative of Jordan, copies of which have
been circulated in document S/9 113.
3. Just a moment ago I received a communication from
the Permanent Representative of Israel, copies of which will
be circulated provisionally
as soon as possible,1 also
requesting an urgent meeting of the Council. It seems to me
that the Council may wish to add this new letter as item 3
of the agenda for this meeting.

9. On the second matter-that of putting the two letters
on the same footing-the Algerian delegation would like to
draw attention to the terms of the meeting’s agenda as you
have presented it, Mr. President. The AIgerian delegation is
aware that to some extent a practice has developed in the
Council of combining in a single document the agenda item
and the letters submitted to the Council asking for it to
convene in order to put an end to a dispute or a situation
likely to endanger international peace. Nevertheless, while
my delegation understands the usefulness of a procedure
which makes it possible to bring together in a single
document all the information before us relating to a
situation endangering international peace, it would like to
point out that this procedure has the effect of giving equal
status to the legitimate complaint which Jordan has
submitted to the Council and the delaying tactics of Israel,
which have now become habitual and are calculated to
create the feeling in the Council that the victim shares with
the aggressor responsibility for the serious events which we
have been convened to consider. It is for this reason that we

4. Mr. YOST (United States of America): I understand
that it has been the practice of the Council, since 1967, in
discussing various aspects of the Middle East situation to
head its agenda “The situation in the Middle East”, and
then to enter under that general heading whatever letter OI
letters might have been submitted. I would think that that
was a very wise procedure and avoided repetition. It is
certainly clear that these various aspects of the situation are
SO closely linked that it is impossible to deal sensibly with
one without getting into other aspects.
5. I therefore should like to suggest that in the light of this
new letter to which you refer, Mr.President, our provisional agenda be amended so that item 2 would be “The
situation in the Middle East”, and thereunder as sub1 Subsequently distributed as document S/9114.
1

15. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated from’ French): For
the reasons which I tried to explain a few moments ago, the
Algerian delegation is obliged to oppose the merging of the
two letters under the same item of the agenda.

would have preferred to have two completely separate
items. We are prepared, however, to accept your suggestion,
Mr. President.
.O. The PRESIDENT: It seems that no more members of
he Council wish to speak on this subject,

16. Mr. MALIK

of Soviet Socialist Republlics)
to the
Council, Mr. President, you showed quite convincingly that
there is no prescribed or uniform manner of including items
in the Security Council’s agenda or any rigid rule that must
be followed in drawing up the agenda and listing the items
on it.
(translated

11. I have taken note of the suggestion of the representative of the United States, and also of the remarks made
by the representative of Algeria, and I still feel that there is
no overriding rule that would prescribe that the Council
should act in one way or the other. Rule 7 of the
provisional rules of procedure states:

17. You mentioned quite convincingly the precedent of
last December, when the complaints, statements or cornmunications addressed to the Security Council by the
Permanent Representative of one of the Arab countries; and
the Permanent Representative of Israel were included in the
agenda as separate items. However, each of those items was
preceded by the title “The situation in the Middle East”. I
imagine that it would be possible, in view of what has been
said here, to agree on a compromise based on the December
precedent, and if any member of the Security Council
insists that the words “The situation in the Middle East”
should appear in the agenda, we might insert the words
“The situation in the Middle East” in both item 2 and
item 3.

“The provisional agenda for each meeting of the
Security Council shall be drawn up by the Secretary
General and approved by the President of the Security
Council .”
12. The provisional agenda was drawn up and approved by
the President. In view of the lateness of the submission of
the letter of the representative of Israel it had to be added
later, and the suggestion of the President was to include it
as item 3. I hope that there will be no need to take a formal
decision on the matter, since previously this practice has
not caused any difficulty in discussing the item under
consideration. I am quite convinced that this time we can
also proceed smoothly and without any difficulty by having
the three items on our agenda.

18. In that way we would abide by the precedent we
established at the Security Council meeting of 29 December
and we would resolve the procedural problem to everyone’s
satisfaction, avoiding a long procedural debate and enabling
us to proceed to the substantive consideration of the most
serious and important matter which has been brought
before the Security Council.

13. Mr. YOST (United States of America): Mr. President,
of course, when the original agenda was drawn up with
your approval, the second letter had not been received. But
in the light of the receipt of that second letter and of the
considerations which I put forward-and I should like to
emphasize that I would certainly find it difficult if not
impossible, as I think many other members of the Council
might also, to discuss the subject raised in one of those
letters without getting into the subject raised in the other-1
should like to propose formally that item 2 of our agenda
should read as follows:

19. The PRESIDENT: There are now three alternatives
before the Council. The last of these has been proposed by
the representative of the Soviet Union. It is identical with a
procedure already followed by, the Council, so there is a
precedent for it. It also meets the suggestion of the
representative of the United States in that it gives the
heading of the item to both letters separately, namely “The
situation in the Middle East”.

“The situation in the Middle East:
“(a) Letter dated 26 March 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council.
‘lb) Letter dated 27 March 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council”.
I

(Union

from Russian): In your clarifications

20. If the representative of the United States could accept
that suggestion, we could then, of course, avoid a formal
decision and the agenda could be issued in the form
proposed by the representative of the Soviet Union,

14. Sir Leslie CLASS (United Kingdom): I am asking for
the floor on a point of clarification, Mr. President. You
have rightly pointed out that there were different precedents about how the items were set in order. But there was
also the question on which the precedent is always the
same, that we start with the title “The situation in the
Middle East”, and I was not sure what you had decided on
that matter. In adopting the agenda we must look at the
over-all implications of the way the agenda is set out, and
my delegation would not wish the proper duty of this
Council to consider the situation generally to be considered
as limited in any way. Therefore I myself would like to say
again, not formally, that the heading “The situation in the
Middle East” is a proper heading. You have not given your
views on that subject, Mr. President.

21. Mr. YOST (United States of America): I woul#d be
prepared to accept the suggestion of the representative of
the Soviet Union on the understanding-which is also in
accordance, I believe, with the precedent-that each speaker
may feel free in his remarks to deal with all items of the
agenda. In this connexion I might quote the statement of
the President of the Council at the December met:ting
which has been referred to. He said, in response to the
representative of Canada:
“...

I should like to say that it is my understanding
that in their statements members of the Council may
refer to any part of the agenda as it stands.” [I&j&h
meeting, para. 8.1
2

22. If it is agreed that we follow the precedent set at that
time, I should be happy to agree to the suggestion of the
representative of the Soviet Union.

28. We have had good reasons to come to the Security
Council before today becauseIsrael has never relented in its
madness of power. The fact that we have not come before
the Council for some time is not because Israel stopped its
acts of madness, but because of our desire to create
conditions conducive to the success of peaceful efforts.
This peace-loving attitude, however, has in no way deterred
the Israeli arrogance of power.

23. The PRESIDENT:
I am glad to know that the
representative of the United States is willing to accept the
compromise proposal, made by the representative of the
Soviet Union, to have the agenda drawn up in three items:
first, “Adoption of the agenda”; second, “The situation in
the Middle East: Letter dated 26 March 1969 from the
Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/9113)“; and third,
“The situation in the Migdle East: Letter dated 27 March
1969 from the Permanent Representative of Israel addressed to the President of the Security Council”. The
document number will be added. In this form we can issue
the agenda and start the discussion, with the understanding
that speakers may refer to any aspect of the items under
discussion so far as it is relevant to the meaningful
examination of the problem.
24. If I hear no objection,
decided.

29. It is not my intention to put before the Council a
detailed study of the daily Israeli attacks on Jordan.
Shelling our villages iri the North has become a daily
practice of the Israeli armed forces. We on the East Bank of
Jordan no longer have mornings without deaths; on the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip many of the people no longer
have evenings without imprisonment, torture and slaug!ter.
And eveiy passing, day carries with it more destructron,
bloodshed and insecurity, more threats to the economic life
of our Christian and Moslem Jordanian citizens. This is
often escalated by cowardly raids by Israeli military aircraft
carrying out bombing, rocketing and strafing. The sending
of waves of Israeli jet fighter-bombers deep into Jordanian
territory has become an official policy arrogantly proclaimed by the Isr’aeli authorities.

I shall take it that it is so

The agenda, as amended, was adopted.

30. The Israeli attacks durihg the last three months
culminated in a massive and concerted attack from the air
and the land against civilian centres and means of cammunication. Israeli raids have extended deep inside Jordan
territory-they have reached the capital of Amman-to
murder civilians and destroy bridges. These Israeli acts of
aggression were the subject of my letter of 2 December
1968 [S/8911]; for, on 1 December 1968, Israeli armed
forces embarked on a concerted attack using machine-guns,
tanks, field artillery and military aircraft against the villages
of Samma, Taibih Shunah Shomaliya Manshiya and AIBogourah. The city of Irbid in the North wasalso subjected
to heavy shelling.

Th.e situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 26 March 1969 from the Permanent Representative
of Jordan addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/91 13)

The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 27 March 1969 from the Permanent Representative
of Israel addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/91 14)

31. All these brutal Israeli attacks in the North happened
at the same time that Israeli units were penetrating deep
inside Jordanian territory in the South, in direct vioIation
of the cease-fire resolutions and in utter disregard of the
Armistice Agreement. Israeli jet fighters taking part in this
raid bombed a convoy of civilian trucks on the main
highway between Amman and the port of Aqaba, killing
two Saudi Arabian civilians and injuring three others. A
fourth civilian, a Jordanian, was wounded. The six Saudi
Arabian trucks were completely destroyed. Having destroyed life, Israeli armed units landed from helicopters,
under the protection of jet fighters, and proceeded to their
targets. They destroyed two bridges; one a highway bridge
connecting the Port of Aqaba with the capital of Jordan,
and the other a Hijazi railway bridge. However, on
2 December 196%and this is an additional attack-Israeli
military aircraft bombed the area of Kufer Yoba and killed
two soldiers and seriously wounded two men and a child.

25. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the provisional
rules of procedure and with the normal practice of the
CounciI when dealing with the question before it, I propose
now, if I hear no objection, to invite the representatives of
Jordan and Israel to take places at the Council table in
order to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote.
At the invitation of the President,
(Jordan)
and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israil)
Council table.

Mr. M. H. El-Farra
took places at the

26. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker whose name is
inscribed on my list is the representative of Jordan. I now
call on him.
27. Mr. El-FARRA (Jordan): Let me at the very outset
express the gratitude of my Government and my delegation
to you, Mr. President, for convening this urgent meeting of
the Security Council. We are also grateful to the members
of the Council who, unanimously and without exception,
realiting the urgency of this question, endorsed the need to
convene the meeting.

32. These Israeli naked attacks and violations, grave in
their motivation, scope and results, did not prompt my
Government to request a meeting of the Security Council, a
request that could have been justified by the Israeli raids
and attacks of 1 and 2 December 1968; it simply brought a
letter [ibid.].
3

39. Yesterday, at 14.30 hours local time, Israeli jets
attacked rest houses and winter resorts in Ein Hazar, one
kilometre from Es Salt City, less than thirteen miles from
the capital of Jordan, Amman. These resorts are frequently
visited by civilian Jordanian citizens. The main roads
connecting the villages around Es Salt and the city itself
were also raided, bombed and strafed. Heavy bombs and
other destructive weapons were used.

33. But the Isrelis and their leaders were not satisfied with
the killing and destruction they wrought on 1 and 2
December, For they attacked again with more brutality on
3 December. The Israelis used the occupied Syrian Golan
Heights to shell the villages of Kum, Kufur Asad and
Samma. Their shelling soon spread to cover the whole
northern part of the Jordan valley, including again the
shelling of the city of Irbid itself, where ten houses were
destroyed.

40. These are places where travellers between the East
Bank and the West Bank stop for refreshments beFore
crossing the Jordan River. The raid was carried out by four
Israeli fighters. It killed taxi drivers and many of their
passengers who were relaxing for a while before continuing
their trip. It destroyed the taxis and the trucks as well as six
houses in the area. One elderly lady, Zarifa Abu Hum, who
was also travelling from the West Bank but remained in the
taxi because she could not walk to the rest house, is still in
a coma in the hospital of Es Salt.

34. The village of Kufur Asad was subjected to brutal
bombing by waves of Israeli military aircraft. Reports on
this raid indicate that thirty civilians were killed and more
injured, most of them elderly people, women and children.
Forty houses were destroyed, It took the Israeli air force
only thirty minutes to destroy what these people had been
building for years and years. A. C. Forrest, who visited the
viIlage, said in an article published in the Presbyterian Life
of 1 February 1969:

41. She was the only survivor in the group that had shared
the taxi; the driver and the four other companions were
killed instantly. A fifty-year-old road construction worker,
Mohamed Kaddah, was carried to the same hospital in ‘very
serious condition. He escaped death only because he
managed, despite a shattered leg, to crawl to safety lfifty
yeards behind rocks. The other five companions who were
working on the same road were killed. Two teenage
students walking on the road reviewing their lessons on the
way home were killed by the first bomb ana rocket sent by
the Israeli planes. Two children and two elderly women
were among the dead. The New York Time$ reported that,
according to information received, there were no military
installations in the immediate area, and no anti-aircraft fire
had been directed against the Israeli planes. The New 1~0rk
Times special report stated that:

“A rocket had a direct hit on one house and penetrated
through the air raid shelter below. It killed fourteen and
injured eighteen others. Most of them were children and
old people.”
He further said that the area attacked: “. . . is full of citrus
orchards, and the plains around produce wheat and other
cereals.” He added: “It is also possible that the Israeli raids
are meant to intimidate and drive the Arabs out.”
35. Here again my Government did not request a meeting
of the Security Council. We limited ourselves to sending
another letter dated 3 December 1968 [S/89116/.
36. Again on 4 December, and for the fourth consecutive
day, Israeli forces continued to attack Jordan from the land
and from the air. Israeli bombardment was extended to
densely populated villages in the North.

“ . . . for a distance of seventy-five yards, the road was
marked by bomb craters and fallen cases of West Bank
fruits and vegetables that are brought each day to Amman
in the large Mercedes trucks favoured by Jordanians.
Damaged trucks and cars were sitting on both sides of the
road. There were signs that napalm had been used.”

37. From 11 December to 14 February 1969, seventy-six
Israeli attacks were carried out against Jordanian citizens
causing severe damage to their mosques, local markets and
municipal and post office buildings, and to their means of
livelihood. These attacks were reported to the SecretaryGeneral in my letter dated 4 March 1969 contained in
document S/9039. In many of these attacks napalm was
used to burn the crops and destroy other agricultural
equipment.

42. Reuters reported this morning that, accordin;g to
eye-witnesses, rockets from four Israeli planes damaged
farm houses and destroyed six fruit and vegetable trucks.
43. After completing their brutal attack against helpless,
innocent civilians, an Israeli spokesman publicly admitted
the attack and arrogantly boasted that “the handful of
Israeli planes had returned safely”.

38. In the last six weeks, the Israelis intensified their daily
raids against Jordan. Hardly a day passeswithout an Israeli
raid being carried out against Jordanian civilians. Israel
sends its planes in waves to destroy innocent human life
and inflict property damage. Between I4 February and 21
March Israeli waves of fighter-bombers attacked villages,
farms, towns and cities, nearly all over the East Bank of
Jordan, not excluding the capital Amman. In their attacks,
the Israelis bomb, rocket and strafe civilians and destroy
their means of livelihood. Napalm was used in many of
their raids and crops were burnt. Some of these attacks
were reported to you, Sir, in my letters contained in
documents S/9083 of 16 March and S/9085 of 17 March
1969.

44. As a result of these Israeli attacks, so far eighteen
civilians have been killed and twenty-three wounded.
Among those killed was an entire family from the Kuloob
tribe and a twelvesyear-old boy.
45. Many of the casualties were *elderly women and
children. Six houses and a number of trucks were destroyed. The attacks caused serious and heavy damage to
the main roads linking the villages to the city of Es Salt.
One of the rockets left a ten-metre-deep pit, Some have not
exploded.
4

--

jets

, one

from
?ntly
oads
.tself
and
East
:fore
four
:heir
uing
s six
who
the
ll in
rred
acre
ker,
f+w
he
ifty
fere
age
the
bY
IlCfl
1at,
w
fire

ark

HBS

Ink

ran
ns.
the
to
Led
ss,
ed

of
en
Id.
$3
Id
!eto
it.
3t

46. Mr. President, you may recall that in my letter of 16
March 1969 I reminded the Council that:
“ . . . if the Israeli use of napalm and other destructive
weapons in brutal defiance of the United Nations cease-fire
resolution, is allowed to go unchecked, the Israelis will
continue to embark upon more vioIations and acts of
aggression.” [S/9083.]
Yesterday,, the Israelis launched another grave attack,
causing heavy loss of life and damage to property.
47. The severe international condemnation of Israel, following its raid on Beirut Airport, prompted its leaders to
think of a new policy to conduct its aggression. They
wanted to keep up their attacks-or, rather, escalate
them-and, at the same time, keep the attention of world
public opinion away from the condemnation
of their
attacks.
48. Israel found this new policy in what its leaders
euphemistically called “active self-defence”. It is a new
offensive policy of aggression, whereby Israel usually sends
a few of its jet fighter-bombers deep inside Jordanian
territory to hit, heavily and massively, civilian targets in the
shortest possible time. They attack villages, refugee camps,
towns and cities. They attack means of communication
and
destroy irrigation projects, as well as burn crops. Their
techniques have become known. Israeli military aircraft
bomb civilian targets heavily and then follow that up by
rocketing and strafing; they end their short but indiscriminate and brutal raids by dropping time-bombs that explode
when civilians gather to carry away their dead.
49. Mrs. Meir, the new Prime Minister, has made it clear
that she intends to maintain this pohcy. Military leaders
like to speak of their attacks and raids in terms of
“lessons”. The above attacks show clearly that what Israel
follows is not “self-defence”, but, rather, active aggression.
50. This is the complaint of Jordan. It shows that Israeli
attacks have included almost all populated areas in the East
Bank of Jordan, in the North and in the South. The attacks
of last week reached the suburbs of Amman. The complaint
shows, beyond doubt, a clear-cut act of aggression. It
embodies clear evidence of Israeli defiance and a brutal
challenge to all peaceful efforts of the Security Council, as
well as of the big Powers.
51. It was not the intention of Jordan to come to the
Council now. We certainly did not want to prejudice the
peaceful efforts of the four permanent members of the
Security Council. It has been the policy of Jordan to
support and help any peaceful effort, and it was for this
reason that my Government has never hesitated to cooperate with the United Nations efforts. We co-operated
with the Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Thalman; we co-operated with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-GeneraI, Mr. Gussing; we
co-operated, and continue to co-operate, with the Security
Council; we co-operated, and shall continue to co-operate,
with Ambassador Jarring, We shall certainly co-operate with
the four permanent members of the Security Council, and
wish them success. We encourage any effort to bring about
peace with justice to our troubled area.

52. However, while this has been Jordan’s position towards peaceful efforts, Israel has done everything Possible
to frustrate those efforts; they are using them as oPPortunities to satisfy their vicious designs.
53. You, Mr. President, and the members of the Security
Council showed a genuine willingness to see peace in our
area. You and the members of the Security GQUnc~ came
with the 22 November 1967 resolution for this purpose and
it was adopted unanimously by this august body. We
accepted your resolution, Israel did not do so and contirrued its acts of lawlessness. Time and again you condemned
Israel and deplored its behaviour. Last December YOU
solemnly warned Israel: “. , . that if such acts were to be
repeated, the Council would have to consider further steps
to give effect to its decisions” [resolution 262 1’1968)J.
Now, v&at is your answer to this latest brutal Israeli
attack? With all due respect, I direct my question to the
four permanent members of the Security Council, What are
they going to do, having special responsibility under the
Charter, to protect the rights of the farmers, the children,
the aged and the refugees of Jordan, the right of those
people to live in peace ? What are they going to do now
that it is clear that this Israeli act of aggression was
calculated and intended to frustrate and undermine all their
peaceful efforts? Israel sent its Foreign Minister, Mr. Ebarr,
to visit certain capitals, to use all his talents of distortion
and misrepresentation, as well as to use all the pressure
groups in the capitals he visited, in order to dynamite the
efforts of the Big Four. Apparently he did not succeed.
And he was given to understand that the Big-Power meeting
would take piace soon. So Mr. Eban rushed back home and
on the same day we were attacked. Our innocent men,
women and children were murdered in cold blood. Why?
And why now? And why that campaign of fake rumours
and vicious propaganda directed only against Jordan and
why only this week? Why all this tactic of distortion and
evasion? The reason is very simple. What the Israelis could
not achieve through Mr. Eban they tried to accomplish
through bluff and deceit. But since all this did not work,
the only remaining alternative to dynamite and frustrate
the efforts of the Big Four is the resort to the old lsracli
cowardly tactics. Therefore they resorted to bombing
innocent civilians in Jordan,
54. That being the case and since the four Powers are
interested to see peace prevailing in the land of peace soon,
their first duty, we submit, is to see to it that Israeli acts
inspired by the arrogance of power arc discontinued, We
hope that they will take the initiative to see to it that all
Israeli attempts to obstruct their efforts are checked. That
is a11the more so since what Israel is in effect telling the Big
Four in advance is ‘&DO not work for peace. Leave
everything to us. We want either complete surrender
according to our terms and conditions or continued war”.
Any accommodation of this Israeli arrogance will not bring
peace. This complaint of Jordan’s poses a challenge and a
test to the Security Council, but particularly to its four
permanent members. It poses a challenge to our friends and
colleagues, the permanent representatives of the four big
Powers on the Security Council. Their action and possible
initiative today will determine the way to the future. lf no
adequate and effective measure is taken now, the Security
Council will face more conflicts in our troubled area. Unless

by terror squads and in particular by El-Fatah. They
included attacks by small arms, mortar, bazook.a, and
Katyushka fire, on the Israeli villages of Daganya, Newe Ur,
Bet-Yosef, Kinneret, Poriyya, Sedom, Ne’ot H.akikar,
Timna and Mizpe-Ramon; sabotage raids with grenades and
explosives, directed against civilians; incidents of mining;
and six clashes with terror units in which seventeen
saboteurs were killed and six captured.

adequate action under Chapter VII of the Charter is
adopted now, more and more Israeli acts of madness and
lawlessness will follow. This can be predicted because we
are dealing with Zionists who are intoxicsted by their
victory, blinded by their arrogance of power and encouraged both by the delivery of more arms which are being
used to accommodate their aggression and by the lack of
adequate action by the Security Council. The arrogance of
power has blinded their minds. Ironically they are proud of
their acts but their acts evoke shame, not pride. We find
consolation in the fact that the Israelis do not speak for all
Jews everywhere.

60. During the last month, these attacks have resulted in
eight Israelis being killed and sixty-one wounded. One sf
these was a United Nations Observer injured in the
explosion in the supermarket in Jerusalem.

55. Unless Israeli aggression is arrested, the task of the Big
Four will become more difficult. Inaction invites disaster
since our people will not be intimidated by Israeli terror or
submit to the Israeli will. If the efforts of the Big Four for
peace are to succeed, they are advised to use their influence
and weight to stop the Israeli acts calculated to frustrate
their efforts-efforts for peace, and we want peace.
56. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

61. Conspicuous during this period is the increase in acts
of aggression along the Israel-Jordan cease-fire line.
62. Jordan’s role in warfare by terror against the people of
Israel is a, major one, since Jordanian territory serves as the
main jumping-off ground for attacks against Israel. Jordan
is the central base of the terror operations. The terror
organizations’ units are free to roam the country, to cross
the Jordan River for raids into Israel, and enjoy full
protection on the part of the regular Jordanian army.

I call on the representative of

57. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): For twenty centuries the
Jewish people has struggled to preserve its existence in the
face of imperialist conquest, dispersion and persecution.
For twenty years the reborn Jewish State has strived to
safeguard its existence and independence in the face of
Arab war. Through these years Israel has succeeded to repel
the Arab invasion of 1948, to beat off the Egyptian terror
offensive in the fifties, and destroy in t956, the Fedayeen
bases in Gaza and Sinai; and, in the sixties, to withstand
repeated onslaughts from the territory of Jordan and from
Syria, carried on under the guise of a “people’s war”, to
ward off the concerted campaign of all the Arab States in
1967 aimed at Israel’s destruction and the annihilation of
its people. Yet, despite the Security Council cease-fire
which called for an end to “all military activities in the
area”, Arab military aggression goes on unabated. The war
against Israel continues. President Nasser declares that this
is only the beginning. In Damascus the cry is that there will
be no rest until Israel is completely shattered. From
Baghdad comes total rejection of any pacific settlement.
From Amman, Prime Minister Rifai only yesterday uttered
a call for intensified terror operations in co-ordination
between the regular armed forces and the terror’organizations. The cease-fire is persistently violated by regular
forces and irregular commandos. Warfare against Israel is
pursued with vehemence and indiscriminate cruelty, and in
the absence of effective United Nations action Israel has no
choice but to defend itself.

63. The main terror organizations maintain headquarters,
branches, recruiting offices and bases in Jordan. According
to the Washington Post of 29 December 1968, “. . , dFatah’s headquarters (is], a villa near the American
Embassy directly across the street from the Royal Jordanian Automobile Club”. El-Fatah’s recruiting office is
located in Amman, in the refugee camp Hussein in Jabel
Hussein, near the mosque and the UNRWA school.
64. Time magazine of I3 December 1968 reports that the
headquarters of the Palestine Liberation Organization is
also situated in Amman. The Palestine Liberation Oflice
recruiting office is on as-Salt Street. It contains nine rooms.
under the title of two attorneys.
65. The recruiting office of Gabhat el-Fida el-Qawmi is in
Wadi Seer Street, near the central post office.
66. The headquarters of the Egyptian Commando Battalion No. 141, which operates from Jordan <and ifs
recruiting office are situated in Amman, at Jabel ,4mmrn
near the Intercontinental Hotel in the vicinity of the Third
Square 1
67. Also in Amman, there is the liaison committee which
co-ordinates operations between the Iraqi ExpeditionaQ*
Force and the terror headquarters. The Committee is
headed by an Iraqi colonel by the name of Muhammad
Sarsuf.

58. This is what happened on the morning of 26 March
when Israel took action to disable terror basesin Jordanian
territory.

68. The Palestine Liberation
branch in Jordan’s capital.

59. Since 20 January 1969, there has been a marked
upsurge in terror warfare. More than 200 sabotage raids and
firing attacks across the cease-fire line have been recorded,
leaving out of account the incessant attacks by the
Egyptian army in the Suez Canal sector and the acts of
mining in its vicinity perpetrated by Egyptian soldiers and
agents. The majority of these terror acts were carried out

Popular Front maintains

a

69. The main terror bases are in the as-Salt area, in
Karameh; Dibin, about 8 kilometres west of Gerash clBayaa, near Amman; Al-yadudah approximately IO kilometres south of Amman and Dabrat, approximately
t2
kilometres south of Shubek; and in particular in the Iraqi
Expeditionary force camps near Mafrak and Irbid. Other
6

bases are scattered here and there in the vicinity of the
Jordanian, Army camps. The administration and the policing in those camps are in the hands of the Jordanian
authorities. Officers of the Jordanian Legion take part in
training the raiders.

the Jordanian state; it also left them free to carry on their
guerrilla thrusts against the Israelis without interference
or control by the Jordanian armed forces,” r
76. The total number of terror raids and other incidents in
the Jbrdanian sector since the beginning of 1969 exceeded
100. Civilian settlements were shelled, patrols ambushed,
vehicles mined and Israeli positions fired at, and raiders
continued to cross the cease-fire line in order to commit
murder and sabotage.

70. On 16 November 1968 an agreement was reached
regulating relations between the Jordanian Governmerit and
the commando organizations. That much publicized agreement was destined to regularize the mutual relationship
between the Government of Amman and the terror units
and give the saboteurs clear licence to violate the cease-fire
with Jordan’s apiroval. The agreement makes no mention
of the fact that Israel and Jordan have a ;cease-fire
agreement. The arrangements in the agreement implicate
Jordan to such a degree that nobody can delude himself
any longer about the Jordanian Government’s responsibility
for violating the cease-fire.
71. Among the most important
are the following:

77. One of the serious aspects of the situation is that the
raiders take up positions in established staging bases in
Jordanian villages in an effort to embroil the civilian
population in the consequent clashes. Despite this Israeli
fire has never been directed against civilians, but against
terrorist concentrations or terrorist positions from which
fire had been opened against Israel.

articles of that agreement

78. Israel’s toll along the cease-fireline since January has
been eight soldiers killed and twenty-five wounded, among
them four civilians.

(1) The terrorists are forbidden to shell targets in Israel
from Jordanian Army gun positions. They are permitted to
shell from their own positions.

79. The most serious incidents which occurred in the
period under survey were the terror activities carried out by
raiders inside populated centres. On 16 February a hand
grenade was thrown in one of the streets of Nablus. Eight
local itiabitants were injured as a result of the explosion.
On 21 February an explosive charge went off in a
supermarket in Jerusalem. Two university students were
killed and nine persons were injured. An additional charge
was discovered and removed. Dr. Habbash, head of the
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, which
maintains headquarters in Amman, claimed credit for this
act. On 6 March, twenty-nine Hebrew University students
and staff members were wounded after an explosive charge
had gone off in the national library cafeteria. According to
the Middle East News Agency on 8 March 1969, this act
too wascarried out by the Popular Front for the Liberation
of Palestine.

(2) When the terrorists want to strike directly at targets
in Israel they should select them at least ten kilometres
west of the cease-fire line, riot on the line itself.
(3) The terrorists must mount no operations from within
Aqaba town.
72. These, and other details, were published by the
Egyptian Middle East News Agency on 19 November 1968.
73. Two weeks after the signing of the agreement the
Lebanese daily el-Nahar wrote:
“Jordanian newspapers published on 27 November
1968 an announcement by the forces of elSaiqa. The
announcement stated that one group of elSaiqa commandos carried out terror operations. in Israeli-held
territory and returned to its base in Jordan under the
cover of concentrated Jordanian fire.”

80. Mr. President, the main target of yesterday’s action
was the El-Fatah base at Ein Huzair, about three kilometres
south of the town of as-Salt. This is an isolated site quite
far from the settlements of the civil population. After the
Israeli action against the terrorist bases at as-Salt in August
1968, the General Command of El-Fatah transferred itself
to Ein Huair and coverted it into its operational headquarters. The choice of this place was not accidental, since
Ein Huzair is situated on one of the two main routes to the
Jordan valley. The base itself is made up of Several
structures-three of them are armouries of various sorts
storing weapons, ammunition and explosives; others are
living quarters for the officers while the rank and file of the
marauders are relegated to tents. Wadi Shuayeb through
which the road from Salt in the direction of the Allenby
Bridge passes, is an area of operational bases.There are no
civilian villages in it. The few and scattered private buildings
dotted here and there are used by the marauders for
different purposes.

This was the first time that Jordanian papers gave such
details about co-ordination between the Jordanian Army
and the terror organization.
74. The
1968:

Manchester

Guardian

writes on 3 September

“Some of Jordan’s best army officers . . . are playing.an
increasingly important role in the Palestinian guerrilla
movement. They are the men who, in time, may give it
the prafessional fibre which, in large measure, it still
lacks.”
75. Dana Adams Smith reported from Beirut, in The New
York Times on 25 November 1968, that the arrangement
between the Jordan Government and the terrorist organiz&ions
‘l . . . gave the groups that had been operating extralegally a semi-legal status and an acknowledged place in

81, The Ein Huzair base is an operational centre and
central storage depot. It is a zone for regrouping before
going out on terror operations. It ah0 serves as a SUPPlY
7

depot for units from other bases where they are reequipped and supplied with transport before being sent on
to other points such as Shuney, Nimrin, Karnmeh and so
forth, which are the last points before entering Israel. These
points are also outposts of the Jordanian army.
82. In Ein Huzair there is a roadblock manned by the
terrorist squads at which travellers from the West Bank are
stopped for control, questioning and instruction. The
roadblock is quite open and is certainly a matter of
common knowledge and has been crossed by foreign
newspaper correspondents. It is one of the roadblocks
which was set up following the agreement between the
Jordanian Government and the terror organizations in
November 1968.
83, In these terror bases there are also canteens and
recreational facilities. These are the cafes and these are the
civilians in them to which the Permanent Representative of
Jordan has referred. By those so-called cafes many vehicles
belonging to terrorists are always parked. Some of those
vehicles have the markings of El-Fatah or of the Palestine
Liberation Front, or no registration number at all.
84. The commander of the central sector of El-Fatah, to
which those bases belong, is a former major of the
Jordanian Arab Legion named Badi Awad, whose code
name in the Fatah is Abu Jamal.
85. Those centres of attack against Israel, those bases for
operations of terror and murder against Israeli citizens were
the targets of yesterday’s action.
86. The Jordanian representative’s discomfort with the
known facts about terror bases in the Ein Huzair is
understandable. Indeed, facts and truth sometimes seem to
be his most inveterate enemies. They speak louder, however, than the Jordanian words aimed at concealing them. It
is not the first time that the representative of Jordan has
made an attempt to conceal the truth about the nature of
terror bases.On 15 March Israel took air action against such
basesin the vicinity of Amman. The next day Ambassador
El-Farra submitted a letter to the President of the Security
Council [S/9083], alleging that Israel had attacked civilian
targets. It is unfortunate for him that on the same day the
terror organizations issued communiqu& informing that the
Israeli action was directed against their bases, and the
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine announced
tkAat one of its leaders, Major Faiz Jorad, was killed in the
action.
-’ 87. Mr. President, yesterday’s Israeli action was an act of
self-defence. Where there is aggression there is defence.
When there is attack there is also counter-attack. Those that
openly wage war against Israel cannot complain that Israel
turns the point of their own sword againt them. Israel has
shown utmost restraint in the face of uninterrupted attack.
It cannot, however, forgo completely its right to defend
itself. Sahs populi suprema lex esto: let the welfare of the
people be the supreme law. When an end is put to Arab
terror warfare and the Arab States scrupulously maintain
the cease-fireto which they pledge themselves, there will no
longer be need for Israeli defence actions. Until then,
however, Israel’s right to self-defence remains inalienable. It

cannot be questioned or curtailed by labelling Israeli
counter actions as reprisals, a concept Which has no
application to the present situation in the Middle East.
88. The war against Israel is pursued today :in particular by
the method of terror warfare. If meaning can be martyred
and truth tortured, that is what happens when the Arab
Governments try to shed responsibility for this type of
warfare and to present it as resistance to the consequences
of the June 1967 hostilities.
89. Arab warfare by terror has been employed continuously in Arab aggression against Israel. Months before
Israel’s independence and its invasion by the regular armies
of seven Arab States, paramilitary units and other irregular
forces were sent across the border to attack Jewish villages,
throw bombs at Jewish buses, murder Jewish civilians. The
most notorious of these forces were those from Syria under
the command of the Nazi agent Fawzi el Kawukji, and
those from Jordan under the Husseinis, whose leader Haj
Amin el Husseini spent the Second World War years,
together with Kawukji, in Berlin as adviser to Hitler and
Eichmann. Husseini was considered by the Allies a war
criminal.
90. There was no mistaking the spiritual parentage of
these para-military terror forces. These Nazi sympathizers
and collaborators were bent on completing the Nazi “final
solution”-the
annihilation of the Jewish people. This
objective became clearer when Arab regular forces joined in
the aggression and the Secretary-General of the Arab
League announced on 15 May 1948 that tltis would be “a
war of extermination which will be spoken of like the
Mongolian massacres”.
91. Thwarted in their invasion, the Arab States signed
Armistice Agreements with Israel, but after a short interval,
they resumed their aggression by means of terror acts.
There was nothing new in their methods. Again, Israeli
farmers were killed in outlying village houses; civilian buses
were ambushed and their passengers shot in cold blood;
grenades were thrown into classrooms and small children at
study were killed. In the Arab capitals, the perpetrators of
these acts were called Fedayeen, as they are today, and, as
today, they were hailed as heroes. The Arab pressgleefully
reported their exploits; the Arab radio stations broadcast
war communiqut5s about their attacks.
92. Then, as today, the Arab Governments
two-faced game.

played a

93. While organizing, directing and inspiring terror warfare
and glorifying it at home, the Arab Governments tried to
disclaim responsibility for it abroad. These were Palestinian
refugees acting on their own, they argued in the United
Nations with tongue in cheek. Even those who were ready
to ignore the obvious and the direct involvement of the
Arab Governments and the use of their territory for
launching attacks against Israel, found it impossible to
explain how individuals could acquire land mines, machine
guns and grenades and how their exploits could be carried
out without professional military training and direction.

“My Government must therefore, insist that the
Council treat the violations of the cease-fire evenhandedly and not pursue a double standard”-he
stressed- “that would call into question both our integ
rity and our objectivity, and that would erode that
quality of fairness which is the quintessential spirit of the
Charter for if we do not deal on a basis of impartiality,
we will only inflame and exacerbate an already highly
dangerous situation.” [1447th meeting, paras. 38,40 and
41.1

94. The fact is that the United Nations has never accepted
the contention of the Arab Governments that they bear no
responsibility for warfare by terror.
95. As early as 1948, the Security Council established the
principle that Governments are responsible for acts of
violence committed by individuals, groups of individuals
and irregular forces, In its resolution 56 (1948) of 19
August 1948, adopted after a discussion on this very point,
the Security Council spelled out the meaning of cease-fire.
It decided that:

98. As years went by it became more and more difficult
for the Arab States to conceal their responsibility for the
terror warfare. Starting in 1955, Egypt began to publish
official communiques about terror operations, and since
then the other Arab States have been doing the same, or
placing their Government-controlled
public information
media at the disposal of the terror organizations. Jordan
was no exception.

“(a) Each party is responsible for the actions of both
regular and irregular forces operating under its authority
or in territory under its control;
“@j Each party has the obligation to use all means at
its disposal to prevent action violating the truce by
individuals or groups who are subject to its authority on
and who are in territory under its control .”

99. When in 1954 Israeli forces seized and published the
archives of the Fedayeen headquarters in Khan Yunis in the
Gaza area, there was no further doubt not only of the legal
responsibility of Egypt and other Arab States, including
Jordan, for the continuation of terror warfare from
territory under their control, but also of their direct
responsibility in fact. Documents which came into the
possession of Israel in the hostilities of 1967, and again at
Karame a year ago, give further proof of the direct
responsibility of the different Arab Governments, including
the Jordanian Government, for the terror warfare activities
from their different territories.

96. These provisions are basic United Nations doctrine on
Arab terror warfare. This was forcefully brought to the
attention of the Security Council by the United States
representative at the Council meeting of 24 March 1968. He
said:
“We oppose acts of terrorism, which are in violation of
the cease-fire resolutions of the Council, and we are not
blind to the additional problems they create.
‘We have long believed, as I also stated to the Council
on 21 March, that the rule which should guide all the
parties in these situations was first and wisely expressed
many years ago in Security Council resolution 56 (1948)
of 19 August 1948 . . .

100. From the experience that has been gained since
1956, it has been clear to all that terror warfare is waged
when the Arab Governments decide to wage it, and it stops
when they so decide. Egypt took such a decision to wage
terror warfare in the early fifties. Terror warfare from its
territory stopped only in 1956 after Israel had destroyed
the Fedayeen bases in Gaza and Sinai, Terror warfare
continued intermittently
from Jordanian territory so long
as the Jordanian authorities took no action against it. The
world witnessed a dangerous upsurge in terror warfare when
a new regime in Syria in the ,mid-sixties decided to resort to
this method of aggression to increase tension on the border.
The usua1 disclaimers of responsibility were heard. As
before, the terrorists were glamourized as freedom-fighters
in a so-called “people’s war”. Again, the Security Council
rejected these arguments. It tried to call on Syria to put an
end to this campaign of aggression, but it wasthwarted by
the veto. The formal outcome of a vote whether as a result
of the veto or of the other voting disabilities which Israel
faces in the Council, cannot, however, derogate from the
validity of international principles that are part of United
Nations doctrine. Terror attacks are violations of the
cease-fire. Governments from whose territory these attacks
are launched are responsible, regardless of the extent of
their direct involvement in the terrorist operations. This is
true even more of Governments directly engaged in
sponsoring;organizing and assisting such warfare. And this
is what the Arab Governments have in fact been doing since
June 1967.

“We deem these principles to be applicable to the
cease-fire resolutions of June 1967 . . .“[1#07th meeting,
paras. 7, 8 and 9J.
97. At the Council meeting of 5 September 1968, the
representative of the United States declared:
C‘. . . it is elementary that every Government is responsible for the control of its own population. And that
responsibility is not limited merely to the action of its
official armed forces, . , .
“A few weeks ago, when faced with an air attack
launched by the Government of Israel against Jordan,
several of the Governments which addressed this Council
admonished us that we should not be even-handed. They
contended” and he continued “that since Israeli forces
were still in control of Arab territories, we should
condone any terrorist activities against Israel. This was
not, however, what this Council contemplated when it
established a cease-fire last June, nor was it what it
contemplated in adopting the resolution of 22 November
1967. What this Council did have in mind was that all
parties should observe the cease-fire while at the same
time seeking a permanent settlement of the conflict that
could result in the retirement of the Israeli forces from
occupied territories.

101. STheir armies thrown back by Israel, the Arab States
have turned again to the tried method of warfare by terror.
9

part, the International
Movements declared:

A decision to this effect was taken at the Khartoum
Conference of the Heads of Arab States in September 1967.
This decision was confirmed in other official meetings
including the meeting of the Arab Foreign Ministers in
Cairo in September 1968. This all-Arab decision was
reiterated by the Under-Secretary-General of the Arab
League Said Naofal on 24 February 1969.

Union of Resistance and Deportee

“No one can compare the spirit of resistance with
terrorist activities and odious and blind crimes; intended
to provoke fear and insecurity, to give rise to violence,
when all possibilities are openly offered for an open
discussion, or, try to compare with the resistance against
nazism the fanatics surrounded by former Nazi criminals
who merely prolong the Hitler genocide and thc.reby offer
an insult which is felt deeply not only by the citizens of
Israel who courageously fight for their right to life but by
all those who resisted and who remain true to them.
selves.”

102. In previous Security Council debates and in official
letters to the President of the Security Council I have
described the active participation of the Arab Governments
in terror warfare. This has also been extensively reported by
the world press and by other public information media.
Jordan, Egypt and Syria have set up training camps for
terror units. Instruction is given by officers of the regular
Jordanian, Egyptian and Syrian armies. Training basesexist
also in Algeria, Officers and soldiers of the regular armed
forces of Jordan, United Arab Republic and Syria are
assigned for commando training and transferred to the
terror organizations. Moreover, recruitment of terrorists is
conducted openly in headquarters in Amman, Cairo, Beirut,
Baghdad and Damascus, Financial resources and arms are
supplied directly by the Arab Governments. The governmental radio stations in Arab States have established special
broadcasts actually run by the terror organizations.

108. This total rejection by the anti-Nazi resistance
fighters is particularly understandable when one bears in
mind that Arab terror warfare against the Jewish people of
Israel has been in reality permeated by Nazi doctrine,
organized by Nazi war criminals like Haj Amin el Husseini
and is directly assisted by Nazi Gerinan instructors. The
following facts are ominous.
Among those who have been
training the terror units are Erich Atlen alias Ali Bella,
one-time head of the Jewish Department of the Gestapo in
Nazi-occupied Galicia; Willy Berner, alias Ben Kashir, an SS
veteran from the Mathausen concentration camp; and
Colonel Baumann alias Ali ben Khader, one of the
exterminators of the Warsaw Ghetto. Hitler’s Mcib? Kampf
translated into Arabic and printed and distributed by the
Egyptian and Syrian Governments is standard reading for
the members of all the terror organizations.

103. The slogans under which these organizations operate
and their avowed objectives are the same as they were ten
and twenty years ago: Kill all Jews, destroy Israel.
104. Yassir Arafat, the El-Fatah leader and head of the
,Council of all terror organizations stated in an interview
with the Middle East News Agency: “El-Fatal1 started its
activities in 1956 and its armed struggle in 1965. Its
aim-the liquidation of, Zionist, i.e. Israeli existence.”

109. Lieut-General Burns, the Canadian head of the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization, by no
means uncritical of Israeli policy, wrote in his book,

105. Such is the organization openly sponsored and
supported by the Arab Governments. President Nasser in a
speech before the. Egyptian National Assembly on 20
January 1969 proclaimed: “The UAR places all its resources at the disposal of these organizations.” King
Hussein welcomed Arafat on his return to Jordan and
announced his Government’s full support.

I felt what Egyptians were doing in sending these
men, whom they dignified with the name of fedayeen, or
commandos, into another country with the nrission to
attack men, women and children indiscriminately, was a
war crime. It was essentially of the same character , . . as
the offences for which the Nazi leaders had been tried in
Nuremberg, to cite the most recent example .“2

106. Mr. President, today, as in the past, the most
gruesome aspect of warfare by terror is that it is directed
for the greater part against civilians, Bombs exploded in
crowded stations and markets, grenades thrown into crowds
of worshippers, explosive charges placed in school buses,
button-shaped mines and other booby-traps scattered in
school yards, cowardly attacks on civil aircraft with
passengers and crew aboard, these are the characteristic
exploits of the terrorists. To compare thugs who murder
indiscriminately innocent men, women and children to
resistance fighers is blasphemy of the name of resistance.
The resistance fighters of Europe have expressed their utter
repugnance for the Arab terrorists.

110. The venerable Rene Cassin, Nobel peace prize winner
of 1968 has again raised his voice against the sophistry
inherent in the Arab position., On 10 February 1969 he
wrote in Ici Paris:

BetweenArab and Israeli:
6‘

.

.

.

“Since 1967, injustice, I note with sorrow, has continued under various forms, consisting on the one hand in
causing the Security Council to adopt decisions which arc
contrary to international law, and on the other in devising
these decisions in a manner that deprives Israel of the
juridical benefits which it could legitimately expect.
“Israel remains bound to respect the ‘cease-fire’, but its
adversaries are never condemned when having violated it
they incur reprisals. Even more than that, they are acting
through irregular forces, in this case the Palestinians who

107. In a resolution adopted at the plenary session in
Brussels in April 1968, in which delegations of World War II
resistance fighters from Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, France, Israel, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands,
Norway, the United Kingdom and the United States took

2 Clarke, Irwin and Company Ltd., Toronto,
p. 88.

lb

Vancouver 1962,

Deportee

rice with
intended
violence,

an open
:e against

criminals
:hy offer
itizens of

fe but by
to them.
,esistancf

bears in
?copIe of
doctrine,
Husseini
:ws. The
ave been

lrli Bella,
estapo ia
lir, an SS
mp; and
of the
II Kawpf
,d by the
;tding for
of ths
, by no
is book,
ing thea
aycen, 01
ission tu
ly, WBSB
tcr . . .a3
II tried ia
!Cwinner
SOphiShJ

1969 hr
3 contin.
! hand in

vhicb an
I devising
cl of the
!ct.

:‘! but ia
iolated it
Ire nctinp
ians who
.lvcr 195:

are assimilated for the sake of argument, with our
resistance fighters.

which call for an immediate answer. I beg the Council to
concentrate on the complaints of Jordan and to permit no
irrelevant accusations and allegations and distortions to
confuse the issue.

“Do they seek in New York the triumph of the doctrine
of the destruction of a State admitted in 1948 as a
Member of the United Nations?

117. It is simple. We are used to Israel’s practice of making
a complaint and requesting a hearing immediately after its
aggression and after we come before the Council. This has
become a routine with which the Council is familiar.

“I, on my part,“-he continues-“desire a just peace and
am far from ignoring the interests of the Moslem
populations of Palestine. However, are not the greatest
enemies of these poor people those who make of them, as
of the Jewish individuals themselves, the instruments of a
policy of aggression, in utter disregard of the real interests
of the refugees and those in occupied territories? ”

118. Mr. Tekoah, in his reference to my complaint, spoke
about bases for the Fedayeen. I think his statement is
belied by the eye-witnesses who visited the area yesterday
and who went to the scene this morning. Realizing the hour
is late I shall refer to only one quotation. This is the report
from Amman at 9 o’clock this morning, of Mr. Richard
Sullivan of CBS, and this was heard, I am sure, by all those
who were listening to the news at that hour: Correspondent
Sullivan of CBS denied the Israeli allegation that they-the
Israelis-attacked military positions. Sullivan emphasized
that the Israeli attack was directed against cafes and resorts
and against Jordanian farmers and their means of livelihood. This was reported at 9 o’clock this morning; it belies
all the allegations and the distortions of Mr. Tekoah.

11 I. Indeed, whether juridically or morally, Arab warfare
by terror is a loathsome, criminal policy. It violates the
cease-fire; it undermines the peace-making efforts; it is
directed against Israelis and harms the Arabs; its victims are
innocent civilians. It is inspired by unmitigated Nazi-like
hatred toward the remnants of a people victimized by the
Nazis in history’s most horrifying genocide.
112. Whatever one may think or say about Arab terror
against Israel, in whatever form this warfare is wrapped up
by the Arab Governments for presentation to the United
Nations, its real test for Israel is one, and one only: Is it or
is it not directed agdnst Israeli lives? Does it or does it not
aim at the murder of innocent Israeli men, women and
children?

119. Mr. Tekoah again turned to falsehood when he
quoted my Prime Minister, imputing to the new Prime
Minister of Jordan-who is well known to all members
around this table-the statement that terror operations
would be intensified. There is no terrorism in Jordan or
coming from Jordan. This “terrorism” is a term coined by
the masters of terrorism, who used terrorism to expel and
to occupy, who used murder and all kinds of acts of
terrorism in order to have “a land without people for a
people without a land”.

113. Whatever pretexts the Arab Governments offer for
continuing terror warfare and refusing to suppress it,
Israel, like any other State, cannot acquiesce to the
organised, premeditated murder of its citizens. If the Arab
Governments are unwilling to stop it, Israel itself must take,
all necessary measures to put an end to it. Enough Jews
have been barbarously murdered in this century; Jewish
mothers have wept enough for their dead. This must stop;
this cannot go on, and we shall not allow it to go on.

120. The time is late; I cannot deal now with all of the
acts committed by Israel to bring about this result, but I
shall come to them later.
121. Terrorism is not used by my Prime Minister. We
believe in the God-given right of a people-any people-to
resist foreign occupation, regardless of where that foreign
occupation is, be it in Palestine or anywhere else in this
world. Occupation imposes a duty on the people occupied
to resist. Therefore, occupation and resistance go together.
This is history, and no distortion can rewrite history.

114. The TJnited Nations has called on the parties to the
Middle East conflict to terminate the fighting, to reach
agreement, to talk-not to kill. It is high time that the Arab
Governments abandoned their sanguinary designs and
ceased warfare by terror and started to talk peace. Surely
they must realize by now that terror and sabotage and the
killing and maiming of civilians will not weaken Israel’s
determination to attain a just and lasting peace. It has not
weakened Israel during the last twenty years; it will not
make Israel falter now. Peace and security are the fundamental rights of all nations. The Arab Governments must
understand and accept that Israel, too, has this right to real
peace and real security.

122. Mr. Tekoah spoke about terrorism from outside; he
spoke about terrorist groups, He did not mention a thing
about resistance from within. He speaks about people
coming from Jordan. How about the people in Gaza? Gaia
is an island now, in an ocean of Zionist occupation,
surrounded by Israeli-occupied lands; you have attacks and
resistance almost every single day in Gaza. What do you call
this? Is this not resistance from within? Is this not the
same as the situation in the West Bank? Is this not like the
cases of Sinai and Golan recently? These are measures of
resistance of a people that has faith in its God-given right.

115. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the represeptative of
Jordan to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
116. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I realize the hour is late; I
shall have more time to answer the many distortions we
have heard this afternoon when the so-called countercomplaint of Israel comes before the Council. I shall then
have more time to analyse the motives and expose the
intention. I simply should like to refer to certain points

123. Mr. Tekoah spoke about the resistance and referred
to the cease-fire. Yes, there is a cease-fire. It is no
agreement; he keeps trying to paint it as an agreement to be
the substitute for the Armistice Agreement. There is the
11

other areas. Is not this pure and simple nazism? We will go
further.

‘Armistice Agreement which is still valid, legal and binding;
and there is the cease-fire resolution. But this cease-fire
resolution was also followed by another resolution-and
that was resolution 242 (1967) of 22 ‘November 1967which did emphasize the inadmissibility of the acquisition
of territory by war and the need to work for a just solution.
This resolution called for the withdrawal of the Israeli
armed forces.

128. Mr. Tekoah said that Mein Kanlpf was published in
the Arab areas. I should like to quote a paragraph to
Mr. Tekoah from the book which we condemn, Hitler’s
Mein Karn&A as to how things should be for nazism. Hitler
said: “Circumstances must be adapted to aims”-the same
thing that we are having now in our area. “This is
impossible without invasion.” What happened in our area
was invasion. Sinai, the West Bank, the Golan Heights,
“This is impossible without invasion”, said Hitler. Invasion
of what? “Invasion of foreign States or attacks upon
foreign property. Further successes cannot be attained
without expanding our living space in the East . . .‘I.

124. Did you, the members of the Council, intend to have
a cease-fire to freeze this resolution and its implementation? Was it the intention of this Council to bring about a
“cease-fire line” as a substitute for the “Armistice Demarcation Lines”? And if it was your intention that this
cease-fire should be of a very temporary nature, is not the
answer complete and immediate withdrawal from occupied
territories? If a cease-fire wasintended to be an accommodation for Israeli aggression-and I know this is not the case in
this Council, the organ of peace-then the Israelis cannot
raise this question of resistance because their presence
invites resistance, their occupation calls for resistance. We
are not responsible for this resistance; we are not there to
protect Israeli aggression; nor are we there to facilitate the
continued occupation by Israel of almost half of Jordan.
The answer-and I hope the Council will give the answer-is
immediate withdrawal. It is about time that the Council
should take more effective steps to bring about withdrawal.

129. The Israelis, in applying this criteria, invaded in the
East, Jordan, in the South, the UAR, and in the North,
Syria. If this nazism is not Zionism in different form, I do
not know what nazism is. Finally, Hitler thought he had
won the war so he had plans for Europe. What did he say
after occupying most of Europe? He said: “We now have
to face the task of cutting up /out of El;‘trrupe/ the giant’s
cake according to our needs in order to be able first to
dominate it”-that is what they want now in the Eaist Bank
and Jerusalem-“and second to administer it”--that is what
Mr. Dayan is saying and what Mr. Tekoah has repeated“and thirdly to exploit it”.

125. Mr. Tekoah keeps defining resistance as terrorism. I
do not have to bring to Mr. Tekoah scholars from outside
his people who have their definition of what is going on.
Here, before me, I have an interview published by the
Israeli paper Yediot Ahronth. The Israeli lawyer, Dr. Yacov
Yeridor, who was himself a member of the Stern gang, a
terrorist organization, objected to terming the Palestine
resistance groups as terrorists and infiltrators. Instead,
Dr. Yeridor called them loyal Palestinian fighters-these are
his words-“ . . . who are resisting occupation and fighting
for the liberation of their country from an alien and
oppressive r6gime”. He very kindly offered to go and
defend the El-Fatal1 people, because he has a good
understanding of their cause and what they are doing,

130. Those are the words of Hitler, so I think Mr.Tekoah
should be the last one to remind us of nazism because Israel
is practising it in our area against our people in our land. So
much for nazism. I will have more to say later on if
Mr. Tekoah chooses to raise the question again.
131. Again, in connexion with terrorism, he mentioned
Khan Yunis and Gaza. I was hoping he would not mention
this because to do so is to remind the Council of what
happened in Khan Yunis in 1956. In 1956, on the pretext
which he cited today, every single young man was killed by
the Israelis in Khan Yunis. What is more, I will not mention
the details, but merely say that in June 1967 some young
students, labourers, mechanics and old ladies, because they
belonged to a certain family, familiar to this Council, were
killed-twenty-one of them. I have their names and occupations listed right here.

126. Mr. Tekoah spoke about nazism. I wanted to avoid
bringing the question of nazism before the Council at this
late hour. But when Mr. Tekoah refers to respectable
leaders who have a place in the minds and hearts of the
Palestinians, and when he says that they are Nazis, I think
that Mr. Tekoah and I should compare notes as to who is
practising nazism now. Let us see what Justice Jackson, the
chief prosecutor for the United States at the Nuremberg
Trials had to say about nazism. In presenting the case for
the United States before the Nuremberg Trials he said this
about nazism. The Nazis: “ . . . wanted things which they
knew they could not get without war. They wanted their
neighbours’ lands and goods”. Compare this with the
Zionists now in our area. Justice Jackson continued: “Their
philosophy seems to be that if the neighbours would not
acquiesce then they are the aggressors and are to blame for
the war.” This is how Justice Jackson analysed nazism.

132. I need not dwell OII this, but I would like to say that
terrorism was practised in Palestine to bring about what is
now Israel. Mr. I. F. Stone, a well-known American writer
of the Jewish faith, said the following about terrorism:
“Jewish terrorism, not only by the Irgun, in such savage
massacres as Deir Yassin, but in milder form by the
Haganah itself, encouraged Arabs to leave areas the Jews
wished to take over for strategic or demographic reasons.
They tried to make as much of Israel as free of Arabs as
possible.”
133. One final remark, however, is in order, with reference
to co-operating with other idealogies for a purpose. I do not
think Mr. Tekoah is well advised to raise this question,
because all the Israeli gangs before the creation of Israel

127. I appeal to every member around this table to apply
this criterion to what the Israelis are doing on the West
Bank of Jordan, their annexation of Jerusalem and the
12

were co-operating with destructive movements for a sinister

matter may be, it is confronted with the simple fact that
Israel will not acquiesce in the murder of its citizens by
attackers from Jordanian territory. Wha$ever belief,, the
Jordan Government may hold about the nature of such
murders, Israel’s refusal to permit the wanton killing of
Israeli men, women and children is irrevocable, The Jordan
Government may wish to take cognizance of this fact and
itself take measures td terminate the terror operations from
its territory. Failing that, however, it must understand that
Israel is compelled to act in its own self-defence. The
Jordan Government may influence the choice of method
for ending terror warfare; it cannot, however, affect the
immutability of the objective: the termination of such
warfare. The Jordanian side of the cease-fire line cannot
serve as a sanctuary for forces which persistently violate the
cease-fire. To the Jordanian representative and to his
Government I would therefore commend the old Arabic
proverb : “Yujtzrz’, intu bi durak, wa ana bi dari”“Neighbour, stay in your house and I will stay in mine.”

purposgz. one of the members of the Irgun said:

“Our company commander, an architect whom we
admire arid imitated joined Stern,“-the Stern Gang-“the
extremist leader who believed that we should make
common cause even with the Naiis and fascists in order
to overthrow ,British imperialism”,
I wish my good colleague and friend the representative of
the United Kingdom would give the Council the benefit of
their experience in 1936 and 1937, 1945 and 1946. I wish
that he would’find it possible to enlighten members of the
Council and give them an idea about terrorism in the area at
that time. That would be difficult for him, I know. With
this I end my answer at this stage.
134. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Israel in exercise of his right of reply.

140. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
Jordan to exercise his right of reply.

135. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I have taken note of the fact
that the Jordanian represe’ntativs has reserved his right to
study my staterhent and to react fully to it at a later stage.
This is indeed a commendable desire, for it is necessary
once and for all to place the terror warfare in its true
historic perspective and in its grim philosophical parentage.

141. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I should like to know how
the representative of Israel would define his house. Where
are its limits? Does it now cover the East Bank of the
Jordan? Is it the Sinai and Gaza and the Golan? Is it going
to be extended to the Euphrates and the Nile? I want him
to define his house. When he tells me about Israel-if he
means by his “house”, Israel-which Israel does he mean?
Is it NO. 1, of 1947? Is it No. 2, expanded in 1948 with
one third more than was allotted to it by the United
Nations? Is it No.3, of 1967? Or No.4, the one now in
thesmaking? Can he define this now? If he can, perhaps we
can have peace today, if he can also tell me where he is
going.

136. As for the reference to terms like “resistance” and
“terrorism”, I should only like to point out that the use by
our Arab neighbours of concepts which do not reflect
reality and the application of terms which are foreign to
fact, has been one of the causes of the continuation of the
Middle East conflict.
137. The representative of Jordan, in support of his
arguments about the present situation in terror warfare,
quotes from Hitler’sMein Kampf, I preferred to quote from
the decisions of the associations of anti-Nazi freedom
fighters and from words of the Nobel Prize winner Rene
Cassin. I hope the representative of Jordan realizes that
what really matters is not the rhetorical exchange we are
engaged in, but whether his Government will at long last
awaken to the urgent necessity of ending the terror warfare
that is being waged against Israel from Jordanian territory-whatever the name he or his Government chooses to
apply to that type of warfare.

14;. He refers to the United Nations jurisprudence. Would
he, here and now, abide by the United Nations jurisprudence? If so, we will have peace, and then the task of
the Security Council will be simple. Will Mr. Tekoah come
before the Council now and say that he will accept
implementation of all the United Nations jurisprudence, SO
he can be in his house and I can be in mine? The “house”
was defined by the United Nations, and I challenge him to
accept that definition by the United Nations.
143. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Israel wishes
to speak, and I call on him.

138. The situation requires plain talk. Jordan invaded
Israel in 1948 in defiance of the United Nations, and then
proceeded to call 1,sraelthe aggressor. Jordan has pursued
war against Israel ever since and has refused to make peace.
But it has never stopped complaining that Israel dares to
strike back in self-defence. Jordan attacked Israel on 5 June
1967 despite Israel’s exhortations that it refrain from doing
so, and then-as now-cried wolf. Jordan has been openly
harbouring and supporting terror operations from its
territory.against Israel and, at the same time, disclaiming all
responsibility for them.

144. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): For all we know, we may be
making some progress here in this debate. I assume that the
desire of the Permanent Representative of Jordan to hear a
definition of the limits of Israel’s house corresponds to the
November resolution, which calls for the establishment of
secure and recognised boundaries. I think it is high time
that Jordan and Israel should begin discussions on this
central matter, which will undoubtedly be the basis for
peace. It is high time for peace between Israel and Jordan.

139. It may therefore be too much to expect that Jordan
recogrize formally the long-standing United Nations jurisprudence that attacks by irregular forces are no less
violations of the cease-fire than attacks carried out by
regular forces. However, whatever Jordan’s views on this

145. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to request the kind
co-operation of the representatives, in view of the lateness
of the hour, and ask them to defer their statements, if they
can possibly do so, to the afternoon meeting.
13

---

,’

I
/

i

1
4

4

United Nations decisions on the prijblem constituting
United Nations jurisprudence. It is Mr. Tekoah who referred to United Nations jurisprudence.
It is atso
Mr. Tekoah who called the Security Council morally,
politically and juridically bankrupt. I wish that he ,would
abide by the jurisprudence of this Council,

146. I call on the representative of Jordan.
147. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I have asked to speak not
in order to make a statement but simply in order to put on
record again the distortions and the policy of bluff and
deceit of Israel. With regard to his house, when he was
asked to define that house the representative of Israel said
nothing. Nineteen sixty-seven is part and parcel of other

The meeting rose at 1.3.5 p.m.

1

14
Litho

in United

Notions.

New York

Price:

$U.S.

0.50

(or equivalent

in other

currencies)

82015--November

1972-2,050

,
