S/PV.7291

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7291st meeting

Wednesday, 29 October 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Perceval .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Argentina)

Members:

Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. Pressman

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

14-59391 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1459391*

S/PV.7291

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Israel to
participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objecton, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: We meet today in light of worrisome
developments in Jerusalem, including growing violence
and renewed settlement activities. On 27 October, the
Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine to the
United Nations submitted two identical letters to the
Secretary-General and to the Security Council
“to demand that Israel rescind its plans and cease
forthwith all of its illegal settlement activities and
all other provocations and incitement throughout
the Palestinian land, including in occupied East
Jerusalem”.
Most recently, in his 21 October briefing to the
Council (see S/PV.7281), the Secretary-General stressed
his deep concerns about continued Israeli settlement
activity, particularly plans to construct residential
housing in occupied East Jerusalem. He also urged
the Israeli Government to reverse these activities.
Regrettably, since then there have been troubling new
reports of settlement activity taking place in East
Jerusalem.

2/20

29/10/2014

The Secretary-General is alarmed by new reports
about the advancement of planning for some 1,000
Israeli settlements units in occupied East Jerusalem.
These include approximately 400 units in Har Homa
and 600 in Ramat Shlomo. This latest development
follows on the heels of Israel’s decision at the end of
September to accelerate the process of constructing
some 2,600 residential units in Givat Hamatos, also
in East Jerusalem. If pursued, these plans would once
again raise grave doubts about Israel’s commitment to
achieving durable peace with the Palestinians, as the
new settlements threaten the very viability of the future
State of Palestine.
As affirmed by the Council and determined by
the International Court of Justice, Israel’s policy and
practices of settling parts of its population and new
immigrants in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including occupied East Jerusalem, are in violation
of international law. As the Secretary-General has
consistently reiterated, it also runs contrary to the twoState solution. Once again, the Secretary-General calls
on Israel to reverse these activities, heed the calls of the
international community to freeze settlement activity
and abide by its commitments under international law
and the Quartet Road Map.
Heightened tensions over unilateral actions,
provocations and access restrictions at the holy sites
in Jerusalem are continuing and the situation remains
volatile. In the past week, some 13 Palestinians have
reportedly been arrested at the Haram Al-Sharif/
Temple Mount compound, including one Palestinian
on 22 October for allegedly throwing stones at Jewish
visitors. Israeli police officers have also been injured
as a result of clashes. We note that, in the aftermath of
these clashes, Prime Minister Hamdallah visited Haram
Al-Sharif/Temple Mount on 27 October.
The Secretary-General has reiterated the importance
of respect for the religious freedom of all, and for
worshippers of all faiths to have access to their holy sites,
while noting that religious and other leaders should also
refrain from making inflammatory statements. In this
regard, the Government of Israel’s reassurances to the
Secretary-General, and reportedly to Jordan, that it has
no plans to change long-standing policies governing the
holy sites are noted. We also note that Israel, as per its
agreement with the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, has
committed to working to ensure the protection of the
Muslim and Christian holy sites in the Old City and
the safety of worshippers. Incitement to violence from

14-59391

29/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

any quarter must cease and the sanctity of the holy sites
of all faiths must be respected. The Secretary-General
will be closely following developments at these sacred
places that have such significance to millions around
the world.
The situation in the rest of East Jerusalem has
grown more tense since 21 October. On 22 October,
a Palestinian man drove his car into a light rail train
station near Ammunition Hill and ran over passengers
disembarking from the train, killing a three-monthold baby and injuring six other people, one of whom
succumbed to her injuries later. The driver was shot
dead by Israeli police as he tried to flee the scene.
It is our understanding that Israeli authorities are
investigating this incident as what they describe as a
potential terrorist attack. Regrettably, some on the
Palestinian side have praised this attack.
Clashes took place during the burial of the Palestinian
man on 26 October. On the same day, Prime Minister
Netanyahu stated at a cabinet meeting that Israel would
not allow the stone- and firebomb-throwing to continue
and that an additional 1,000 security forces would be
deployed in East Jerusalem. The Prime Minister also
reportedly requested legislation to raise the terms of
punishment for stone-throwing, including criteria for
the possible imposition of economic sanctions on the
parents of minors who throw stones.
Tensions have also escalated in the rest of the West
Bank, where Israeli forces shot and killed a PalestinianAmerican teenager on 24 October in Silwad village
near Ramallah, reportedly following stone- and
Molotov cocktail-throwing during a demonstration.
On 27 October, Israeli forces detained 14 Palestinians
for alleged stone-throwing. On 28 October, four
Palestinians were reportedly shot and injured by Israeli
security forces in Jenin, including one who is in critical
condition.
Tensions also rose from the reported demolition
in the past week of five Palestinian homes in the East
Jerusalem neighbourhoods of Al-Tur and Silwan, as
well as in Salah Eddine Street, and following news that
a Palestinian held under administrative detention in
Israel and on hunger strike for 37 days was moved to
hospital on 27 October after his health had deteriorated.
I would like to underscore the criticality of
immediately diffusing the escalating tensions in
East Jerusalem without delay. The wounds from the
devastating conflict in Gaza are only just beginning to

S/PV.7291

heal, with the tripartite temporary mechanism for the
delivery of reconstruction materials into Gaza brokered
by the United Nations only starting to take effect. The
parties can ill afford to once more take unilateral actions
that serve only to inflame tensions and further entrench
the suspicion and hostility that have been the tragic
narrative of this conflict for decades. The reality is that
continued settlement activity in occupied Palestinian
territory is doing significant damage to any possibility
of a lasting peace between the two sides and is moving
the situation ever closer to a one-State reality.
Ongoing tensions in East Jerusalem and the West
Bank cannot be separated from the larger reality that
remains unresolved. As the Secretary-General has
frequently conveyed, any enduring peace will require
starting dialogue to address the root causes of the
conflict, including an end to the occupation that has
lasted close to 50 years and effectively addressing
Israel’s legitimate security concerns.
I wish to recall that on 26 September 2008, during
the high-level meeting of the Security Council on
settlements, the then Secretary-General of League of
Arab States, Mr. Amre Moussa, recalled that two years
earlier the Security Council had
“recorded a clear consensus on the necessity of
reviving the peace process with the express goal of
establishing a viable Palestinian State in the West
Bank and Gaza, with, of course, East Jerusalem as
its capital” (S/PV.5983, p. 3).
Such consensus was echoed in the Arab Peace initiative
and the understanding that there would be an immediate
and complete halt to settlement activities, as per the
Road Map. Eight years later, we must ask ourselves
why there has been little progress and how to move the
peace process forward.
We have heard that some members of the Council
have again started discussing the possibility of adopting
a new draft resolution on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
For our part, we wonder if the current paradigm, almost
50 years into the conflict, does not require revisiting
our engagement thus far, consistent with the decisions
of the Security Council and the relentless efforts of
the international community. Palestinian and Israeli
leaders and people should make no mistake — there
will never be a substitute to their own responsibility in
bringing the change necessary to achieving peace. The
United Nations stands ready to lend its full support to
such collective efforts.

14-593913/20

S/PV.7291

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In conclusion, the status quo is not a viable
option. Further delay in the pursuit of peace will only
exacerbate the conflict further and deepen divisions.
Now is the time for bold leadership and for both sides
to fully commit to meaningful negotiations that will
allow the establishment of two States, living side by
side in peace and security. Ignoring the calls of the
international community for such negotiations, for
whatever reason, will only breed more violence in the
region that has already seen too much of it.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Allow me at the outset
to thank Mr. Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his very important briefing and
for the principled elements that he raised, especially
the position of the Secretary-General that all these
illegal activities, policies and practices of Israel, the
occupying Power, must stop immediately, especially in
occupied East Jerusalem, and be rescinded.
We also agree totally with Mr. Feltman and many
other leaders, including President Barak Obama
speaking before the General Assembly, that the status
quo cannot be sustained and is not an option. Precisely
for that reason, we have put before the Security Council
a draft resolution reflecting the initiative of President
Mahmoud Abbas that contains elements of a parameter,
with a time frame, to end the occupation. If we cannot
collectively convince the occupying Power to negotiate
with us the end of occupation in order to allow for the
independence of the State of Palestine, and thereby to
actualize the global concensus on a two-State solution,
then the option of the two-State solution may not be
available to us. For that, there will be no one to blame
except the occupying Power for not responding in a
responsible and positive way in negotiating with us, in
good faith, the end of occupation.
Israel is still insisting that it is not an occupier
and that there is no occupied terroritory, in complete
contradiction to the many relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and the United Nations, as well as
the global consensus that the Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem, are
defined as occupied territory. Israel is not listening or
abiding by the Council’s will. It is not listening to those
resolutions, and so long as it continues not to listen,

4/20

29/10/2014

peace will not move forward. On the contrary, we will
face explosive situations such as that we are facing
today in occupied East Jerusalem.
I thank you, Madam, for your swift response to our
urgent appeal and to the formal request of Jordan, the
Arab representative on the Security Council, to convene
this emergency meeting to address the critical situation
in occupied East Jerusalem, which clearly has a bearing
on the crisis situation in the rest of Palestine, as well as
in the region and far beyond. Jerusalem, the Holy City
of the three monotheistic religions, was and remains
the key to peace. The City is the heart of Palestine and
has historically been the religious, political, social,
economic and cultural centre for the Palestinian people
for centuries. And Jerusalem, a theatre for both conflict
and peace, has always maintained an Arab and Islamic
identity, and will continue to do so.
Yet, Jerusalem is under siege as Israel, the occupying
Power, continues its reckless attempts to change its
character, falsify its history, alter its demography and
negate Palestinian rights and connections to Jerusalem.
Israeli provocations and incitement, particularly
at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, home to the holy Al-Aqsa
Mosque and Qubbat Al-Sakhra — the Dome of the
Rock — are further inflaming this volatile situation,
aggravating religious sentiments, deepening mistrust
and threatening to ignite yet another cycle of violence,
including instigation of religious conflict. Such illegal
Israeli actions are severely exacerbating the conflict
and obstructing a peaceful solution, with grave
implications. We have therefore been instructed by
President Mahmoud Abbas to bring this crisis situation
to the urgent attention of the Security Council, in full
recognition of its Charter duty with respect to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
In countless official letters conveyed to the Security
Council and in repeated statements in this Chamber,
we have urged that serious international attention be
given to the crisis in occupied East Jerusalem caused
by Israel’s illegal policies, practices and provocations.
We have repeatedly appealed to the Security Council
to uphold its resolutions on Jerusalem — including
resolutions 446 (1979), 452 (1979), 465 (1980), 478
(1980) and 672 (1990) — as an urgent contribution to
reducing tensions and stabilizing the situation on the
ground and as a long-term contribution to the efforts
to achieve a peaceful solution to the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, which is the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict.

14-59391

29/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We recall in particular the Council’s determination that
all measures taken by Israel, the occupying Power,
“to alter the character and status of the Holy City of
Jerusalem, and in particular the recent ‘basic law’ on
Jerusalem, are null and void and must be rescinded
forthwith” (resolution 478 (1980), para. 4).
Moreover, we recall the Council’s determination that
“the policy and practices of Israel in establishing
settlements in the Palestinian and other Arab
territories occupied since 1967 have no legal
validity and constitute a serious obstruction to
achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in the Middle East” (resolution 446 (1979), para.1).
The Council further calls on Israel
“to cease, on an urgent basis, the establishment,
construction and planning of settlements in the
Arab territories occupied since 1967, including
Jerusalem” (resolution 465 (1980), para. 6).
Have the resolutions been implemented? The answer
is obviously “no”. Israel continues to do exactly the
opposite.
While the rest of us seek peace and try any and
every initiative aimed at ending this nearly 50-year
military occupation and salvaging the two-State
solution on the basis of the pre-1967 borders, Israel
is instead expanding and entrenching its illegitimate
control over occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of
occupied Palestine through countless unlawful policies
and measures.
Moreover, Israel not only denies that East Jerusalem
is occupied and refuses to recognize Palestinian rights
or presence or history with respect to the city, but
actively seeks to negate those rights and to characterize
Jerusalem as a solely Jewish and Israeli city, ignoring
its centrality to the Arab countries and the Muslim
Ummah — for whom Al-Quds Al-Sharif is the first
Qibla and third holiest site — as well as its centrality
to Christianity.
Since the occupation began in 1967, Israel, the
occupying Power, has never ceased its unlawful
attempts to create facts on the ground to alter Palestine’s
demography, character, legal status and geography. It
has targeted occupied East Jerusalem in particular with
such illegal measures and has openly permitted and
supported the illegal and violent actions of its settlers
and extremists in the city.

S/PV.7291

Israeli settlement activities have persisted unabated,
with the construction and expansion of settlements, the
building of the wall and recurrent announcements about
plans for the construction of thousands more settlement
units. The latest declaration, this week, concerns the
construction of another 1,000 units. It was preceded
by an announcement regarding the construction of
more than 2,600 units in the city earlier this month,
which was preceded by the issuance of military orders
to confiscate 1,000 acres of Palestinian land in the
Bethlehem area, and so forth.
Every day the territorial contiguity and integrity of
our State is being fragmented and undermined by those
illegal actions, which seriously diminish the viability
of the two-State solution.
The occupying Power has also continued to
confiscate property, including the seizure last week of
35 Palestinian homes by extremist settlers in the Silwan
neighbourhood of occupied East Jerusalem. Such
actions have forcibly displaced hundreds of Palestinian
families from the city, in addition to their displacement
by other illegal measures, including the demolition
of Palestinian homes, the revocation of Palestinian
residency and threats to forcibly transfer thousands of
Palestine refugee Bedouins, which would be a violation
of their human rights.
Palestinian residents of East Jerusalem also suffer
from acts of raging violence, discrimination and racism
directed against them by Israeli extremists, who persist
in their attacks against Palestinian civilians, including
killings, assaults and kidnapping attempts on children,
as well as attacks against Muslim and Christian holy
sites, including the vandalizing and desecration of
several mosques and churches in the city.
Israeli occupying forces and Jewish extremists
also continue carrying out incursions into the
Al-Aqsa Mosque compound and attacking Palestinian
worshippers. Israeli officials, including the Prime
Minister and members of his Cabinet, persist in their
grotesque competition to see who can most effectively
provoke Palestinian and Muslim sensitivities by
spewing dangerous rhetoric and uttering incitements
and hate speech at an alarming rate.
Provocation continues via attempts to pass
legislation to change the status quo of the holy city.
At the same time, Israel continues its excavations and
tunnelling in the city, including near and under the
holy sites, threatening their integrity, foundations and

14-593915/20

S/PV.7291

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

29/10/2014

sanctity. Stringent restrictions on access to the city,
affecting both Palestinian Muslims and Christians,
severely impede freedom of worship and of movement,
while closures of Palestinian institutions in the city
continue.

their leadership. Israel must be compelled to comply
with international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, and to commit to the path of peace. If that
course fails, Israel must be held fully accountable for
its crimes and obstruction of peace.

We strongly and unequivocally condemn all those
illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and
the rest of occupied Palestine. Such illegal policies and
measures, along with the deplorable, illegal blockade
of our people in the Gaza Strip, who are suffering
grievously as a result of the disastrous impact of
the recent criminal Israeli war waged against them,
in addition to all the other measures of collective
punishment imposed by Israel on our people, have
created an explosive situation, which, if left unattended,
will deteriorate further, with grave consequences.

Jerusalem is a painful reflection of Israel’s
entrenched occupation and its total rejection of peace.
Yet, deeply committed to peace, we remain insistent
that Jerusalem become a reflection of our collective
determination to achieve a two-State solution based on
the pre-1967 borders, with an independent, sovereign,
contiguous and democratic State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel
in peace and security.

That the situation is illegal and unsustainable
and destroys the prospects for peace is not merely
a Palestinian narrative or perspective. It has been
deemed as such by the Council, based on the United
Nations Charter principle of the inadmissibility of
the acquisition of territory by force, and the relevant
provisions of international law, particularly the
Fourth Geneva Convention, which strictly prohibits
colonization activities, among other prohibitions. The
positions of the International Court of Justice and the
General Assembly are also very clear in that regard.
Moreover, the international consensus is firm
regarding the illegality of the Israeli settlement
enterprise and the status of Jerusalem, including
non-recognition of Israeli claims to sovereignty over
East Jerusalem and agreement that East Jerusalem
is occupied territory and remains an integral part of
the Palestinian territory that has been belligerently
occupied by Israel since 1967.
The international community, especially the
Security Council, must send a clear message and
reaffirm its established positions and the international
consensus. The Council must fulfil its responsibility
to bring an end to this illegal situation, which has
broad and dangerous political, religious and security
dimensions.
Israel, the occupying Power, must be compelled to
immediately and completely cease its illegal settlement
activities throughout the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and to cease all provocations
and incitements at the holy sites in occupied East
Jerusalem and against the Palestinian people and

6/20

We therefore reiterate our appeal to the members of
the Security Council and the international community to
support our initiative and adopt a resolution reaffirming
the fundamental parameters of the two-State solution
and delineating a time frame to bring an end to the
Israeli occupation and achieve the independence and
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. Such a
resolution would constitute a major contribution to the
efforts to salvage the prospects for peace and accelerate
its realization, with a view to ultimately ushering in a
new reality in which Jerusalem is a shared capital of
peace and a new era opens up for our peoples and the
region as a whole.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): Barely a week has gone by
since the Security Council met to discuss the situation
in the Middle East (see S/PV.7281). One would think
that we have reconvened today to address the rampant
violence and bloodshed that plagues the region between
the Mediterranean Sea and the Arabian Sea. After all,
the past few days have seen untold suffering. In Iraq,
a suicide bomber drove into a security checkpoint
and killed 38 people. In Lebanon, militants linked to
Al-Qaida launched an attack on the central market,
leaving 42 people dead and 150 wounded. In Syria,
500 people were killed and injured in seven days of
the regime’s aerial bombardments. In Iran, a 26-yearold woman named Reyhaneh Jabbari was executed for
killing a man who tried to rape her. In Saudi Arabia,
three lawyers were sentenced to eight years behind bars
for tweeting messages that “undermined the judiciary”.
That is a relatively light sentence in Saudi Arabia,
which has beheaded 59 people so far this year.

14-59391

29/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Most of the millions of men and women being
oppressed in our region are completely ignored by the
Security Council. They are cast aside to make way for
a litany of half-truths, myths and outright lies about
Israel. I am here to convey one simple truth: the people
of Israel are not occupiers, and we are not settlers.
Israel is our home and Jerusalem is the eternal capital
of our sovereign State. There are many threats in the
Middle East, but the presence of Jewish homes in the
Jewish homeland has never been one of them. And yet
that is the issue that we have convened to discuss today.
It says a great deal that the international community is
outraged when Jews build homes in Jerusalem, but does
not say a word when Jews are murdered for living in
Jerusalem. The hypocrisy is appalling.
I have said it before and will say it again: the
primary obstacle to peace is not settlements. That is
a just a pretext for the Palestinians to avoid making
painful compromises. The primary obstacle to peace is
the Arab world’s refusal to acknowledge that Israel is
the nation State of the Jewish people — and its refusal
to acknowledge Jerusalem as the eternal capital of the
Jewish people.
Throughout history, Jerusalem has been the capital
for one people and only one people — the Jewish
people. I am holding a Bible which details almost
4,000 years of Jewish history in the land of Israel. In
it we read about our forefathers — Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob — who wandered Jerusalem’s rolling hills. We
read about King David, who laid the cornerstone for his
palace over 3,000 years ago. That is King David from
Bethlehem, not King David from the West Bank, and
certainly not King David from the occupied territories.
And in the Bible we read about King Solomon, who
constructed the First Temple.
Jerusalem is a divine promise to the Jewish people.
Following the destruction of our Temple and the
Babylonian exile, the great Jewish leader Nehemiah led
the Jewish people back to Israel saying:
“Then I prayed to the God of heaven ... let him
send me to the city in Judah, Jerusalem, where my
ancestors are buried so that I can rebuild it.”
Jerusalem is central to our identity and our
tradition. The holy city is named more than 900 times
in the Bible. On holidays we sing “l’shana haba’ah
b’Yerushalayim” — “Next year in Jerusalem”. For
thousands of years, through persecution and massacres,
expulsions and crusades, blood libels and pogroms,

S/PV.7291

Jews turned their hearts in prayer towards Jerusalem.
The connection between the Jewish people and our
capital cannot be denied. And nothing you can say here,
Madam President, could change that.
Jerusalem is Mount Zion and Mount Moriah and
the Temple Mount. To walk in that place is to follow
in the footsteps of our forefathers and to feel the hopes
and dreams of the Jewish people. The Palestinians and
others have had the audacity to accuse us of trying to
alter the historic Jewish character of our ancient city.
Really?
The truth of the matter is that Jerusalem had a
Jewish character long before most cities in the world
had any character. It was the capital of the Jewish people
long before Homer composed the Iliad, before Romulus
and Remus founded Rome, and before the armies of
Alexander the Great swept across the Middle East.
Jerusalem is steeped in Jewish history. In an effort
to erase all traces of the religious and historical ties
between Jerusalem and the Temple Mount, the Waqf is
deliberately destroying archaeological evidence. Each
and every one of us knows that. The United Nations
knows it. Is it out there? Is it saying anything? They
even brought in a fleet of bulldozers and removed 6,000
tons — not, you know, a little bit — 6,000 tons! — of
earth from the south-east corner of the Temple Mount,
also known as Solomon’s Stables. With every shovelful
of soil, they are trying to shovel away Jewish history.
But one does not need a research institute at the United
Nations to figure that out.
If the Palestinians wish to secure a brighter future,
they must stop rewriting history and start making
history by making peace. They must abandon the
destructive rhetoric. A people can only build a brighter
future if it makes peace with the past. If not, it will be
held captive by the chains of resentment and hatred and
pass on a legacy of violence and intolerance to the next
generation.
Former Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin
said that if an enemy of the Jewish people says he seeks to
destroy us, believe him. Do not doubt him for a moment.
If history has taught the Jewish people anything, it is
that we must take all calls for our destruction seriously.
Hamas’s genocidal charter calls for the destruction of
Israel and the murder of Jews worldwide. Some in this
Organization do not have the courage to mention Hamas
by name, never mind to condemn the terrorist group
for its crimes. Hamas deliberately targets our civilians

14-593917/20

S/PV.7291

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

by blowing up buses and restaurants, kidnapping and
murdering teenagers, shooting rockets into our cities
and building terror tunnels into our towns.
That is Hamas. What about the leader of the
Palestinian Authority, President Abbas? Well, he is
the reason that we are sitting here today. You see, he
is orchestrating a campaign to vilify Israel, and the
Security Council seems willing to play second fiddle.
Let me remind the Council about the conductor behind
the accusations that it heard today.
Palestinian President Abbas wrote a dissertation
denying the Holocaust, and he educates Palestinian
children to hate Jews. In schools, mosques and the
media, generations of Palestinian children are being
taught to hate, vilify and dehumanize Israelis and
Jews. In his remarks in the General Assembly last
month (see A/69/PV.12) — and everyone here heard
them — President Abbas delivered a hate-fuelled
attack and accused Israel of the worst crimes, including
genocide.
Earlier this month, he called on Palestinians to
prevent Jews from visiting the Temple Mount by
using “all means necessary”. Are those the words of
a leader committed to making peace? I did not hear
that in the briefing by Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman. It is not just in general, from both sides. The
video of his hateful remarks was broadcast on official
Palestinian Authority television 19 times in 3 days.
That is not someone who is not relevant, or second-tier.
The results of those inflammatory remarks were almost
immediate. Hundreds of Arabs rioted in Jerusalem,
damaging the light rail system, and a Hamas terrorist
deliberately drove full-speed onto a Jerusalem train
platform, killing two people.
Did President Abbas express outrage or remorse
over the senseless killings? Of course not. He could
not even muster the courage to denounce an attack that
left a three-month-old baby dead. Rather than trying
to extinguish the flames of conflict, the Palestinian
leadership is adding fuel to the fire. First they incite
violence on the Temple Mount, and then they run to the
Security Council to complain about the consequences.
If that is not manufacturing a crisis, I do not know what
is.
Let us try to follow the logic here. Palestinian
extremists have turned the Temple Mount into a
battleground by throwing stones and Molotov cocktails
at visitors and police. That is phrased as “allegedly”

8/20

29/10/2014

throwing stones. Allegedly throwing stones? Why,
we could build a whole quarry from the stones that
allegedly were thrown. In doing so, they are preventing
Muslims from praying at their holy site. Israeli police
are forced into harm’s way to restore quiet, and then the
Palestinians come to the Security Council complaining
about Israel’s activities on the Temple Mount. Do you
have trouble following this logic? I certainly do, but
I can tell you this: it both starts and ends with the
irresponsible actions of the Palestinian leadership.
The Palestinians had the audacity to come to the
Council and speak about religious freedoms. Let me tell
you, Madam, just how much the Palestinian Authority
cares about holy sites. Take Shechem, which has been
under the control of the Palestinian Authority since
1995. Shechem was home to the grave of the Biblical
patriarch Joseph. Palestinian vandals broke into the
sacred site, burned Jewish prayer books and reduced
the building to rubble.
In Bethlehem, which is also under Palestinian
Authority control, violent extremists have looted
and desecrated the Church of the Nativity, one of
Christianity’s holiest sites. As a result of the persecution
that they face, the city’s Christian population has
decreased by nearly 70 per cent.
It is not just the Palestinians that have impinged on
religious freedoms. I would like to remind the Council
that from 1948 to 1967 Jerusalem was under Jordanian
rule. Jerusalem was divided, and everyone could come
in and visit Judaism’s holiest sites, except the Jews.
They were denied access. Following Israel’s victory
in the 1967 war, Israel reunited Jerusalem. Since then,
all people — and I mean all people — regardless of
religion and nationality have been able to visit the
city’s holy sites. While we were victorious and assumed
control over all of Jerusalem, Israel extended a hand in
peace to the Muslim world. According to the status quo
brokered between Israel and the Waqf, Muslims would
enjoy access to pray at their holy sites, while all other
religions would be allowed access to the Temple Mount.
That was the case until a couple of years ago.
Israel went one step further than that with respect
to religious freedoms, and decided that Jews would
not be allowed to pray on the site. I want to make sure
the Council understand this. The Temple Mount is
Judaism’s holiest place, but we were willing to restrict
our own freedoms for the sake of peace. Can you think
of another nation that would make such a compromise?

14-59391

29/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7291

Can you think of another religion that would make such
a sacrifice?

against the trials and tests of time. We are a nation with
deep roots in the past and bright hopes for the future.

Today Jerusalem under Israeli authority is
united — united for Muslims, united for Christians
and united for Jews. As Prime Minister Netanyahu
reiterated this week,

It is time for the Palestinians to realize that the
children of Abraham — all the children of Abraham,
Jews, Christians and Muslims alike — are not doomed
to live together in war, but rather destined to live
together in peace.

“We are maintaining the status quo and allowing
everyone access to the holy places, and we will
continue to do so.”
Israel is doing everything in its power to minimize
tensions. Even when riots break out, Israeli security
forces, acting in coordination with the Jordanian
Government, refrain from entering the mosque and its
courtyard unless there is an imminent threat to the site
and its visitors.
The Palestinians, on the other hand, are doing
everything in their power to inflame tensions. The
Waqf has violated the status quo agreement by
restricting access to Judaism’s holiest place, the place
where we believe that God began the act of creation,
where Abraham brought his son Isaac and where Jacob
fell asleep and dreamed of angels.
Today a Jew who wishes to visit the sacred site
is threatened with violence. But the Council does not
have to take my word for it. Earlier this month — and
this is also not hard to find out — Hanan Ashrawi, a
prominent member of the Executive Committee of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, said that allowing
Jews to visit the Temple Mount was a “declaration of
war against Islam.”
Those are the irresponsible words of a person
trying to ignite a religious war. You do not have to be
a Catholic to visit the Vatican. You do not have to be
a Jew to visit the Western Wall. But the Palestinians
would like to see the day when the Temple Mount is
open only to Muslims, and that will not take place.
I speak before the Council today as a proud
representative of the Jewish State and the Jewish
people, a people whose bond to the land of Israel and its
eternal capital of Jerusalem extends back almost 4,000
years. I am proud to represent an ancient people who
have outlived history’s most daunting empires. Where
is the ambassador of Babylon? Where is the ambassador
of Caesar’s Rome? Where is the ambassador of
Mesopotamia? They have been relegated to history,
while we, the Jewish people, continue to stand tall

Israel will continue to strive for peace while
fulfilling the prophesy of Isaiah:
“On your walls, O Jerusalem, I have appointed
watchmen; all day and all night, they shall never be
silent.” (The Holy Bible, Isaiah 62:6)
Israel will never be silent. We will stand guard, and
we will safeguard Jerusalem, not just for the Jewish
people, but for people of all faiths. So today I issue this
promise from the people of the promised land: under
our watch, Jerusalem, the eternal capital of the Jewish
people, will remain a free and open city for all people
and for all time.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now give
the floor to the members of the Security Council.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Madam President, allow me to thank you
for quickly responding to the call from Jordan, in
coordination with our Palestinian brothers, to hold this
urgent meeting to discuss the grave developments in
the occupied Palestinian territories, in particular East
Jerusalem.
Jerusalem today faces the dangers posed by
escalation and the intransigence of the Israeli
Government. It is confronted by the intolerance and
the provocations of its legislators, the extremism and
barbarity of its settlers and a well-designed Israeli policy
that is illegal and aimed at fundamentally changing the
status quo, erasing the religious culture of the Holy
City and changing its demographic composition. Such
Israeli policies, which threaten occupied Jerusalem,
are a reflection of narrow internal tactical objectives
that move Israel much further away from the peace
camp and that promise new, violent cycles of hatred
and violence, with repercussions for the region and the
entire world.
The international community must focus on the
gravity of the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, particularly East Jerusalem. In East
Jerusalem, Israel relentlessly continues its settler

14-593919/20

S/PV.7291

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

expansion. It continues to violate the sanctity of
religious sites. We have shown many times that such acts
are illegitimate and clearly run counter to the norms of
international humanitarian law, particularly The Hague
Convention of 1907 and the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949. Jordan will continue to do its utmost to defend
Jerusalem and the Al-Aqsa Mosque, the Holy Mosque,
and the Dome of the Rock, and to ensure that they are
not desecrated.
At a time when the world is unanimous on the
need to end unilateral Israeli practices as well as on
the gravity of the increasing tensions in East Jerusalem,
Israeli officials are taking premeditated steps to provoke
millions in the Arab and Islamic world, the latest
being that the head of the West Jerusalem Council, Nir
Barakat, stormed the Holy Al-Aqsa Mosque on Tuesday
morning through the Al-Magharba gate, surrounded by
Israeli security forces. Indeed, he went to the very top
of Bab Al-Rahman, in the very first visit by the head of
the West Jerusalem Council to Haram Al-Sharif.
Jordan would warn of the gravity of the debate in the
Israeli Knesset of laws aimed at dividing the Al-Aqsa
Mosque and attempting to impose Israeli sovereignty
on Jerusalem. Such measures not only contravene
international humanitarian law; they also contravene
resolutions 465 (1980) and 478 (1980). And that is not
to mention the continuous incursions by hordes of
settlers and extremists as well as armed soldiers into
the Al-Aqsa Mosque. The faithful are prevented from
reaching the mosque. There are direct attacks against
Muslim officials, detentions, and injuries resulting
from the raids. Excavations are continuing in the
Old City of Jerusalem and its surroundings, and the
implementation of repairs inside the Holy Mosque is
being prevented.
The representative of Israel is now telling us of
the freedoms granted by Israel at the holy sites. That
only shows what Israel is currently doing. Israel must
immediately cease all unilateral measures in East
Jerusalem. It has the responsibility not to change the
facts on the ground.
Jordan will continue to confront Israeli violations
in the Holy Al-Aqsa Mosque by all means — political,
diplomatic and legal — because the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan has the historic mandate to defend Islamic
and religious holy sites in Al-Quds, Jerusalem. That is
a duty that is being fulfilled by King Abdullah II ibn
Al Hussein, in the light of the special role of Jordan

10/20

29/10/2014

vis-à-vis Islamic holy sites recognized by Israel under
article 9 of the peace treaty.
It is clear that Israel does not heed its commitments
under international law, including the norms of
international humanitarian law. Israel defies all calls by
the international community to cease settler activities.
As the Council is aware, the Israeli Government agreed
to the building of thousands of new settler units in
East Jerusalem, including through the confiscation of
Palestinian homes and lands and the forcing out of said
Palestinians.
Jordan strongly condemns all such activities in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem. We would recall once again that this is a clear
breach of international law as reflected in the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice on the
Legal consequences of the construction of a wall in the
occupied Palestinian territory (see A/ES-10/273). These
are grave breaches of the Fourth Geneva Convention
and of the resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council.
I should like here to stress here the content of the
aforementioned advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice, namely that Israel violates the right
of the Palestinian people to self-determination through
settler activities, the confiscation of land, the expulsion
of Palestinians and the removal of people to occupied
Palestinian land. The Court considered Israel’s violation
of the right to self-determination as being an obligation
erga omnes. It is a wide-ranging, comprehensive
violation. It is therefore the duty of the international
community, including the Security Council, to act to
put an end to such violations. It must not recognize the
illegitimate status proceeding from such violations.
Jordan calls on the Security Council to shoulder
its legal responsibilities in putting an end to such
violations of the right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination. The Security Council must act to end
the Israeli occupation of Palestinian land, including
East Jerusalem.
The Israeli practices that we have mentioned today
do not reflect Israel’s wish to obtain peace. On the
contrary, they threaten the two-State solution, which
is the only solution to the Palestinian-Israel conflict.
It is a solution that has unanimous support throughout
the world. It is the doorway to a comprehensive peace
in the region based on international terms of reference
and the Arab Peace Initiative in all its elements. The

14-59391

29/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

two-State solution must immediately be brought to life
through serious negotiations, to be resumed, governed
by indicators of achievement and a time table, and
accompanied by a full end to all illegal measures that
could hamper such negotiations or that try to pre-empt
them by attempting to change the facts on the ground or
the legal status of occupied Arab land, including East
Jerusalem.
In conclusion, those who have lost both political and
legal arguments are now invoking history and religion.
We all know full well that all nations have a history
and a religion. They can be used as a pretext whenever
it is convenient. The claims of the representative of
Israel can be countered by many other arguments.
Nevertheless, peace, security and justice cannot be
achieved through historic or religious arguments. If
that were so, States’ boundaries would change, not
dozens but hundreds of times. He who wants peace
and security for his country must respect the law and
the fundamental principles and tenets agreed upon by
the entire international community, and is Israel is no
exception.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): Thank
you, Madam President, and I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman for his briefing.
We are deeply concerned by the deteriorating
situation in Jerusalem, especially over the past two
weeks. We are living in a time of tremendous turmoil
in the Middle East. It is a time that requires brave
leadership; a time that requires hard choices — choices
that advance peace, choices that advance stability,
choices that advance security. This is a time that calls
for responsible decisions by leaders and people of
both sides, as well as the international community, to
advance the goals of security and peace.
The current situation is only made more difficult
by actions that pollute the atmosphere for peace and
further undermine trust on both sides. We continue to
urge all to refrain from actions, including settlement
activity and unhelpful rhetoric by either side, that will
only further escalate tensions.
The deterioration of the situation in Jerusalem, at
a time when so many are eager for signs of progress
towards peace, is deeply troubling. It is hard to
imagine sites more sensitive than those in Jerusalem,
and today we are very concerned by recent tensions
surrounding the Temple Mount/Haram al-Sharif. It
is absolutely critical that all sides exercise restraint,

S/PV.7291

refrain from provocative actions and rhetoric, and
preserve the historical status quo on the Temple Mount/
Haram al-Sharif in word and in practice. That is why
Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu’s recent statements
expressing his commitment to maintain the status quo
there and not to make any changes at the site are so
important. We welcome the Prime Minister’s comments.
The continued commitment of Israelis, Palestinians
and Jordanians to preserving the historic status quo
at the holy site is critical. Any decisions or actions to
change it would be both provocative and dangerous. We
urge the leaders of all three parties to exercise decisive
leadership and work cooperatively together to lower
tensions and discourage violence, alleviate restrictions
on Muslim worshipers and reinvigorate long-standing
coordination mechanisms and relationships that have
served over the decades to preserve the historic status
quo as it pertains to religious observance and access
to the site. Those arrangements are essential for
maintaining calm at this important and holy site.
Israel’s recently announced plans to advance a
project to construct more than 1,000 housing units
in East Jerusalem are deeply concerning. Beyond
those recent developments, we have also seen reports
that Israeli authorities met today and discussed the
approval of dozens of projects aimed to expand
settlement infrastructure in the West Bank, including
water projects, electricity grid expansion and road
construction, along with the so-called legalization of
outposts the Israeli Government itself considers illegal.
The United States is deeply concerned by those
developments. We urge all parties to refrain from
provocative actions, including settlement activity
by Israeli authorities. Settlement activity will only
further escalate tensions at a time that is already tense
enough. The United States views settlement activity as
illegitimate. And we have made unambiguously clear
our opposition to unilateral steps that may prejudge
the future of Jerusalem, just as we have made clear our
opposition to any unilateral attempts to make end runs
around the hard work of negotiations.
Against that backdrop, the cycle of violence
continues. The attack at the Jerusalem tram stop
last week that killed a young baby who was a United
States citizen was unconscionable. We condemn it in
the strongest possible terms. We express our deepest
condolences to the family of the child who was killed
and the second victim, who succumbed to her wounds.

14-5939111/20

S/PV.7291

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We also express our sympathies to those injured in the
attack and hope for their full recovery.
The United States also expresses its deepest
condolences to the family of the 14-year-old American
citizen who was killed by Israeli Defense Forces during
the clashes in Silwad on 24 October. We have called
on the Israeli authorities to conduct an expeditious and
transparent investigation into that incident and we expect
them to do so. In that especially fraught environment,
it is critical that all parties restore calm and that hard
choices are made to de-escalate tensions and re-engage
in the hard work of negotiations. Unilateral actions and
short cuts are no substitute for the difficult work that
peace will require.
Our goal must be to lay the groundwork for a
negotiated agreement that will lead to two States living
side by side in peace and security. As we have said
before, the two-State solution is the only viable way
forward and negotiations are the means by which the
conflict will ultimately be resolved. If the parties are
willing and committed to go down that path — in both
words and in deeds — then we stand ready to support
them every step of the way.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his
briefing.
A week ago, we convened in the Chamber (see
S/PV.7281) to note just how threatened the two-State
solution was as a result of the war of July and August,
which led to a critical humanitarian situation in Gaza,
which was largely destroyed, and an exacerbation of
tensions on the ground in Jerusalem and the West Bank.
However, it is also threatened by the lack of political
prospects for meeting the aspirations of Israelis and
Palestinians.
For several months, France has repeated that the
current situation is untenable. For the past week, we
have again seen evidence that it is dangerous, especially
in East Jerusalem. We condemn the criminal action of
22 October, which killed two individuals and injured
seven other civilians. We also condemn the violence
committed by settler groups against Palestinians and,
finally, we condemn the planning of more than 1,000
new housing units in East Jerusalem, compounding
the decision to build more than 2,600 housing units
in Givat Hamatos, which we all know is an especially
sensitive area, where, for the first time in 15 years, a
new settlement would be created.

12/20

29/10/2014

The relentless pace of settlement construction,
which is illegal under international law, confirms that
the status quo is non-existent. Every day the situation
deteriorates and moves us further away from the
possibility of two States living side by side in peace
and security. We must draw the necessary conclusions.
Those actions are all contrary to peace and only fuel
tensions, yet what we need is a climate of dialogue.
More specifically, we are very concerned by the recent
flare-ups of tension, the increase of provocations by
religious nationalists and the restrictions of access to
the Haram al-Sharif, which echo throughout the entire
region. France reaffirms its belief in the importance
of Jerusalem’s multicultural character and of free
access to its holy sites for all believers, regardless of
their religious affiliation, and would like to emphasize
that any questioning of the status quo carries a risk of
significant destabilization.
Today we cannot dismiss the possibility of an
uncontrolled explosion of violence in Jerusalem and
the West Bank. It is in nobody’s interest that this
should lead to a new intifada. It would mean permanent
insecurity for Israel and would only ensure that
Palestinians’ living conditions deteriorate even further.
In that context, France calls on the leaders of both sides
to show a spirit of responsibility. It is their duty to take
all the necessary measures to calm rather than stoke
the tensions in Israeli and Palestinian public opinion.
To that end, we welcome the efforts of the Palestinian
Government of national unity aimed at reconciliation,
an essential step towards peace. We urge the parties to
refrain from any speech that could be seen as inciting
violence. We call on the Israeli authorities in particular
to abandon their plans to build new housing units in
Jerusalem, which, we should emphasize again, are
illegal under international law and liable to worsen
the tensions between the parties. We urge them to
take the steps necessary for a resumption of the peace
negotiations as soon as possible, since they are the only
way to reach a political solution to the conflict.
The crisis in Gaza this summer and the violence
in Jerusalem and throughout the Palestinian territories
are only symptoms of a deeper sickness, which is
the deadlocked peace process. The lack of political
prospects for Palestinians and the numerous threats to
a two-State solution that arise on a daily basis all help
to maintain a breeding ground for violent flare-ups that
victimize both sides.

14-59391

29/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

If we are to make peace rather than just discuss
it, we must therefore change our method. New
negotiations will come to nothing if they are not
based on clear parameters and a clear timeline, as the
successive failures of negotiations for the past 20 years
have shown. What could that new method be? First, we
can no longer accept the Security Council’s remaining a
mere spectator in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. While
nothing, obviously, can replace negotiations between the
parties, the Security Council should seriously consider
taking action by establishing a balanced framework for
those negotiations. France is ready to commit to that
path.
Next, clear-headed consideration should tell us that
mistrust between the parties has never been stronger,
to a degree that we can no longer settle for calling for
resumed direct negotiations as a panacea. An agreement
is more impossible than ever without a renewed and
stronger international effort. For that, the commitment
of the United States will of course be decisive. But
Europe should also shoulder its responsibility and use
any leverage available to it, as must the Arab States,
Russia and all the members of the Council. It is essential
and urgent that all parties mobilize in order to ensure
that the hope of peace and the prospects for the two
parties do not simply vanish irretrievably.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for
his briefing. I have also listened attentively to the
statements made by the representatives of Palestine and
Israel.
The Palestinian-Israeli situation is currently
very fragile, and China is deeply concerned about
the continuing conflict between the two sides in East
Jerusalem and other territories. We urge the parties to
maintain restraint and to avoid any expansion of the
conflict or further escalation of tensions. The issue
of settlements is one of the major obstacles to the
Middle East peace process, and China’s position on
the issue is consistent and clear. We are opposed to
the Israeli settlement activities in East Jerusalem and
other occupied Palestinian territories. We urge Israel to
work seriously and responsibly to halt all its settlement
activities immediately, avoid taking any action that
could further aggravate the conflict, and create the
conditions necessary for building confidence between
Palestine and Israel and for resuming peace talks.
Dialogue and negotiation are the only route to a
Palestinian-Israeli peace. Both parties should adhere

S/PV.7291

to the strategic option for peace talks, resume them as
soon as possible and work towards a rapprochement.
The international community should strengthen its
mutual support and create synergy aimed at providing
a serious guarantee for advancing the peace process.
The relevant parties should enhance their sense of
responsibility and urgency, maintain an objective and
impartial approach and vigorously promote peace and
negotiation.
The Council should shoulder its essential
responsibility and play a mediating role in resolving
the Palestinian question. We would support the
Council in taking action to respond to the legitimate
demands of Palestine and other Arab States as soon as
possible. China has always supported the Palestinian
people in their just demand for and legitimate right to
independent Statehood, and will continue to work with
the international community in order to play a positive
and constructive role in advancing the Middle East
peace process.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman
for his briefing, and the representatives of Israel and
Palestine for their statements.
The United Kingdom deplores the recent
escalation in violence and Israel’s recent settlement
announcements. We remain concerned about tensions
and continued restrictions on Palestinian worshippers
at the Haram Al-Sharif Temple Mount compound in
recent months. Attempts to alter the long-standing
status quo have serious political and security
implications. We strongly urge the Israeli authorities to
live up to their commitment to upholding the status quo
by complying with their obligations under international
law as an occupying Power in East Jerusalem, including
with regard to the protection of holy sites. We value
Jordan’s important role as custodian of the holy sites
in Jerusalem, and urge the Israelis to work with the
Jordanian Waqf in order to reduce tensions and avoid
potential flashpoints, including by using a heavy
police presence to prevent a worsening of the situation
following the high-profile visits by extremists.
The United Kingdom has long made it clear that
we condemn any actions that make it more difficult to
reach a peace agreement. In that regard, we strongly
condemn the recent increase in violence in Jerusalem
this year, which has resulted in the deaths of five
Palestinians and a terrorist incident in the Ammunition
Hill area that led to the deaths of two Israelis. The

14-5939113/20

S/PV.7291

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

United Kingdom is also profoundly concerned about
recent settlement announcements in East Jerusalem
and the West Bank. Our long-standing national position
on Israeli settlements is clear. They are illegal under
international law, present an obstacle to peace and take
us further away from a two-State solution. We therefore
deplore Israel’s recent decisions to advance plans for
settlement units in Givat Hamatos, expropriate land
near Bethlehem and make a further announcement this
week to advance plans for 1,060 new housing units in
East Jerusalem. We are also deeply concerned about
plans to relocate the Bedouin population from around
the sensitive E-1 area, and by recent demolitions of
Palestinian structures in East Jerusalem and Area C of
the West Bank. The movement by Israeli settlers into
the Silwan neighbourhood of East Jerusalem in the last
two months has further fuelled tensions in Jerusalem.
All of those developments undermine prospects for
a two-State solution and make it much more difficult
for Israel’s friends to defend it against accusations
that it is not serious about peace. We strongly urge the
Government of Israel to reverse its policy on illegal
settlements.
We urge all parties to urgently take steps to reduce
tensions and to create a climate conducive to peace. We
urge the parties to focus efforts on resuming serious
and comprehensive negotiations towards resolving the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict as well as making swift
progress in the Cairo talks on Gaza. Bold political steps
and leadership are necessary to end the conflict, and
they are needed now.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are extremely concerned about Israel’s
declared plan to build thousands of new settlement
units in East Jerusalem and the general exacerbation
of the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories,
where renewed flare ups of violence have been noted.
We regret that there have civilians casualties on both
sides.
We have repeatedly stressed that unilateral actions
damage the prospects for a peaceful settlement of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and undermine the
universally recognized international legal foundations.
The Israeli construction of settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories on the West Bank and in East
Jerusalem is illegal and cannot be considered by
anyone as prejudging the outcome of negotiations.
It must be frozen without any exceptions. It must be
noted that such a requirement is also set out in the road
14/20

29/10/2014

map of the Middle East Quartet. All Security Council
members agree with that — even, as we understand
it, the delegation that three years ago vetoed the
anti-settlement resolution (see S/PV.6484), which,
however did not really contribute to restraining Israel’s
settlement activities.
A dangerous turn of events has arisen as a result of
recent developments around the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque
in the Old City of Jerusalem. We urge all parties to
exercise maximum restraint and to refrain from any
unilateral actions aimed altering the status of holy
sites. This problem is one that impacts and touches the
feelings of millions of believers throughout the world,
and it must be resolved within the framework of the
cluster of issues related to the definitive status of the
Palestinian territories. It is one thing to remember that
resolution 478 (1980) states that measures aimed at
altering the make-up of Jerusalem are null and void and
must be rescinded. Attempts to impose a fait accompli
through facts on the ground, along with the imposition
of unilateral decisions, undermine the prospects for a
settlement on the basis of the two-State concept.
The occupation of Palestinian territories must
cease. The Quartet road map set out a time frame of
two years to achieve that, providing for a definitive
settlement of the conflict by 2005. We stand now on
the threshold of the year 2015. The situation on the
ground continues to deteriorate, and obstacles on that
path remain just as numerous. Attempts at discrete
negotiations on the sidelines with American mediations
repeatedly fail. Against that backdrop, the Security
Council could play a much more substantive role
in terms of assisting the sides and implementing its
previous decisions. There are a great many options in
this situation. We have the Security Council mission
to the Middle East, something that the Palestinian and
other Arab delegations asked us to do three years ago.
The same applies to the adoption of a draft resolution
that would spell out the parametres for a cessation of
the occupation and a timeline, proposed by Palestine.
We also hope that the Council will be able to break out
of the impasse. Its attempts to more actively involve
itself in resolving the Palestinian problem to a large
extent are very important for the region, but are blocked
as a result of the actions of a single delegation.
It behooves us to recognize that the pooling of
efforts goes beyond even the Middle East Quartet itself.
Therefore, we have long urged involvement in this work
by the League of Arab States. At the current stage, we

14-59391

29/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

champion the continuation in Cairo of indirect contacts
between Israeli and Palestinian representatives, with
an active role being played by Egypt, to achieve
agreements on the long-term settlement of the situation
concerning Gaza. A necessary precondition for success
in achieving that is strengthening the authority of a
unified Palestinian leadership structure, one which
controls the whole territory of a Palestinian State,
including the Gaza Strip. We also hold out the hope
for a rapid resumption of full-fledged PalestinianIsraeli negotiations on a final status for the Palestinian
territories.
We stand ready to work actively with the
protagonists, both in bilateral and multilateral formats,
to advance the cause of achieving a fair and long-term
peace in the region.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
welcome this important meeting at the request of
Jordan, following an urgent request by the Permanent
Observer of the State of Palestine. I wish to thank UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, for his briefing.
The situation is serious. The Israeli project to
expand settlement units in the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, makes a contiguous Palestinian State
each day more difficult. If nothing is done, the twoState solution risks becoming an abstract concept,
inapplicable on the ground. If nothing is done, very
soon nobody will be able to believe in such a solution.
The international community, in particular the
Security Council, should not resign itself to doing
nothing. We must act, calling for an end to the
provocations and inflammatory statements on both
sides and the acts that spread hatred and further poison a
delicate situation. The Security Council must condemn
calls to violence and extremist acts committed by
both sides, either by Palestinian militants or by Israeli
settlers. Those extremist acts have recently cost the lives
of victims, even of children, including young Israeli
Chaya, age three, and a young Palestinian, age five.
The Security Council should also condemn the ongoing
unrestrained demolition of Palestinian structures and
the decisions to build additional settlements in the West
Bank, including in East Jerusalem. I think particularly
of the decision recently taken on Givata Hamatos, Har
Homa and Ramat Schlomo.
Why should we condemn those settlement decisions?
We should do so because they pose an obstacle to peace,

S/PV.7291

because they are illegal under international community,
because they directly threaten the two-State solution
and because they are not at all compatible with the
aspirations of the Israeli and Palestinian people to
live in peace and security. Nobody will believe in the
success of peace efforts, as fragile as they are, if active
settlement continues. If they are left in place, those
decisions will serve to confirm the doubts about the
commitment of Israel to a negotiated settlement with
the Palestinians. How can we reconcile the construction
of thousands of settlement units and the confiscation
of Palestinian land, when all efforts should rather be
targeted to settling the conflict by making the twoState solution a reality.
Israel wants to live in peace and security. Israel
has the right to live in peace and security. Why then
should it take measures that undermine the viability
of prospects for peace? We call on Israel to revoke its
decision and to put an end to its settlement activities
in the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem. We
specifically call for a halt to all measures affecting the
demographic balance of Jerusalem, the destiny of which
is to become the capital of two States, the capital of
the sovereign democratic, sustainable, viable Palestine
living in peace and security side by side with Israel.
I should now like to turn to the violent incidents
in the Holy City, especially the will displayed by
some to change the status of the Temple Mount. That
will trigger a major crisis, one that will constitute a
direct challenge to the Muslim and Christian worlds.
Luxembourg recalls its commitment to free access
to the holy sites by the faithful of all religions. Any
change of the status of the holy sites would pose a major
risk of destabilization.
I wish to conclude by stressing how urgent it
is to provide a new impetus to creating a credible
political horizon for peace efforts between Israelis and
Palestinians. Poverty, violence and despair serve only
to swell the ranks of extremists on both sides who are
driven by their incendiary acts and words. The time to
implement the two-State solution cannot be extended
indefinitely. The situation is critical. The time has
come to put an end to the measures that undermine
confidence and exacerbate tensions and suffering. The
time has come to take daring, specific measures in
order to arrive at a fair, lasting peace.
In our view, the Security Council has a role
to play in that regard by assuming its institutional

14-5939115/20

S/PV.7291

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

responsibilities and by playing a more active role to
support and preserve the two-State solution. It is our
hope that we will all be able to play a constructive
role to build peace, to encourage and facilitate efforts
to save the two-State solution and to put an end to the
occupation. Luxembourg is prepared to support those
efforts.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I wouldl like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his
briefing.
The Republic of Korea is deeply concerned
by the worsening security environment in East
Jerusalem and the West Bank. With tensions already
high following the conflict in Gaza last summer,
both Israel and Palestine must do everything in their
power to de-escalate the situation in order to avoid
another confrontation, which will only lead to further
destruction on both sides. In that regard, we strongly
oppose the recent announcements of settlement
expansion plans, including one on Monday to construct
an additional 1,000 apartments in East Jerusalem. Such
actions are not only dangerous at this volatile time, but
also undermine the long-term prospects for building
peace in the region through the two-State solution.
We are also concerned that settlement expansion will
further deepen Israel’s international isolation, inflame
radicalism and ultimately be counterproductive to
Israel’s legitimate long-term security concerns.
We appeal to both sides to refrain from all unilateral
measures, especially those that could prejudge the final
status of Jerusalem. We condemn recent attacks on
civilians in Jerusalem and the West Bank, including the
reprehensible targeting of Israelis on 22 October, which
resulted in the tragic death of an infant and injured
eight others, as well as the hit-and-run car attack on
two Palestinian children on 19 October, whicht killed
a five-year-old and severely injured an eight-year-old.
We are also deeply troubled by the increased
incursions at key holy sites in East Jerusalem. We appeal
for calm and reiterate that maintaining the status quo at
Al-Haram Al-Sharif and ensuring access to all places
of worships for all faiths are of paramount importance.
We commend Jordan’s administerial role in that regard,
and appeal to the Israeli authorities to do their utmost
to prevent provocations by extremist groups and ease
limitations on the entrance of worshippers moving
forward.

16/20

29/10/2014

Finally, we call on both sides to return to the
negotiating table and redouble their efforts towards
establishing the necessary conditions for a future
accord. To break the vicious cycle of violence, we hope
that negotiations will resume soon and that they will
eventually lead to the realization of the vision of two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace,
with secure and recognized borders, as called for by the
Security Council.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I also thank
Mr. Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for his briefing on the current tensions in the
region following the announcement of the construction
of new housing units in East Jerusalem.
Last week the Security Council held an open debate
on the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
(see S/PV.7281). The Council noted that the situation
remained fragile, not only in Gaza but also in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem. The recent announcement by
the Israeli Government to advance construction plans
in East Jerusalem in the Ramat Shlomo and Har Homa
districts has predictably heightened tensions. The
situation, however, should be addressed peacefully and
responsibly with the aim of preserving the chances for
the resumption of talks and ensuring the viability of the
two-State solution.
We should not lose sight of the fact that the effects
of the 50-day war in Gaza are still fresh and that
any unilateral action from any side could cause the
region to erupt into violence. Despite the Egyptianbrokered ceasefire in August, as stated by UnderSecretary-General Feltman, the current status quo
is not sustainable. But we also know that any failure
to move forward will incite the parties to resort to
unilateral decisions. Therefore, the parties should make
additional efforts to end the vicious cycle by resuming
negotiations.
In this context of heightened tension, my delegation
reiterates the importance of respect for religious
freedoms, including unhindered access for worshippers
of all faiths to their holy sites, and a commitment by
both Israelis and Palestinians to ensure that members
of their respective communities refrain from any
provocation.
The status of the Old City and its religious sites are
extremely sensitive to the final status issues, which can
be resolved only through direct negotiations between
parties. Therefore, we call upon parties to continue

14-59391

29/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to uphold the 20-year-old peace treaty regarding the
religious status of the area of the Al-Aqsa Mosque in
East Jerusalem. In that regard, we commend the Israeli
Government for announcing that it will maintain the
status quo agreement on the whole sites and will not
restrict access to anyone.
In order for the world to ever witness the realization
of our common goal of two States for two peoples living
side by side in peace and security, both parties, supported
by their peace partners, should commit themselves to
a comprehensive and negotiated settlement to end the
conflict and save succeeding generations in the region
from the scourge of war.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Today
we are urgently meeting at the request of the Permanent
Mission of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the
Permanent Observer Mission of the State of Palestine
to address the dangerous escalation of tensions in East
Jerusalem. We regret that the Security Council has to
deal once again with the situation of Israeli settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory and the Temple
Mount, for, as we all know, that already has been decided
on. Among the measures taken with respect this issue
by the Council, we highlight resolutions 446 (1979), 452
(1979), 465 (1980) and 478 (1980). We attach particular
importance to resolution 478 (1980), which decides not
to recognize the basic law enacted by the Knesset or the
measures that, as a result of that law, “seek to alter the
character and status of Jerusalem” (resolution 478 (1980),
para. 5). However, 35 years on, we must stilll continue
to deal with what our predecessors in the Chamber had
already decided.
In that regard, Chile emphatically condemns Israel’s
latest announcement that it will continue construction
of more than a 1,000 new settlement units in Ramat
Shlomo and Har Homa. Israel’s flouting of Security
Council resolutions voids the viability and geographic
contiguity of the future Palestinian State, which must
have East Jerusalem as its capital.
Like other members of the international community,
we believe that such unilateral actions, as well as those
initiatives seeking to alter the character of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque compound, perpetuate discord and mistrust
between peoples. We are very concerned about the
tension we have seen in East Jerusalem since July,
including the action on Wednesday, 22 October, which
led to the death of an Israeli child and an Ecuadorian
migrant woman. All that makes us fear for a new
intifada.

S/PV.7291

We again urge and deem it necessary for the
Security Council to speak out and to continue making
every effort to facilitate the two-State solution and
to effectively exercise its responsibilities to preserve
international peace and security.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would also
like to convey my gratitude to you, Madam President,
for having convened this public meeting on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
I also thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his briefing.
Chad wishes to express its deep concern regarding
the most recent developments in the occupied
Palestinian territories, where the brutal actions by Israel
against Palestinian civilians continues. Incursions into
holy sites continue, threatening to further deteriorate
an already extremely tense situation, especially in
East Jerusalem. It is in this tense climate that Israel
has announced its plan for the construction of 1,000
additional housing units in East Jerusalem, thus fanning
the flames of discord. Quite clearly, settlement and the
illegal appropriation of land are very serious acts that
risk completely undermining any chance for a peace
process as well as undermining all mediation efforts.
A legitimate question in this case is how can the
Palestinian people build its future independent State,
one which would be viable and sovereign, if its territory
is reduced on a daily basis? In that regard, we condemn
as firmly as possible the construction of any new
settlements, attacks against civilians, the destruction of
houses and the forced displacement of Palestinians, and
we urge Israel to bring all this to an immediate end.
Turning to the political process, as other delegations
have underscored, the current status quo is no longer
acceptable, and it is regrettable that of late the Security
Council’s public and closed meetings on the issue of
Palestine are leading to no concrete initiatives likely
to unblock the situation and to improve the living
conditions of Palestinians under occupation. It is high
time for the international community to assume its
responsibilities to lend real momentum to the peace
process and to bring Israelis and Palestinians back
together around the negotiating table. That requires
Israel to respect its international legal commitments
and to put an end to all actions that are fraught with the
risk of reducing the peace process to nothing.
The solution of two States living side by side in
peace remains the only possibility that would guarantee

14-5939117/20

S/PV.7291

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

security for Israel and a better, safer future for the
Palestinian people. We are convinced that to achieve a
just and lasting peace in the region, Israel has to respect
the relevant United Nations resolutions. Israel will have
to recognize that peace is simply incompatible with the
occupation policy, the construction of new settlements
in Palestinian territories, the massacre of innocent
people or the desecration of holy sites.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jeff Feltman for his briefing, and I note the
statements from our Palestinian and Israeli colleagues.
Australia remains very disappointed at the
failure of final-status negotiations earlier this year.
Efforts to achieve a durable peace based on a twoState solution must resume in earnest immediately.
Australia unreservedly condemns sectarian acts of
violence against innocent civilians, which breed mutual
distrust at a time when trust is urgently needed. Such
cowardly acts do nothing to advance the interests of
the Palestinian people and serve only to strengthen
the narrative of those extremists wedded to a cycle of
killing and recrimination. Both sides have an obligation
to do everything within their power to reduce current
tensions. It is not in the interests of any party to return
to the mass violence that characterized the conflict in
Gaza. Instead, Israeli and Palestinian politicians must
show real leadership in seeking the difficult path of
peace and reconciliation.
In respect of the holy sites in Jerusalem, we welcome
Prime Minister Netanyahu’s public commitment this
week, repeated by Israel’s Permanent Representative
in the Council today, that access by all to the holy
sites will continue to be maintained. We are troubled
by Israel’s reported decision to construct more than
1,000 new apartments in East Jerusalem. The decision
follows Israel’s declaration in August of an intention
to expropriate 1,000 acres of West Bank land south of
Bethelehem as State land. Following that declaration,
Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ms. Bishop,
called on Israeli Minister for Foreign Affairs Liberman
to reconsider that declaration to expropriate land.
The building of new Israeli settlements on
territories subject to final-status negotiations and
Palestinian efforts to pursue unilaterally a Palestinian
State undermine efforts to return to peace negotiations.
Israelis and Palestinians deserve to live with dignity
side by side in peace and security. To that end, we
continue to encourage both sides to resume direct
negotiations towards a just and lasting two State
18/20

29/10/2014

solution. We believe the Council can play a constructive
role in supporting that process, but can only do so with
the full commitment of both sides.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I also wish to thank UnderSecretary-General Feltman for his briefing.
The recent announcement by the Government of
Israel of plans to build new settlements in occupied
East Jerusalem has grave implications for the IsraeliPalestinian peace process. The immediate cessation of
illegal Israeli settlement activity is crucial to resolving
the question of Palestine, based on the two-State
solution, which the international community broadly
supports and for which there is no viable alternative.
We therefore join other members of the Council in
ordering the Israeli Government to abandon its plans
to construct new settlements in East Jerusalem, which
under international law is a part of occupied Palestinian
territory.
During the Security Council debate of 21 October
(see S/PV.7281), we called on both parties to seize
the opportunity provided by the current ceasefire to
restart the stalled negotiations. We restate our position
that dialogue remains the only means of resolving
the question of Palestine. The parties should avoid
hostile rhetoric and unilateral actions and take steps
to de-escalate tensions. They should, without delay,
resume direct negotiations on the final status issues,
including on borders, security, the status of Jerusalem
and the return of Palestinian refugees.
Our unambiguous message today, as always, is
that we would like to see Israel and Palestine live side
by side in peace and security, within internationally
recognized borders and consistent with the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I thank UnderSecretary-General Feltman for his briefing.
Latest tragic incidents such as the deadly attack by
a Palestinian of 22 October, the shooting of Palestinian
teenagers and settler violence are developments of
extreme concern. We deplore the loss of lives and call
for thorough investigation into those tragic events. We
fear that, if left unaddressed, this tension may spiral
into yet another escalation of violence. We urge all
sides to refrain from any actions that could heighten
tensions and lead to further incitement and hate crimes.
It is the responsibility of all sides to restore calm and
avoid further tensions.

14-59391

29/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The European Union and its States members,
including
Lithuania,
condemned
the
Israeli
Government’s decision to approve plans for new
settlements. Settlements are illegal under international
law. If these plans advance, it will severely threaten the
final status of Jerusalem as the future capital of two
States. We join international community in calling on
the Government of Israel to reverse the plans and put
an end to its settlement policy in East Jerusalem and
the West Bank.
We urge Israel to desist from any measures
aimed at altering the physical character, demographic
composition, institutional structure and the legal
status of the City of Jerusalem. Those actions threaten
the prospects for peace and run counter to the Fourth
Geneva Convention.
Lithuania strongly commends Jordan, the Custodian
of the Holy Sites in Jerusalem, and supports its actions
to preserve the status quo of holy sites in East Jerusalem.
We have consistently repeated our call to all sides to
cease all provocative actions in and around the Holy Site
of the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif complex that
could prejudice the outcome of negotiations over East
Jerusalem. Our Foreign Minister has just completed
a visit to Jordan that coincided with the twentieth
anniversary of the peace agreement between Israel
and Jordan. The Lithuanian and Jordanian Foreign
Ministers agreed that it was important to resume peace
negotiations between the Israelis and the Palestinians
as soon as possible.
Lithuania reiterates its call for both sides to
resume peace negotiations and to demonstrate strong
commitment and leadership to reach a two-State
solution. A way must be found through negotiations to
resolve the status of Jerusalem as the future capital of
both Israel and Palestine. A two-State solution achieved
on the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the terms of reference of the Madrid Conference,
including land for peace, the road map, the agreements
previously reached by the parties and the Arab Peace
Initiative is the only viable solution to bring peace and
security to both people and to reduce tensions in the
region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Argentina.

S/PV.7291

I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing, and I reiterate
my gratitude to the representatives of Israel and
Palestine for their statements.
Jerusalem is of enormous importance for Christians,
Muslims and Jews. I do not think I err in saying that
Jerusalem has genuine meaning for all men and women
of good faith. It is thus that the emergency holding of
this meeting of the Security Council is amply justified,
at a time when tensions in Jerusalem — which, again, is
of great importance for everyone alike —are escalating
in a dangerous and destabilizing manner, with violence
having already cost civilian lives.
How unfortunate that, while we are still in the midst
of discussions about yet another reconstruction of Gaza,
we again face an urgent need to draw attention to actions
that take place in the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
Particularly worthy of our resolute condemnation are
the announcements that Israel plans to move forward
with the construction of more settlement units in
East Jerusalem, including in Ramat Shlomo and Har
Homa. Unfortunately, those announcements are neither
surprising nor isolated events. Most lamentable of all
is the fact that they do not surprise us because they are
part of the continuing campaign of settlement in East
Jerusalem, accompanied by seizures, attacks against
civilians, demolitions and the forced displacement of
Palestinian residents.
Moreover, settlement expansion coincides with
a series of violent events, access restrictions, acts of
incitement and attempts to alter the status quo of the
holy places in Jerusalem — for men and women of faith
and for men and women of goodwill. In the current
climate of frustration and a stagnation in the dialogue,
we are dealing with irresponsible actions with potential
destabilizing effects for the engire region.
We know that all these practices as a whole violate
international law, are contrary to peace, continue to
change the situation on the ground and jeopardize the
viability of the two-State solution. How can we tolerate
practices that cannot be tolerated? Why not require
once again that they be reversed immediately? Why not
warn that they could lead to a new tragic escalation of
violence?
The Security Council, joining the majority position
of the international community, has on many occasions
said that all legislative and administrative measures
taken by Israel and the actions taken that tend to change
the legal status of Jerusalem are null and void, cannot in

14-5939119/20

S/PV.7291

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

fact change that status and constitute a serious obstacle
to peace. The Council has also deplored Israel’s
persistent attempts to change the physical nature,
demographic composition, institutional structure and
very status of the Holy City of Jerusalem.
But it is clear that simple words of condemnation
are not enough and that the history between the Security
Council and Jerusalem is a series of unobserved
resolutions. Things are that way because we are losing
sight of the fact that Jerusalem is just one facet of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and that the acts that have
brought us together today are expressions of a broader
reality, of an illegal occupation that has lasted for
almost half a century.
Argentina believes that the Security Council must
stop condoning, through its inaction, acts of provocation
and actions that are incompatible with peace. We believe
that we should do our utmost to salvage the two-State
solution while it is still possible to do so. If we drop our
masks and double standards, there are things that the
Council can and must do to meet that objective, thereby
fully living up to its responsibilities.
The Council can accept Palestine as a State Member
of the United Nations. The Council can conduct a

20/20

29/10/2014

long-postponed visit to the region. And it should take
up — in a high-minded, serious fashion and with a spirit
of commitment — the Arab draft resolution, which
would put an end to the occupation within a specific
time frame, as part of the Council’s efforts to achieve
the full independence of the Palestinian people and
guarantee the right of the State of Israel to live in peace
with its neighbours within secure and internationally
recognized borders. To that end, Argentina continues
to be ready to work on the draft resolution.
We are convinced that, with the necessary political
will and political ethics, the Security Council will be
able to help create conditions that will lead, once and for
all, to a peaceful, fair, tolerant and lasting coexistence
between Israelis and Palestinians.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

14-59391
