TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR

th
MEETING: 29 DECEMBER 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l460/Rev.

1)

. . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I

1

Statement by the President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda , . , . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 29 December 1968 from the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8945);
(b) Letter dated 29 December 1968 from the Acting Permanent Representative
of Israel to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8946) . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . , . . , , . . . . . .

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a synibol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SIXTIETH

MEETING

Held in New York on Sunday, 29 December 1968, at 6 pm.
President: Lij Endalkachew MAKONNEN

(Ethiopia).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, BraziI, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l46d/Rev.l)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
(Q) Letter dated 29 December 1968 from the
Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8945);
(b) Letter dated 29 December 1968 from the Acting
Permanent Representative of Israel to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8946).

Statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT: I wish to apologize for the delay in
calling the meeting to order, As members of the Council are
aware, it was necessary to hold prior consultations in order
to facilitate our proceedings.
2. This meeting of the Security Council has been convened
at very short notice, inasmuch as the President received a
letter from the representative of Lebanon only this
afternoon requesting that the Council should be convened
as al matter of urgency. Subsequently the representative of
Israel also communicated with me and requested an urgent
meeting of ,,the Council. I immediately contacted the
members of the Council in order to arrange for a meeting
this evening.
3’
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
?he sit&ion

in the Middle East:
dated.21 December1968 from the Permanent
Representative;of Lebanan to the United Natiotts
addressedto the President of the Security Council
,’
(S/8945);

(a) Letter

(71)Letter dated 29 December1968 from the Acting.
Permanent Representativeof Israel to the United
Nations addressedto the Presidentof the Security
Council(S/8946)
3. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translatedfrom Russian):Mr. President,on behalf of the
Soviet delegationI wish to makethe following statement.
4. The Soviet delegation,bearingin mind the urgency of
this questionandthe latenessof the hour and not wishing
to involve the Security Councilin a proceduraldebate,will
agreewith great reluctanceto the adoption of this agenda.
5. The Soviet delegation,however, reservesits right to
return to this question later, since it considersthat the
secondquestionreally bearsno direct relationshipto the
situation in the Near East, inasmuchasthe incident took
placein Athens. If the Security Councilwere to dealwith
all problemsof this nature which arisein any country, then
it would becomea kind of internationalcourt for the trial
of terrorist activities.
6. However, not wishingat the presentstageto involve the
Security Council in a procedural debate, the Soviet’
delegationhasnot objected to the adoption of the agenda
in the form in which you havestatedit.
7. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada):Mr, President,I shouldlike
to have assurance
that in adoptingthe agendawe havedone
SO without prejudice to the positionsthat any member
round this table or the partiesconcernedmay take on’the
substance.
-8. The PRESIDENT: In response
to the representativeof
CanadaI shouldlike to saythat it ismy understanding
that
in their statementsmembersof the Council may refer to
any part of the agenda,
asit stands.
9. In accordancewith the provisionalruIes of procedure
and’with the usualpractice, I shallnow, with the consentof
the Council, invite the representativesof Lebanon and
Israel to take places at the Council table in order to
participatewithout vote in the discussion.*
At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. Ghorra
(Lebanon) and Mr. S. Rosetine(Israel) took placesat the
Counciltable.
10. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
considerthe questionplacedon its agenda.

18. The act in itself and the information I have put before
the Council are sufficient proof of the magnitude of the
aggression. The gravity of the situation it has created
undoubtedly constitutes a threat to the peace and security
of Lebanon, of the Middle East and of the world. The
Israeli authorities
have arrogantly and unabashedly
proclaimed to the world that their military units are
responsible for the attack on the international airport of
Beirut. Intoxicated by their military might, the Israelis
must feel that they have achieved a great feat. Their
officials and press welcomed the safe return to their base of
their aggressive units, applauding and hailing their shameful
exploit. It is ironic that while Israel was hailing its
aggression, the whole world was busy welcoming back to
earth the American astronauts from their exploit of
orbiting the moon.

11. I should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to some information relating to the question that
has been received from the Acting Chief of Staff of
UNTSO. That information is contained in documents
S/7930/Add.107 and 108.
12. The first speaker whose name is inscribed on my list is
the representative of Lebanon. I now call on him.
1,3. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, as well as the other members of the Security
Council for the prompt action taken in convening this
meeting at my request on behalf of the Lebanese
Government.

j

14. The Security Council is requested to deal again with
an act of aggression committed by the habitual,
trigger-happy aggressor, Israel. The new victim is peaceful
and peace-lo&g Lebanon. I believe that members of the
Council are shocked and dismayed, as are people all over
the world, by the latest act of aggression committed by
Israel. Great indignation has gripped the Lebanese people.
That indignation is shared by Governments and peoples
everywhere. This stems from their appreciation of the role
that Lebanon has always played within as well as outside
the United Nations for the promotion of peace in the
world, international co-operation and amity, and cultural,
spiritual and human values. The Lebanese Government and
people have always applied themselves to promoting the
true vocation of Lebanon as a free and democratic State
and as a centre for social, cultural and economic progress.
My country has become a great link of communications and
understanding among peoples, nations and continents.

19. The records of the Security Council, as well as those
of the Assembly, are replete with resolutions condemning
Israel for its series of acts of aggression in Palestine and
against the Arab countries. I am not here today to review
those records; the members of the Council are well aware of
them. In invoking this, my delegation wishes only to shed
light on the aggressive character of Israel, which on &any
occasions in the past has defied the United Nations and
ignored international law and morality.
20. We humbly submit that it is time for the United
Nations, and particularly the Security Council, to stand up
to this defiance, for it constitutes a grave challenge to this
Organization, which from its inception was meant to be a
secure anchor for small peaceful nations like mine. Surely
the aggressive act committed against my country is a
flagrant violation of the principles and objectives of the
Charter. Another condemnation of Israel will not be
sufficient. Peaceful Lebanon has no aggressive designs. Ever
since the foundation of the United Nations we have been
one of its most faithful adherents; in this Organization we
have placed our reliance for our security.

15. The international airport of Beirut has become a
significant manifestation of Lebanon’s vocational mission.
That airport is an open, civilian, defenceless airport used by
many countries Members of the United Nations. It became
a target of the aggressive designs of Israel. At 9.30 p.m. on
Saturday, 28 December 1968, units of the Israeli Air Force
staged a surprise and treacherous attack on its installations
and on the civilian aircraft which were in the hangars and
on the ground of the airport. Explosive and incendiary
bombs and rockets were used. The resulting damage is
staggering. Thirteen airplanes were completely destroyed.
They constituted the main portion of our civilian aircraft
fleet. The planes destroyed were the following: one Boeing
superjet 707, one VC-IO, ,two Caravelles, three Comet jets,
and one Viscount, all belonging to the Middle East Airlines
Air Liban Company; two Coronado jets and one DC-7,
belonging to Lebanese International Airways; two DC-Gs,
belonging to the Trans-Mediterranean Airways company.

21. We therefore hope that the Security Council will go
beyond the usual condemnatory resolutions. We ask for
effective measures, under Chapter VII of the Charter; for
should Israel walk out of this hall with only a
condemnatory resolution being adopted against it by the
Security Council, what assurances, in the light of the past,
should we have that it will not immediately hatch a new act
of aggression against Lebanon or one of the other Arab
States?
22. This is a test case for the Council to raise the hopes of
small peaceful nations and give them confidence that the
United Nations has been established to protect their
security and territorial integrity.

16. AI1 those companies are Lebanese and privatelyowned. Hangars, repair shops and fuel depots were also hit
23. At a later stage the Lebanese Government, after having
and destroyed. The buildings of the air terminal also ’ ‘*’ fully assessed the damage that we have sustained, intends to
suffered extensive damage’.
request the Council to take the necessary measures against
Israel in order fully to compensate Lebanon for such
17. My delegation will supply the Security’Council at a
damages. At this stage, allow me only to quote a
declaration made today by the First Vice-President of the
later stage with further information about the full extent of
International Federation of Air Line Pilots Associations
the damage sustained as a result of the attack. It is already
known that the losses considerably exceed $50 million in
who described the Israeli action in these words:
value.
“Personally, I think the raid on Beirut Airport is the most
2

serious interlude against civil aviation that has ever taken
place ‘during peacetime.”

33. According to press reports the competent authorities
of that country are dealing with this matter; they are
studying it and apparently certain measures will be taken.
Clearly there are executive and judicial authorities in that
country. How is this matter related to the Security
Council?

24. Lebanon rests its case in your hands, Mr. President,
and in the hands of the members of the Council. We are
confident that the dedication of the members of the
Council to the principles and objectives enshrined in the
Charter, to the maintenance of peace and security in the
world, and to justice will undoubtedly justify the reliance
of Lebanon on the Security Council.

34. If the Security Council, as I pointed out in my,
remarks after the adoption of the agenda, were to begin to
consider all terrorist acts committed no matter where, even
in this country, then it would cease to be the Security
Council. And this is what is happening. The Israel
representative is involving the Security Council in the
consideration of events which took place on the territory of
a sovereign State, which is entitled to determine what
happened and to draw the appropriate conclusions. That
Government has not appealed to the Security Council. On
what basis, therefore, is the Israel representative telling us
all this?

25. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Israel, on whom I now call.

_

2G, Mr. ROSENNE (Israel): I wish to thank YOU,
Mr. President, and through you the members of the
Security Council, for meeting so promptly and at such an
inconvenient hour at the request of my Government for
this urgent meeting of the Security Council.
7. On 26 December, an Israeli civil airliner en route to
P New York on a regular scheduled commercial flight was
viciously attacked by bombs and machine-guns at the
Athens international airport, On board were fifty-three
passengers, including fifteen women and three children.
They were of varied nationalities: American, French,
Belgian, Iranian, Mexican, and perhaps others; the minority
were Israeli nationals. The assailants came from Beirut.
They hurled hand grenades against our airliner; they
succeeded in perforating one of the fuel tanks and in
igniting one engine, and they tried to prevent the escape of
the o’ccupants by shooting at and deflating the emergency
rubber chutes. They opened fire indiscriminately,
with
sub-machine-guns, against the passengers and crew,
shouting-and
I quote in translation: “We want to kill
Jews.‘”

35. We are dealing with an entirely different matter. The
Security Council is examining a new act of Israel aggression
against a peaceful Arab country, Lebanon. That is the
substance of today’s meeting, not the matter to which the
Israel representative seeks to draw our attention.
36. I ask leave to point out this fact.
37. The PRESIDENT: I invite the representative of Israel
to continue his statement.
38, I&. ROSENNE (Israel): The mind boggles at the
thought of what could have ,been the consequences 3f that
diabolical plot, had fortune favoured the assailants: a giant
airliner, with thirty tons of fuel in its tanks, engulfed in
flames; men, women and children caught in the inferno;
danger and death and destruction spreading to everything
within reach.

28. They killed one passenger, a maritime engineer,
Mr. Leon Shirdan, who was travelling to New York at the
invitation of the United Nations Development Programme
to serve as a consultant on the subject of the construction
of ports and artificial islands. Those projects were to be
carried out in Latin America and in Africa. One stewardess
was graveiy injured.

39. The assailants, identified as Mahmoud Mohammed and
Maher Suleiman, boasted that they were Arab commandos
and admitted that they had been trained and equipped by a
terrorist organization operating out of Beirut. They left the
international airport of Beirut that same morning, 26
December, with the sole and avowed purpose of destroying
the Israeli airliner and killing all its occupants. They left the
internatibnal airport of Beirut on a criminal assignment: to
kill men, women and children, to kill Jews, and to kill also
other hipless persons of whatever nationality or creed who
happened to be on the Israeli aircraft, These persons were
not misled underground fighters. There sho$d be no
mistake about this, The two bloodthirsty gunmen are
members of a paramilitary organization which .operates
quite openly in Beirut and with the full knowledge and
blessing of the Lebanese Government, which is fully aware
of all its doings, its purposes and its methods. From Beirut
they went to Athens and violated the sovereignty of a third
country. In its name they perpetrated a most shocking and
piratical outrage against the freedom and safety of
international
civii aviation. The crime which they
committed in its name is a new one in the history of
international
civil aviation, It is absolurely without
precedent.

29. I[ need not say that the news of this outrage was
received in Israel with the greatest indignation and anger.
,130. It is by now evident that an unprecedented $an of
mass murder was thwarted only by a combination of
factors: sheer chance, the efficient and calm behaviour of
the crew and passengers, and the subsequent forceful
intervention of the Greek police, who succeeded in
arresting the perpetrators before they could either do more
damage . . .
31. ‘The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative
Soviet Union to speak on a point of order.

of the

32. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Mr. President, this raises serious
doubts. Why is all this being narrated to the Security
Council? This incident, which took place in Athens,
concerns the sovereignty and competence of the Greek
authorities. It occurred on the territory of Greece.
3

shooting into the air, were seensurrounding the Prime
Minister.

40. The eyes of the world turned to Beirut in anxious
expectation of what the Lebanese Government would say
and do. Would the Government of Lebanon, recognizing its
vocation to which the representative of Lebanon himself
referred in his statement just now, rise at last to its
responsibilities and disband the terror organization, detain
and bring its members to swift justice, condemn the crime
and take all necessary measures to prevent its repetition?
Those who hoped so were soon disappointed. Instead of
this, the official Lebanese news agency, in a lame
statement, tried to throw off all responsibility, taking
shelter behind communiques issued by the terror
organizations in Beirut which were widely reproduced in
the Arab press and broadcast by Arab official radio and
television stations, boasting of the exploit and extolling the
murder in Athens. At the same time, the Lebanese
Consulate in Athens extended its consular protection to the
assassins.

47. On 8 May 1968, the Lebanesedaily As-Safa reported
that “train/rig centresfor Lebaneseyoung menwho join the
fedaveen movement have been establishedin the town of
Sidon”. In a statementmadeon 6 May, the LebanesePrime
Minister reiterated his Government’ssupport for tcrrorirt
warfare. The following night the first ‘of a seriesof armed
attacks was launched from Lebanesesoil againstan lsr~cli
village,Manara.
48. Since then, the Government of Lebanon has nrrl
restraineditself either in its actionsor in its threats agajns~
Israel.My delegationreported theseand other incidents to
the Security Council in its communicationsof 14 May 1%R
[S/8585] and IS June 1968 [S/8637/. Those notes
stressedthe grave dangersto the cease-firecreated by the%
Lebaneseprovocations.

41. Not even tonight did the Ambassador from Lebanon
find it possible to utter one single word about this dastardly
assault and the loss of life it caused.

49. Those and other warnings were not needed, C)n
2 November1968, the Prime Minister of Lebanon declared
to the Kuwait newspaperAr-Rai AZ-Amm that he did no1
believe in political solutions and that his Govemrracn;r
would support the feduyeen since he considered tir’eia
activities to be lawful. Later in the day he rcceiverf P
delegationand, according to Radio Beirut, repeated what
statement. ,On 2 November 1968, Radio Baghdadquo&&i
the Prime Minister as saying that what was taken by ~UM<B
would be recovered by force. On 6November 1968, the
representativeof Israel forwarded againa complaint to 8%~
Security Council. He wrote:

42. The feeble excuses which came from Lebanon, from
Beirut, will deceive no objective person. By its tolerance
and connivance, Lebanon has once again ranged itself on
the side of defiance of international law. It has thus
continued, both by omission and by commission, the policy
enunciated by its Prime Minister on 16 February 1968. The
official position of the Lebanese Government was then
expressed by Mr. Abdalla el-YafI in the Lebanese
Parliament as follows-and I am quoting from Radio Beirut:
‘We remain at war with Israel. Lebanon will remain faithful
to the Khartoum decisions.” There is no need for me to
repeat before this Security Council the trinity of negatives
that constitutes the Khartoum decisions.’

“I am instructed to stressonce more the responsibilasy
of the Lebanese authorities to ensure SC~UI)IIBIX~~
observanceof the cease-fireand to prevent all armc9
action againstor incursionsinto Israel from its territsvfll*;,
whether by regular or irregular forces.When the ccasc.5rr
is violated from the Lebaneseside,Israelmust rcscrve rFw
right to take appropriate defensivemeasures.“[S/&‘&‘d /

43. On 30 April 1968, Abdalla el-Yawl publicly pledged
support to warfare by terror against Israel, He publicly
encouraged Lebanese nationals to join terrorist organizations and promised them arms to fight Israel. That is the
declared policy of the Government of Lebanon.

50. In this very month of December,Lebanon acted &%
host to an Arab regional conference, which vowed ~$3
continueterror warfare againstIsrael.

44. The Beirut daily AZ-Yaum vividly described the official
ceremony held on 30 April last when the Prime Minister
took leave of fifty Lebanese citizens who had joined the
El-Fatah terror organization, a representative of which
thanked the Lebanese Government for its assistance.

51. On 24 December 1968, a bare five days ago. @%?
El-Fatal1 headquartersin Beirut published a warnina Bn
Christianpilgrimsthat they would be risking their live%b?,
goingto Bethlehemfor Christmas.TheNew York 7hfi ~6
25 Decemberreported that the Arab terrorists had pl;ann:d
a dramaticact of violence to disruptthe holiday. AccQthr$
to the newspaper,only the vigilanceof the Israeli defeBsc*
forcespreventedan infamousact of desecration.

4.5. The newspaper Al-.4nw~ of Beirut, of the same *day,
added that the Prime Minister spoke enthusiastically. in
favour of the continuation of warfare by terror against
Israel, and had instructed the Lebanese border guards to
facilitate the movements of El-Fatah units.

52. The dastardly and murderousoutrageof 26 Dec*nj%~
is thus the culmination of a long sustainedand offi~~~~I:encouragedcampaign,All through 1968 Lebanon, tum?$ ;g
deaf ear to Israel’s appeals, has been playing an ebb
increasingrole in the over-all Arab belligerency 1
Israel, It was in Beirut that the major Arab tcni~rssi~
organizationsestablishedtheir headquartersand set uP EI%xs
international networks. From this safe haven, and tdkara~
advantageof its activities, they mobilized their r~s~~~~~~~
built up their propagandamachine,planned and direcQ%I

46. TO attack Israel is indeed an easy way , to gain
popularity, and the Arab leaders do not shun it. On 2 May
1968, the newspaper AU%zyat reported extensively on the
presence of the Prime Minister of Lebanon at the funeral of
an El-Fatal1 man who had been killed in action, where
armed El-Fatah men, dressed in camouflage uniforms and
1 Resolutions taken at the Arab Summit Conference held at
Khartoum from 29 August to 1 September 1967.

4

b
r

their murderous attacks launched against Israel villages and
cities, Ithe acts of sabotage, the planting of mines and
boobytraps, and the hijacking of an Israeli airplane last
July. They made no secret of their far-reaching and devilish
plots and plans. All this is taking place on Lebanese soil, in
Beirut, the very capital of that country, under the
complacent eyes and ears of the Lebanese authorities. The
Government’s responsibilities are clearly established, They
are direct responsibilities, not vicarious ones.

I,

C‘

58. After the hijacking of our aircraft last July, the
Government of Israel exercised the maximum of restraint.
We refrained from reacting in force and took diplomatic
action instead for the release of the plane, the crew and the
passengers. The Prime Minister of Israel, Mr. Eshkol, made
it clear at that time, on behalf of the Government of Israel,
that we would not accept interference with free movement
along ‘our air routes. He emphasized that the kidnapping
not only endangered Israel but also violated principles of
freedom and safety of aviation, and he called for a cessation
of acts of this kind. Unfortunately, an end has not been put
to this dangerous practice. Once again, unprecedented
criminal attacks have been perpetrated, this time on an
Israeli airplane in another international airport.

53. The latest tragic and barbaric act in Athens has again
brought to the Lebanese Government the cheap rewards of
applause by a public opinion continuously whipped into
senseless and blind hatred, The influential Lebanese
newspaper An-j%har, gloating over the murder, wrote on
28 December:

59. It was indeed fortunate that the reckless act of
hijacking last July was not accompanied by any loss of life,
although members of the Security Council will recall that it
provoked a major international crisis. There was reason to
expect that, in the light of the harsh reaction of world
public opinion and of the organizations concerned with
civil aviation, the Arabs would desist from this particularly
vicious form of terror warfare. Last Thursday’s action in
the international airport of Athens has belied these hopes
and expectations. The Government of Israel was duty
bound on this occasion to take appropriate action in
self-defence designed to prevent any repetition of this
nefarious attack.

“The homeland of the Palestinian is the entire world-in
Jerusalem, in Tel Aviv, in Los Angeles, in Rome and
Athens. One day it will be in New York, Washington and
Lond.on. For as long as the Palestinian is without a
homeland, the entire world is his. His home is where the
enemly is . , . And New York, Washington and London or
any other places might be the scene of the next
Palestinian protest operation. The world will support or
condemn, be happy or be afraid,”
54. Other mass media, including state-controlled broadcasting, services, joined in voicing their satisfaction at the
attack on the Israeli plane, The Beirut daily AI-~u~ydu
wrote, on 28 December 1968, that the attack had the
advantage of publicizing the fedaveen activities all over the
world. The Lebanese newspaper AZ-Ha&f, which voices the
views of El-Fatah, commented, also on 28 December 1968,
that the,attack in Athens was a demonstration of what it
called extraordinary heroism.

60. On 28 December 1968 a commando unit of the Israel
defence forces landed at Beirut airport and struck at a
number of aircraft belonging to Arab airlines parked in the
airport. There was no loss of life. Strict precautions were
taken, as far as possible, to avoid damage to non-Arab
aircraft, The action was directed solely against the base
from which the terrorists had departed on the previous
occasion.

5.5. To proclaim disrespect and brazen defiance of every
accepted principle of human decency and international
behaviour, to glamourize crime, seems to be the accepted
currency in Beirut today, at least as far as Israel is
concerned.

61. This action was taken to uphold Israel’s basic right to
free navigation in international skies, Its purpose was to
show once again that Israel’s rights on land and sea and in
the air cannot be jeopardized and trampled on with
impunity. It js a reminder to friend and foe of the firm and
unconditional commitment of the people and of the
Government of Israel to protect its very existence, its
territory and its lifelines, resolutely and unswervingly.

56. However, not only are general principles of law and
order, of freedom of transit, of international safety at
stake. Lebanon has undertaken specific obligations towards
Israel under the Security Council cease-fire resolution, Any
attack. against an Israeli civil aircraft, wherever,it might be,
is as much a violation of the cease-fire as any attack on
Israeli territory, and entitles the Israeli Government to
exercise its right of self-defence, Two attacks on Israeli civil
aircra,ft this year, within six months of each other,
perpetrated by the same terrorist group, based in Beirut,
have made it abundantly clear what their objectives are,
namely, to disrupt Israeli civil aviation, wherever it might
be, without any consideration for loss’ of life, for the
identity of the victims, for the material damages or for the
disruption of international civil aviation in general.

62. Without in any way belittling the gravity of this
terrorist warfare being conducted against Israel’s civil
aircraft, wherever they might be, the complaint that we are
discussing must also be seen in the broader context of the
continuation by the Arab States, including Lebanon, of
active belligerency and warfare against Israel through the
instrumentality of irregular forces and organizations armed,
trained, encouraged and financed by the Arab Governments, including the Government of Lebanon.
63. This warfare is in flagrant violation of the Charter of
the United Nations, of the cease-fire regime, and also of the
United Nations resolutions on the inadmissibility of
interfering in the internal affairs of other States.

57. This is a grave matter in itself; this is a grave matter for
Israel; this is a grave matter for every country. It threatens
the viery basis of international law and order. It strikes at
the very foundations of the whole complex network of
international transportation and communications.

r;
Ii

64. The activities of the terrorist organizations very
seriously undermine the patient efforts of Ambassador
5

‘I
\

Jarring towards the attainment of a peaceful settlement.
These terror organizations openly proclaim that their
objective is to thwart any such settlement and to destroy
Israel, regardless of Israel’s shape and size. Members of the
Security Council will recall that, as the Secretary-General
himself reported at that time, this kind of governmentbacked terrorist activity contributed not a little to the
general deterioration
of the situation preceding the
outbreak
of the 1967 war. The Arab Governments
-including the Government of Lebanon-cannot be relieved
of their responsibilities
for the activities of these
organizations.
I

Council. This is a source of double satisfaction to your
colleagues here. Your country, since 1924 when it was
admitted to the League of Nations, has played a
distinguished role in the councils of the world. Its voice has
been heard again and again in the cause of right in the
international councils of nations. Unfortunately, it has not
always been heeded, but repeatedly it has really been the
voice of the conscience of our civilization. You, Sir, we
regard as a distinguished representative of that tradition,
and we are delighted to see you in a position to preside over
this body with the patience, dignity, kindness and courtesy
which have always distinguished your attitude towards all
of us. I am especially pleased to see you occupying your
position at a time when problems of such difficulty and
complication are before us.

65. Just before the June war, in this very Council
Chamber, on 30 May 1967, it was the Foreign Minister of
Lebanon who said:

70. I wish at the same time to express my congratulations
to your distinguished predecessor, the Ambassador of
Denmark, for the skill, patience and objectivity with which
he presided over the affairs of this body in the previous
month.

“This time it must be clear to everybody that it would
be a total war. In a total war, the Arabs will use all means
to defeat their enemy I . . It would be a long war, with
no cease-fire until final victory.”
[134&/z meeting,
pnras. 19 rind 21.1

71. The year is ending on a note of tragedy and of
violence in the Middle East. The Council, which has met so
many times during the year to consider acts of terrorism
and military counter-action, meets on this occasion to deal
with a most regrettable Israeli action which my
Government strongly condemns. As Ambassador Goldberg
stated in the Council on 21 March [1402nd meeting], my
Government opposes violence from any quarter in the
Middle East.

66. Not without
regret do we have ‘to say to the
representative of the Lebanon, our neighbour, through you,
Mr. President, that in the light of all that has happened
since those words were first uttered, it seems to us that that
is still the guiding tenet of his Government’s policy. The
Security Council is today faced with a very grave challenge.
My delegation hopes that it will at long last exert its
authority and clearly indicate that it can no longer tolerate
the continuation of warfare under the guise of terrorist
activities and will hold the Arab Governments, including
the Government of Lebanon, firmly to their duties under
the Charter and under the cease-fire.

72. Carrying the pattern of terrorism and reprisal into the
centres of international commerce and travel adds a new
dimension of destruction and risk which directly touches
the interests of all States. My Government can understand,
and in fact it shares, the concern of the Israeli Government
over the increasing interference with the right of
unimpeded air travel between States. Israel was rightly
aroused and legitimately concerned about the attack upon
an Israeli aircraft in Athens on 26 December and the
previous hijacking of another Israeli airliner. The free
movement of peaceful transport among countries is a
matter to which we are going to have to give increasing
attention. Armed intervention that interrupts the movement of civilian aircraft is an outrageous disregard of the
law of nations and an intolerable interference with the
safety of civilian passengers,

67. In a statement on Israeli television today, the Prime
Minister, Mr. Eshkol, said:
“We have no desire whatsoever for a worsening of our
relations with Lebanon. Israel is interested in a limitation
of the hostile front; not in its expansion. But we are
obliged to defend ourselves against all aggression,
wherever it is planned and carried out. This practice
adopted by our enemies must stop. States that make it
possible for terrorist organizations to organize and
perpetrate acts of terror bear responsibility for aggression,
a responsibility
which they cannot disclaim. This is
accepted as a fundamental principle of international law.
On no account can we accept the notion that the waging
of war against Israel should be permitted when those who
wage it call themselves this or that organization and not a
Government .”

73. However, the United States feels that this action does
not justify the Israeli retaliation of 28 December. In the
first place, we do not see a justification for a retaliation of
any kind against Lebanon. Nothing that we have heard has
convinced us that the Government of Lebanon is
responsible for the occurrence in Athens. On the contrary,
the Lebanese Government has made efforts to control the
actions of fedayeen groups in its territory. Lebanon is a
country which clearly has been doing its best to live in
peace with all other States in the area. Secondly, apart from
the question of Lebanese culpability, the Israeli action is
unjustified, Such a military attack upon an international
airport is an unacceptable form of international behaviour.
In magnitude it is entirely disproportionate to the act
which preceded it. It is disproportionate in two ways: first,

68. I wish to reserve the right of my delegation to
intervene again in this debate and, if necessary, to submit
further evidence to this Council, both about the attack on
our airliner by the Beirut-based and Beirut-inspired
terrorists and on other aspects of their nefarious activities.
69. Mr. WIGGINS
(United States of America): Mr.
President, I wish first of all to convey my congratulations
to you, on the first opportunity I have had to do SO, on
your assumption of the duties of President of the Security

6

in the degree of destruction involved; and secondly, in a
more fundamental way, in the difference between the acts
of two individual terrorists and those of a sizable military
force operating openly and directly under governmental
orders. It can be attributed to good fortune that there was
t-10 10~s of life; but the risk to scoresof innocent people,
including passengers
on aircraft in the airport at the time,
wasvery great. Our reports confirm a substantialamountof
damageto equipment and facilities.

latest Israeli action. In the meantimewe shallcontinueour
intensive efforts in support of Mr. Jarring, as we shall
continue to seeka meaningfularmslimitation agreementin
the area. Inlthese ways the foundationsfor peacein the
Middle East canbe laid.
78. The PRESIDENT: I should like to thank the
representativeof the United Statesfor the friendly message
he addressedto me and to my predecessor.
I shouldlike to
thank him in particular for the warm and generous
referencehe madeto my country andto its contribution to
the causeof international understanding
and peace.

74. Beyond the strong senseof concern at this specific
action is the increasingevidence that terrorism and other
acts of violence have become a way of life in the Middle
East. We seeno way to peacein this direction. The history
of the past year has shown that violence leads to more
violence and that retaliation does not bring an end to
terrorism; in fact it tends to weaken the forces of peace
rather than to strengthenthem.
7.5. It must now be plain to the Government of Israelitself
that the attack on the international airport at Beirut has
introduced new dangersinto the alreadyalarmingsituation
in the Middle East. This destructive operation hasenlarged
the ring of reprisaland widenedthe circle of terror to touch
areasand peoples hitherto strugglingto keep aloof from
these measures.Surely the Government of Israel must be
having sobersecondthoughts about this act of arrogance.It
would be a refreshing variation from previous patterns of
belhaviourin the region if that Government would candidly
and frankly itself give voice to its own misgivingsabout the
results of its military operation. An honest acknowledgement that this enterprise was ill-conceived and a candid
exlpressionof regret would illumine the bleak political
lan.dscapeof the region like a flash in the night. It would
realssure
the friends of Israelwho regret a situation in which
the Government of that country seemsto be putting its
confidence in the almost unrestricted use of force, and it
would silence many of Israel’s critics who find in this
epi.sodenew argumentswith which to reproach the Israeli
Government. It would even set before its enemiesan
example of reasonableness,
without which peacecan never
be achievedin the Middle East.

79. Sir Leslie GLASS (United Kingdom): I am sureyou
are aware, Mr. President, of the affection; respect and
admiration in which you areheld by my delegation.Weare
very glad to seeyou backin the post you haveheld in such
a distinguishedmanner in the past and we are only sorry
that you will be leavingussoon.
80. I speak shortly tonight to emphasizeat the earliest
possiblemoment in this Council the profound concernof
my Government at the action of the IsraeliGovernmentin
sendingforces to commit dangerousand deplorableactsof
violence at the international airport of Beirut on 28
December.
81. We in the Council must necessarily
look at eventsnot
in a vacuum but againstthe backgroundof pastviolencein
the context of the situation in the Middle East.Wecannot
ignore the dangers to peaceful international air travel
threatenedby such acts asthe hijackingof aircraft andthe
machine-gunningat Athens Airport, There is a terrifying
trend here which all nationsmust surelyjoin in deploring.
However, the scaleand intensity of the Israeliaction stands
out exceptionally against even this sombrebackground.
Although we have noted what the representativeof Israel
has said, it is particularly sadthat the flamesshouldhave
spreadto the country of Lebanonwith its history of peace
and conciliation.
82. As we look backward, we must alsolook forward. We
can seeonly too clearly that violencebreedsviolence;that
incident inevitably follows incident; that it is all too easyto
fmd self-justification for yet more bloodshed and
destruction; and that the spiral will end inevitably in
disasterunlessat somestagecommonsensecanprevailand
a peacefulsettlement is worked out in the Middle East.We
have had more than enough evidenceof that, and the
nations of the world are entitled to demandthat to all
actions in the Middle East there should be applied the
yardstick of whether such actions advanceor retard the
chancesof a peaceful settlement. By that yardstick the
eventsof 28 Decemberarea gravesetback.

76. The Security Council-indeed every Member of the
United Nations-has a responsibility to help break the
pai;tern of violence in the Middle East. We hope this
Council will speak promptly and clearly on the issues
before it. Surely all the parties in the area have a
responsibility to adhere scrupulously to the cease-fire
resolutionsof the Security Council. Surely it is evident to
all that a meaningful armslimitation agreementin the area
should not await the conclusionof a political settlementof
differences which have proved intractable for more than
two decades.Surely the principal partiesin the area,aswell
as the membersof the Council, must redoubletheir efforts
in support of the missionof AmbassadorJarring, whose 83. The ingredientsof possiblesettlementsexist. What we
sole purpose is to help facilitate a just and lasting peace, still seemto lack is the will to peace.Overthe yearsin the
debatesin the Council we have been911too awareof the
which would benefit all peoples of the area and help
passions
alive in the Middle East; but we havenow reached
bul!wark the political independence and the territorial
the
stage
when the sheermutual instinct for survivaland a
integrity of both the Israelisand the Arab States.The time
haslong passedfor halting the vicious circle that could lead common fear of disastermust surely begin to dampdown
thosepassions.
to further tragedy, pain and destruction.
84. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representativeof the
United Kingdom for his expressions
of friendly sentiments.

77. For its part the United States is preparedto support
prompt action by the Security Council to condemn this
7

.

85. Mr. CHAYET (France) (translated from French): My
delegation will confine itself today to making a few
preliminary remarks, reserving the right to add to these
initial comments in the light of the subsequent debate in
the Council and the additional clarification to be given us
by the Lebanese Government.

justified in any way, no matter what inventions and
fabrications the Israel representative may shower on us.
This new aggressive action by Israel can be regarded only as
the expression of a premeditated, preplanned and deliberate
decision to act in such a way as to complicate further the
situation in the Near East, to undermine the United Nations
decisions aimed at a political settlement in that region, and
to frustrate Ambassador Jarring’s mission. That is the only
political assessment that can be made of this new act of
aggression by Israel.

86. My delegation believes it essential to express at the
outset its serious concern over the Israeli raid carried out
yesterday, 28 December, on the international airport of
Beirut. It regrets that act all the more as a serious blow to a
country which is s traditional friend of France and has
always shown respect for the principles of the Charter.

93. Israel’s military action against Lebanon grossly violates
the Security Council’s decision on the establishment of a
cease-fire in the Near East. It is one of the most serious
military provocations committed by Israel recently. It is
designed to aggravate the situation in that region, to
increase tension and to create a threat to international
peace.

87. The facts have been clearly established: in consequence of ,an individual action committed at Athens against
an aircraft of El Al Airlines, the Israel Government caused
the destruction at the Beirut airport of at least thirteen
civilian a,ircraft.,belonging to various Arab airlines.

94. What is the real objective of these new aggressive acts
by Israel? It is not difficult to reply to that question, The
substance of the matter is to undermine the possibility of a
political settlement, to increase tension in the Near East
and thus to pave the way for the consolidation of the
results of last year’s aggression, for the absorption of the
occupied Arab territories, and for the fulfilment of the mad
plans of the Israel extremists who are fostering the wild
idea of creating a greater Israel by seizing the territories of
neighbouring States. No other assessment can be made of
this new aggressive act.

‘88. That raid, both because of the substantial material
damage which it caused and because of the obvious political
dangers of such a reckless operation, fully justifies this
urgent meeting of the Council.
89. My delegation has, unfortunately, alre.ady had
occasion many times to state that the very idea of reprisals
is unacceptable. From that point of view the raid carried
out yesterday, 28 December, is inadmissible and therefore
deserving of condemnation,

95. This new aggressive action cannot be regarded as an
isolated act of aggression by Israel, perpetrated by Israel
extremists who, intoxicated by last year’s victories, have
gone mad. It is a direct consequence and result of the
attempts made, ever since Israel’s aggression last year
against three Arab countries, by some high protectors of
Israel to conceal and justify every new act of aggression by
Israel. That is the position of several countries, including
unfortunately some members of the Security Council. It is
well known to all of us seated around this table.

90. The Council has a duty to put an end to actions which
extend violence and spread it successively to the States of
the Near East. Such operations can only compromise the
efforts made to establish a just and lasting peace. As my
delegation has already pointed out, a satisfactory
settlement can result only from the implementation of
resolution 242 (1967) adopted by the Council on 22
November 1967. A joint action by Member States,
particularly those with special responsibilities, is therefore
urgent and indispensable, for it is becoming increasingly
clear with every passing day that the conflict in the Near
East threatens the peace of the world.

96. In this connexion, we cannot fail to recall-and
members of the Council certainly remember-the constant
attempts of certain representatives on the Security Council,
in particular the representative of the United States of
America, to place Israel the aggressor, and the Arab
countries victims of its aggression, on the same footing. In
this connexion, mention must also be made of the recent
visit to this country by Moshe Dayan, the Israel Defence
Minister, In this connexion also attention must be drawn to
the conclusion of an agreement between the United States
and Israel for delivery to Israel of modern weapons of
attack-supersonic Phantom aircraft. It is, of course, no
accident that the news of this agreement was made public
the day before yesterday and the new act of aggression by
Israel was committed yesterday.

91. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Strange and monstrous: that is
the only way to describe the criminal aggressive act
perpetrated by Israel-this time against Lebanon, Suddenly,
under cover of dark night, like gangsters, soldiers of Israel,
with the knowledge of Israel’s Military High Command and
with the official approval of the Israel Government,
committed this monstrous piratical raid on the peaceful
civilian international airport at Beirut, the capital of
Lebanon.
92. As has already been mentioned here and in the press,
more than ten modern airliners at the airport were set on
fire and hangers were destroyed; a serious moral and
political blow was dealt against the peace-loving Lebanese
people and against the entire Arab East. The prestige and
authority of the United Nations and the Security Council
have been seriously impaired. This is a new act of aggression
by Israel and that is the only way in which it can be
considered. This military action by Israel cannot be

97. We understand the difficult situation in which
Mr. Wiggins now finds himself. For the first time in the
Security Council a United States representative has
seriously condemned an aggressive act by IsraeI. He found
himself obliged to reap the fruit-the bitter fruit-of his
predecessors’ acts. Their encouragement and protection
8

I

went too far. Now the international prestige and authority
of th.ose who have protected and are continuing to protect
the a.ggressors are compromised. This creates a very serious
and delicate situation. Counting on the future moral and
political support of certain circles in the Western countries,
the Israeli extremists pursue their adventurist policy,
defy:ing the entire world, expanding the front of aggression,
and thus threatening universal peace.

civilian aircraft. Extensive damage was also caused to other
aviation facilities and installations. The representative of
Lebanon has given the Council full details of the Israeli
aerial and ground action. We offer our deepest sympathies
to the Government and people of Lebanon for the grievous
loss they have suffered.
104. In the light of what the Ambassador of Lebanon has
said, as well as from independent reports, it is clear beyond
any doubt that Israeli military action against his country
was unprovoked, unnecessary, and a flagrant violation of
the Charter of the United Nations, This Israeli military
attack on Beirut is blatant and reprehensible, and should
not be tolerated. It is the duty of the Council to condemn
it and to take suitable measures under the relevant
provisions of the Charter to prevent the repetition of such
wanton acts. At the same time, the Council should demand
of Israel the payment of compensation to Lebanon for the
damage caused in Saturday’s action.

98. By attacking Lebanon-that
Arab country against
which Israel had not taken any large-scale military action in
the :recent past-Israel is pursuing this very objective. It is
the duty of all peace-loving States and of the Security
Council at last to stop the arrogant Israeli aggressors, to
force them to respect the legitimate rights and interests of
all States, the decisions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly, and the Charter of the United Nations,
Only then wiIl it be possible to hope for a political
settlement of the conflict in the Near East.
99. The Security Council must take the necessary
mealsures to destroy the Israel extremists’ desire to continue
provocative and aggress&e acts of this kind and to justify
them by the most fantastic assertions, which no one
accepts, not even those who have frequently supported
such1action in the past.

105. There is another aspect of the situation to which my
delegation would like to draw the Council’s attention.
During the last few months, Israeli forces have attacked and
destroyed several public installations in neighbouring
countries. In October the targets were two bridges and a
power station in the United Arab Republic; a month later,
road and railroad bridges in Jordan; and now it is the
international airport of Beirut.

100. In the view of the Soviet delegation, the Security
Council must first of all condemn most resolutely the
criminal military adventure which Israel has perpetrated
against Lebanon. The Security Council must warn Israel
and take appropriate measures under Chapter VII of the
Charter. The Security Council must oblige Israel to punish
the military pirates who committed that criminal act
against neighbouring States, that attack which caused them
such enormous damage. That is the action which the
Security Council must take. Only such a decision by the
Council would contribute to the achievement of a speedy
settlement in the Near East.

106. The premeditated nature of these attacks and the
enormity of the action seem to point out that it is the
intention of Israel to deal crippling blows to the economy
of Arab countries. My delegation believes that the Council
should take serious note of this new phase in the escalation
and widening of the area of conflict and adopt appropriate
measures to arrest the fast deteriorating situation. Incidents
in occupied Arab territories or individual acts against Israeli
property have been cited as justification for the recent
recrudescence of tensions. My delegation deplores all
violent incidents leading to loss of life and property. We
cannot, however, accept that they would justify in any way
the massive attacks launched by Israel on Arab civilian
property. Those incidents have no relevance to Israeli
military actions, such as the one on Beirut International
Airport on Saturday.

101. The Soviet delegation considers that it may confine
itself to this brief statement. It reserves the right to speak
again on this question after a careful study of all the facts
and data presented at today’s meeting by the Lebanese
representative and after studying the additional information
which has just been received from the Acting Chief of Staff
of i:he United Nations Truce Supervision Organization.
lo;!. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): Mr. President, since
this is the first time that 1 have spoken under your
presidency this month, 1 should like to pay my tribute to
you before proceeding to express the views of my
dellegation on the grave situation which has resulted from
the Israeli attack on the civilian airport of Beirut. The
Council is indeed fortunate to have a person of your
eminence and experience as its President during these grave
moments. Under your wise leadership, I am sure it will take
some forceful and effective measures to alleviate the
situation. Both as a colleague and a friend, you have always
shown the utmost consideration to me. 1 shall always
cherish the very close association that we have had in the
Council in the last two years.

107. During the entire period of its membership of the
Security Council, the Indian delegation has espoused
certain fundamental principles that should govern relations
among Member States, These are the principles of the
non-use of force, the respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of States, and the
peaceful settlement of disputes. For this reason, we have
lent our full support to the Security Council’s efforts to
bring about a lasting settlement of the entire range of
problems confronting the States of West Asia. The way to
the peaceful solution of these problems has already been
shown in the Security Council resolution of 22 November
1967. Since then, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Jarring, has been making
strenuous efforts to bring about an expeditious implementation of that resolution in all its aspects.

1013. On 28 December, Israeli troops landed by helicopter
at Beirut International Airport and destroyed several

108. It is the wish of my delegation, indeed that of all
members around this table, that the mission of Ambassador
9

being dealt with by the proper local authorities. The
Security Council cannot intervene in proceedings taking
place under national jurisdiction without grave violation of
the Charter. Similar acts of sabotage have never been
brought before the Council for the simple reason that the
Council is entitled to deal only with problems and conflicts
between sovereign States and their Governments. Since in
the case mentioned by the Israeli representative, no direct
relation exists between the perpetrators of the sabotage and
. ^_
the tiovernment of Lebanon-in fact that Government has
resolutely denied any responsibility for the sabotage-the
inscribing of the question on the agenda of the Security
Council is completely out of order. This is only an attempt
by Israel to distract our attention from the real issue under
our scrutiny: that is, an act of armed aggression committed
by commandos of the Israeli armed forces against Lebanon, I
causing serious material and human damage. The
responsibility for that act is fully recognized by the Israeli
Government. The substantive difference between the two
cases is evident; they cannot be placed on the same level.
The complaint of Lebanon clearly belongs within the
competence of the Security Council, whereas the letter of
the representative of Israel is an empty pretext and a vain
attempt to justify his country’s aggressive policy.

Jarring should be successful in laying the fbundations for a
peaceful settlement in West Asia. However, actions of the
kind in which Israel has indulged recently, including the
latest, the attack on Beirut International Airport, have set
the mission of Ambassador Jarring a dozen steps backward.
Particularly at this juncture, when hopes of making progress
seemed to have risen somewhat, these actions, by
heightening tensions, are a serious setback to the
achievement of a political settlement. It is therefore the
duty of the Security Council to ensure that Israel stops
such wanton acts and pays full compensation to the
Government of Lebanon. If the Government of Israel does
not comply with these demands, it will be incumbent upon
the Security Council to take further appropriate measures
under the Charter to secure Israel’s compliance.
109. The PRESIDENT: I should like to reciprocate in full
measure the friendly sentiments that my friend and
colleague the Ambassador of India has expressed in his
statement,
110. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): The Security Council
has been convened in emergency session, on the initiative of
Lebanon, to deal with the latest-and, let me add,
particularly brutal-aggression by Israel against one of its
Arab neighbours: an armed attack by Israeli armed forces
against the international airport of Beirut, the details of
which have been elucidated not only in the moving
statement of the representative of Lebanon but also by the
official information supplied by the Acting Chief of Staff
of UNTSO in documents S/7930/Add.l07 and 108,

115. Fourthly,
the purpose of these premeditated
aggressive acts, which are as a rule announced beforehand,
is to terrorize the neighbours of Israel and their civilian
populations. These acts show the true face of Israel’ and
afford the Council insight into the kind of peace that the
leaders of Israel never tire of offering to the Arab States.

111. This latest unprovoked aggression by one Member
State against another bears all the well-known features that
have come to characterize the conduct of Israel in its
international relations. Some of those features I wish to
mention here very briefly.

116, Fifthly, it is a characteristic feature of the Israeli
attacks that they aim at the destruction of peaceful
installations, the sinews of the economic life of its Arab
neighbours. It has become the policy of the Israeli
Government systematically to destroy industrial plants,
harbour installations, electric power stations, and-as on
this occasion-a civilian airport. I could describe them by
using the words of the Israeli representative: to glamourize
crime. All these add a revealing touch to the true intentions
of Israel with regard to the economic development of the
Arab States.

112. Firstly, this incident convincingly shows that for
Israel, the Charter of the United Nations simply does not
exist and the provisions of the Charter forbidding the use of
force in international relations are systematically rejected
by Israel. Israel uses armed force against its neighbours in
violation of all those provisions.

i17. During our debate we have heard very strong
statements revealing the facts and condemning the
deliberate acts of aggression committed by Israel, and it
would seem that there is almost complete unanimity among
the members of the Council since the facts are undeniable.
There is, however, a strange phenomenon present, in that
certain Governments, though making strong statements, are
inconsistent in their actions. To condemn the Israel
aggression in words while simultaneously proceeding to
supply the aggressor with the most up-to-date war material,
including Phantom fighters, is indeed inconsistent.

113. Secondly, as on numerous previous occasions, one of
Israel’s Arab neighbou,rs, a victim of its aggression, is again
obliged to turn to the Security Council to seek redress
against the banditry practised by Israel. Israel usually
pretends to haye been wronged, but never even thinks of
coming to the Council.
114. Thirdly, only the pretexts under which the repeated
aggressions are committed change; the effects of the armed
attacks, outlawed by international law, remain the same.
But no pretext is justifiable; in no circums’t?nces would
Israel be entitled to resort to arms before the Security
Council had decided on the course to be taken. In the
present case, the pretext given here by the representative of
Israel refers to an act committed by individuals in Athens,
Greece. The representative of the Soviet Union has rightly
pointed out in his brief statement that such problems,
including this question in particular, do not belong on the
agenda of the Security Council. The question is already

118. In this case, as in previous ones, Israel committed an
aerial attack against a neighbouring country, and now one
member of the Security Council is sending Israel additional
airplanes which can be used for further acts of aggression. It
is as if we wanted to extinguish a fire and, instead of
pouring water on it, poured gasoline on it. It is aggravating
the situation in the Middle East; it is inviting further acts of
aggression on the part of Israel.
10

‘“1

i

119. Such acts are seriously obstructing the possibility of
finding a peaceful settlement in the Middle East based on
resolution 242 (1967) of the Security Council and are
seriously obstructing the mission of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador Jarring, to
promote the cause of peace in that dangerous area of the
wor18d. But we are duty bound to add that if Israel &ares to
act in such a way-as if the United Nations and its Charter
simply were not in existence-the earlier inaction of the
Council 011 similar occasions is also to blame. The reasons
for this inaction, I feel, need not be stated here,

Western Powers. Proof of this is the recent decision of the
United States Government to supply Israel with modern
fighter aircraft, a fact which, especially in view of the
events at Beirut, has sinister implications in the eyes of the
Arab countries.
126. It is therefore clear that such assistance encourages
Israel in its reckless plans.
127. Such behaviour discloses Israel’s true nature, since it
no longer even tries to cultivate the image of a so-called
small peace-loving country constantly struggling against
aggressive Arab States, and reveals on the contrary its
attitude towards the United Nations and in particular
towards the Security Council, both of which assumed
well-known responsibilities at the time of the creation of
Israel to the detriment of the Palestinian people.

120. I wish to mention only that those countries members
of the Security Council, Members of the United Nations,
and other States which advocate peaceful settlement of
differences should exert their influence to make the
Government of Israel discontinue the series of deliberate
destructive acts committed against its neighbours and
comlpensate the victims for the losses suffered, and to
indu’ce the Israeli Government to respect the Charter of the
United Nations and implement the resolutions of the
Security Council and of the General Assembly.

128. On this last point, however, we should recognize that
Tel Aviv has gained considerable experience, since it has
always ignored the decisions of our Organization and defied
world public opinion.

12 1, The Hungarian delegation is strongly convinced that
here too the time has come to take resolute action against
Israel. The Council cannot remain a passive witness to the
situation brought about by Israel, The strongest provisions
of the Charter envisaged to deal with armed aggression by a
Member State against another must be strictly applied. The
condluct of Israel leaves no alternative to the Council. The
Hungarian delegation will co-operate with other members
of the Security Council in the application of Chapter VII of
the Charter.

129. The recent aggression confirms once again that
Israel’s warlike attitude is part and parcel of its very nature
and a prerequisite for its survival. Israel literally feeds on
aggression and is fated ever to pursue an annexationist
policy to which our Organization unfortunately, notwithstanding its responsibilities, has so far been unable to put an
end.
130. We are witnessing a revival of gunboat policy, which
our Council must necessarily condemn; in so doing,
however, the Council cannot consider its task to have been
fulfilled, for it must also demand the payment of
compensation to the party which has suffered considerable
damage.

122. Mr. BEN KACI (Algeria) (translated from French):
Befalre taking up the question under discussion, I wish to
say that the Algerian delegation has accepted the revised
agenda as a gesture of co-operation with you, Mr. President,
and the members of the Security Council, because it, too,
considers that the question raised in the letter of the
representative of Israel does not come within the
competence of the Security Council. Nevertheless, we
accepted the revised agenda so that the Security Council
could discuss as a matter of urgency the question placed
before it by the representative of Lebanon. That is our
understanding of the content of the agenda.

131. If the myth of “Israel, a small, peaceful and
persecuted State”, is collapsing somewhat throughout the
world and yielding to a more realistic idea, the myth
reflects despite everything only a marginal reality, since the
background to, this conflict is and remains Palestine, We
repeat and shall continue to do so as often as is necessary
that, so long as the right of this people to selfdetermination is not recognized, the Council will
unfortunately have to meet to discuss the most recent
Israeli demands and take decisions which will be more or
less inversely proportional to the requirements of the hour.

123. Once again the Security Council has been convened
at the request of an Arab State-on this occasion
Lebanon-to
examine an act of aggression committed
against it by Zionist authorities.

132. The war in the Middle East will not be quenched by
palliatives, if indeed they exist: Peace in that area will
become a reality only if solutions are finally implemented
which take due account of the vital interests of the
Palestinian people: in the last analysis the right of that
people to the restoration of its legitimate national rights.

124. That aggression was carefully premeditated and
undertaken with an arrogance that clearly reveals Israel’s
intention of playing in the Middle East the part formerly
played by Prussia in Europe. The Tel Aviv authorities
respionsible for this act of aggression are now trying once
again to deceive world public opinion. However, their
impudence has reached such a degree that they now
disregard not only the dictates of the international
community but also the words of warning given by their
stau.nchest allies.

133. To return to the specific question before us today,
the Israeli aggression against Lebanese territory, the
Algerian delegation considers that the Security Council
must unequivocably condemn the Tel Aviv authorities for
their act of aggression arid must see to it that, in addition to
the necessary compensation, effective measures are taken
under the Charter to put an end to the systematic policy of

125. This behaviour flows from the encouragement and
effective assistance which Israel receives from certain major
11

aggression pursued by the Israel authorities against the Arab
world.
134. The Algerian delegation reservesits right to speak
again on this question at a later stage.
135. Mr. M’BENGUE (Senegal) (translated from French):
My delegation would like first of all to fulfil a pleasant
duty, Mr. President, by extending to you its warm
congratulations on your election to the presidency. I am
especially happy to do so since you represent a country
which enjoys much prestige. You are assuming your
responsibilities at a particularly difficult time. Nevertheless,
your well-known qualities, which have been duly
recognized here by my colleagues, afford us the best
assurance for the successof our work. I should also like to
congratulate your predecessor, who conducted our debates
most happily during November.
136. On the problem before us today I should like first of
all to make some preliminary remarks, reserving my right to
speak again at a later stage in the light of the additional
information to be given us by the Lebanese delegation.
137. We are meeting today once more as the result of a
grave incident which has again disturbed the Middle East.
The raid on the Beirut Airport by Israel troops, which has
been interpreted by observers as a reprisal, has causedmuch
concern in the world and will certainly contribute to
increased tension in that area, already sufficiently disturbed
by the Israel-Arab conflict. Such acts serve to make the
prospects for peace more remote. They ruin the efforts
which Ambassador Jarring has been making for several
months for a peaceful settlement of the conflict.
13X. My delegation’s position is well known. It has had
occasion to state it here. In its view, international problems
should be resolved peacefully, in particular by means of a
dialogue. It therefore condemns all acts of reprisal, no
matter by whom. It especially condemns this act which has
just been committed against Lebanon, a peace-loving
country which never took part in the June war. ’
139. Confronted by acts of violence which are increasing
in number, the members of the Security Council must agree
to implement resolution 242 (1967) adopted by the
Council in November 1967. In that way they will meet the
obligations which devolve on them under the Charter.
140. The PRESIDENT: On behalf of my predecessor and
on my own behalf, I should like to thank the representative
of Senegal for his kind references to us.
141. Mr. DE ARAUJO CASTRO (Brazil): Mr. President,
first of all I wish to join with all delegations which have
rendered a tribute to Ambassador Borch, the representative
of Denmark, for the skill and statesmanship with which he
presided over our proceedings during the month of
November. At the same time, my delegation wishes to
express its satisfaction at seeing you, sir, as President of the
Security Council when we are confronted with such serious
problems. We count on your guidance and leadership.
142. The Brazilian delegation wishes to state briefly its
views on the very serious problem with which the Security

Council is again confronted. The pattern of events, such as
the one we are considering, has become all too familiar to
all of us. It cannot be ignored, however, that the over-all
situation becomes more and more serious and explosive
each time such events take place. It may even be later than
we generally think. Without wishing to sound alarmed or
alarmistic, we might even say that we are entering the initial
stagesof another round of fighting.
143. The unjustified and premeditated attack by Israel
against the civilian airport of Lebanon clearly showshow
close we have come to open warfare. The Brazilian
delegation wishes therefore, Mr. President, to express its
appreciation for the promptness with which you have called
us on this Sunday to the Security Council chamber. Seldom
indeed since June 1967 has the situation in the Middle East
been so gloomy and so fraught with danger.
144. Time and again my delegation has expressedthe view
that short of a political settlement along the lines provided
for in resolution 242 (1967) the Security Council would
find more and more difficulty in securing an adequate
cease-fire between the parties to the dispute, My delegation
has, on four different occasions, given vent to its
preoccupations with the arms escalation in the area. Time
and again my delegation has insisted on the necessity of
strengthening the hand of Ambassador Gunnar Jarring in
trying to secure from both sides a more conciliatory and
constructive attitude. And time and again we have felt
frustrated by a new eruption of violent acts, retaliation and,
sometimes quite clearly, of over-retaliation,
145. As we have stressed before, the authority and
prestige of the Security Council have been challenged. We
have been unanimous on many issues,and unanimously we
have failed. We have likewise expressed the view that the
question of the Middle East, which is difficult to settle on
its own terms, may become downright insoluble if it
becomes inserted into the context of the cold war.
146. A recent resolution of the Security Council
[258 (1968)J has emphasized that it is incumbent upon all
Members of the United Nations to help in the peaceful
solution of the question of the Middle East, and my
country has not failed to live up to its responsibilities on
that question. Today we just wish to reassert our earnest
conviction that such violent acts asthe premeditated attack
against a civilian airport should not be ignored or permitted
to pass unnoticed. It is imperative that the Council should
act promptly and speedily by discharging its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security.
147. We are prepared to join in a constructive effort to
reassert the authority of the Council and to preserve its
powers under the Charter of the United Nations. That will
be our position up to the very last minute of our term as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council.
148. The PRESIDENT: Again speaking for myself and for
my predecessor, I should like to express appreciation for
the friendly sentiments addressed to us by the representative of Brazil.

’

14!>. The representative of Lebanon has asked
permission to speak in exercise of the right of reply.

for

Nothing that the representative of Lebanon has said can
obliterate the fact that his country took part a year and a
half ago in the genocidal Arab plot against Israel and that
Lebanon has supported and continues to support the Arab
campaign of encirclement and suffocation of my country.

1511. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): I wish to reserve the right
of my delegation to reply to the statement made by the
Israeli representative this evening. I only wish to state now
that his statement is full of distortions and unfounded
allegations and accusations against my country and my
Go’vernment and has not convinced any one of the
members of the Council who have spoken so far.

157. On 5 June 1967, Lebanon declared itself in a state of
war with Israel. It undertook military operations against my
country, and only belatedly, on 2 August 1967, did it
signify its acceptance of the cease-fire.

1.51. The Israeli representative has said that in my
statement I did not refer to the incident that took place in
Greece. I certainly would not refer to an act which has
taken place in the territory of a friendly State, Greece,
which is not a party to the deliberations of this Council. In
our view, the incident which took place at Athens Airport
is a matter of common law and the Greek courts have sole
jurisdiction in the matter. They certainly do not need the
help of Israeli armed units.

158. Nor was the representative of Lebanon able to
whitewash the responsibilities of his Government in
abetting and supporting terrorist, activities against Israel’,
which I mentioned when I spoke earlier this evening. Too
often in the past the Security Council has been unable to
heed Israeli complaints and to take a clear-cut stand against
terrorist attacks in violation of the cease-fire and of the
Charter. The result has been an increased spiral of violence,
fostered by those who draw benefits from turmoil and
chaos, whose familiar voice we have heard again tonight.

152. The Israeli Government has for long been extending
its aggressive jurisdiction to many countries and territories.
It is projecting itself now to becoming the gendarme of
international aviation. Perhaps it will one day claim for
itself jurisdiction here and in Cuba to deal with the
hijacking of aircraft to that Caribbean State.

159. My delegation ventures to hope that, in accordance
with the agenda that the Security Council has adopted, the
Council will deal equally with the complaint of my
delegation and not limit itself, as some members of the
Council seem to desire, merely to the complaint submitted
by the Beirut Government, When the Security Council
adopted its cease-fire resolution in June 1967 it clearly
intended to call for a complete cease-fire. It never
contemplated for one moment that one party, the Arab
party, would be free to evade its obligations by dressing up
its armed forces in the guise of irregulars and terrorists. In
that regard the excuse we hear time and time again, and we
heard again tonight, is a flimsy one which has been
sedulously fostered by a number of statements made in this
Council from time to time-and we have heard them again
tonight.

153, What seems to irritate the representative of Israel and
his Government is the fact that we in Lebanon have a free
press. We cannot suffocate freedom in order to
accommodate Israel’s aggressive, expansionist aims and
designs. The representative of Israel knows that Lebanon’s
policy is decided in the Council of Ministers and the official
position of Lebanon should be evaluated in the light of
official communiques issued by the competent authorities.
The ugly, murderous actions by the Israelis seem to be
equated with press reports.

160. The action of 28 December was the inescapable
consequence of the prior action of 26 December and of the
failure of the Lebanese Government to take adequate
measures to prevent any repetition thereof. My delegation
respectfully invites the Council to face up to the challenge
that the Arab terror poses for it. Terror warfare in violation
of the cease-fire must be stopped. Only then will the way
be open to a freely negotiated and freely accepted peace,
which alone will bring tranquillity, security and hope to the
peoples of the Middle East.

154. We have been comforted by the friendly statements
wfe have heard tonight from various delegations; we are
deeply moved by them. I wish to express the appreciation
of my Government for the support we have received. The
unanimous sense of indignation and condemnation of the
blatant and murderous attack by the Israeli Air Force
against the international airport of Beirut has been felt here
around this table. This has justified our reliance on the
Security Council. I thank you, Mr, President, and I thank
all the delegations who have spoken in a manner so friendly
to my country.

161. The PRESIDENT: No further speakers are inscribed
on my list to speak at this stage. I have conducted informal
consultations with members of the Council, and it appears
that the preference of the Council is to schedule a meeting
for tomorrow at 9 p.m. and to use the time between now
and then for intensive consultations. I shall make myself
available for such consultations among all-members. If there
is no objection to that proposition, I shall adjourn the
meeting until 9 p.m. tomorrow.

1.55. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Israel has
asked for permission to speak in exercise of the right of
reply.
156. Mr. ROSENNE (Israel): I shall be brief. In reply to
the statement we have just heard from the representative of
Lebanon, I wish to tell him and assure the members of the
Council that the Government of Israel is doing no more
than claim the right that every self-respecting Government
claims, the right to protect its civil aviation wherever it is
being deliberately, recklessly or wantonly endangered.

The meeting rose at lOS0 p.m.

13

HOW

T O OBTAIN

United

Nations

UNITED
publications

the world.
or Genevo.

Consult

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

les

NATIONS

publications

your

der

may

or

Unies

sent

entier.
Informez-vous
des venter,
New York

IlOJlY’iMTb

M3AAHMfi

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES
de tar Naciones

en todas
porter
del mundo.
Consulte
Ventas,
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

from

write

to:

LES PUBLICATIONS

HAK

Las publicaciones

be obtained

bookstore

Notions

ddpositaires
du monde
‘Nations
Unier,
Section

PUBLICATIONS
bookstores

United

DES NATIONS
en

vente

distributors
Soles

les

de votre

librairier

librairie

et
ou

erttrn

en venta

a IV librero

o dirijose

New

les

York

ogencer

adressez-vous

06bEAHHEHHblX

DE LAS NACIONES

throughout

Section,

UNIES

dans

auprhr
ou Genive.

OPTAHMSAl.(MH

Unidar

ond

Notions,

b:

HAUL1ti

UNIDAS
en librerias
a: Nociones

y casar
Unidas,

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

dirtribuidoros
Secci6n

de

35011-October

1972-2,050
