UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3315
16 November 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTEENTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Tuesday, 16 November 1993, at 6.55 p.m.

President:

(Cape Verde)

Brazil
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Venezuela

Mr. SARDENBERG
Mr. ZHANG Yan
Mr. OLHAYE
Mr. LADSOUS
Mr. ERDÖS
Mr. YAMAMOTO
Mr. BENJELLOUN-TOUIMI
Mr. KEATING
Mr. MARKER
Mr. VORONTSOV
Mr. YAÑEZ-BARNUEVO

Members:

Mr. JESUS

Sir David HANNAY
Mrs. ALBRIGHT
Mr. TRUJILLO

________________________________________________________________________________
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.

93-87195 (E)

S/PV.3315
2
The meeting was called to order at 7.15 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION IN SOMALIA
REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF
SECURITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION 837 (S/26022)
REPORT PURSUANT TO PARAGRAPH 5 OF SECURITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION
837 (1993) ON THE INVESTIGATION INTO THE 5 JUNE 1993 ATTACK ON
UNITED NATIONS FORCES IN SOMALIA CONDUCTED ON BEHALF OF THE
SECRETARY-GENERAL (S/26351)
The PRESIDENT:

I should like to inform the Council that I

have received a letter from the representative of Somalia in which
she requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council’s agenda.

In conformity with the usual

practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
that representative to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. Hassan (Somalia) took
a place at the Council table.

S/PV.3315
3
The PRESIDENT:

The Security Council will now begin its

consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 837 (1993), document S/26022, and the report pursuant to
paragraph 5 of Security Council resolution 837 (1993) on
investigation into the 5 June 1993 attack on United Nations forces
in Somalia conducted on behalf of the Secretary-General, document
S/26351.
Members of the Council also have before them document S/26750,
which contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by the
United States of America.

I should like to draw attention to two

technical changes in that draft resolution.

The first is to be

made to the first preambular paragraph, by adding at the end a
reference to resolution 878 (1993).

The second is to be made to

paragraph 1, which should read as follows:
"Authorizes the establishment of a Commission of Inquiry,
in further implementation of resolutions 814 (1993) and
837 (1993), to investigate armed attacks on UNOSOM II
personnel which led to casualties among them".
I should like to draw the attention of members of the Council
to document S/26627, which contains the text of a letter dated
25 October 1993 from the Permanent Representative of Ethiopia,
transmitting the text of a letter dated 24 October 1993 from the
President of the Transitional Government of Ethiopia addressed to
the President of the Security Council.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolution before it.

Unless I hear any

objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

S/PV.3315
4
(The President)
I shall first call on those members of the Council who wish to
make statements before the voting.
Mr. BENJELLOUN-TOUIMI (Morocco) (interpretation from
French):

As this is the first time my delegation has addressed the

Council this month, let me begin by congratulating you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council.

My delegation

highly appreciates the ability and effectiveness with which you are
discharging you duties in that post.
I wish also to pay tribute to Ambassador Sardenberg of Brazil
for the very able way in which he conducted the Council’s business
last month.
The Kingdom of Morocco fully supports the goals set out in the
draft resolution before the Council.

We are convinced that any

effort to resume the national political process and national
reconciliation in Somalia should be supported.

In order to attain

that goal, and to help our brethren, the Somali people, overcome
the suffering caused by famine, disease and anarchy, Morocco, an
Islamic, Arab and African country, felt duty-bound to participate
in the activities of the United Nations Operation in Somalia
(UNOSOM), the Unified Task Force and now UNOSOM II.
We have always been convinced that the search for a solution
of the Somali crisis can succeed only through dialogue and
concertation.

But that dialogue can be possible and fruitful only

if there is cooperation and good faith on the part of all the
protagonists.

There should also be a close analysis of the

elements of Somalia’s social structure to identify an appropriate
approach in keeping with the initial goals of UNOSOM, an approach
that would give the process every chance of success.
To be sure, the United Nations and the international community
have made tireless efforts and tried various approaches to attain
tangible results in the political sphere.

But the situation in

S/PV.3315
5
(Mr. Benjelloun-Touimi, Morocco)
Somalia is particularly difficult, owing in part to the lack of any
governmental institutions, which has complicated the job of the
United Nations and has thus far blocked meaningful progress.
While we appreciate the laudable efforts of the United Nations
in the humanitarian, social and other fields, we hope the dialogue
will commence as soon as possible, bringing together the heads of
the Somali clans, and that it will have constructive results for
the benefit of the entire Somali people.
For all those reasons, we have decided to vote in favour of
the draft resolution before the Council.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Morocco for

the kind words he addressed to me.
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in
document S/26750, as orally revised.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Brazil, Cape Verde, China, Djibouti, France,
Hungary, Japan, Morocco, New Zealand, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Venezuela

The PRESIDENT:

There were 15 votes in favour.

The draft

resolution, as orally revised, has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 885 (1993).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who wish to
make statements following the voting.
Mrs. ALBRIGHT (United States of America):

My Government

is pleased to support the establishment of a Commission of Inquiry
for Somalia, which will carry out a thorough investigation into the
armed attacks on personnel of the United Nations Operation in
Somalia (UNOSOM II).

We believe the Commission is vitally

important to advancing the peace process in Somalia, a process that
has been disappointingly slow.

Our primary goal in Somalia is to

S/PV.3315
6
(Mrs. Albright, United States)
foster a political dialogue which can lead to national
reconciliation.

We want to see the Somali people re-establish key

institutions needed to ensure that the conditions which led to
national tragedies in recent years do not recur.
The United Nations must continue to do its part to help create
a climate to facilitate that process.

We hope that this resolution

will allow all the key players in Somalia to join together in the
crucial task which faces the Somali people:

national

reconciliation for Somalia.
Mr. MARKER (Pakistan):

My delegation voted in favour of

resolution 885 (1993), because we feel it will advance two
essential objectives.

The first is the political process, which is

essential for a lasting peace in Somalia, and responsibility for
which is rightly attributed to the people of Somalia themselves.
The second desirable objective relates to the necessity for a
clear message of support to the United Nations Operation in Somalia
(UNOSOM II) and the brave men and women who have dedicated
themselves to peace-keeping in conditions of the greatest hardship
and considerable danger.
We are confident that the establishment of a Commission of
Inquiry to investigate the armed attacks against UNOSOM II
personnel is an important measure that will provide the requisite
assurances to all those who have followed with concern the sad
events that have occurred in Somalia.
Mr. KEATING (New Zealand):

The resolution we have just

adopted flows out of the Security Council’s overall consideration
of the United Nations role in Somalia.

It is the first of two

important resolutions the Council will adopt this week.

The second

will deal with the overall mandate of the United Nations Operation
in Somalia (UNOSOM II), while the present resolution deals with one
aspect of the mandate that was created in resolution 837 (1993).

S/PV.3315
7
(Mr. Keating, New Zealand)
Resolution 837 (1993) gave the Secretary-General certain
discretion with respect to the actions which should be taken to
detain persons who were responsible for the attacks on United
Nations personnel on 5 June 1993 in Mogadishu.
called in that resolution for an inquiry.

The Council also

That inquiry will now

proceed, and pending its conclusion the Council has asked the
Secretary-General not to pursue the individuals who may be
implicated.
The New Zealand delegation does not accept the argument that
the United Nations would have proceeded without allowing suspects
the benefits of due process.

But we can understand that in the

extraordinary circumstances of southern Mogadishu it is a fact that
fears in that regard have become an obstacle to the political
dialogue.

S/PV.3315
8
(Mr. Keating, New Zealand)
We therefore accept that there is a political significance in
this resolution, and value in indicating that arrest action will be
suspended pending completion of the work of the Commission of
Inquiry.
The process of national reconciliation is critical for
securing peace in Somalia, and New Zealand is 100 per cent behind
both the United Nations and the Security Council in achieving that
end.
Mr. SARDENBERG (Brazil):

The Brazilian delegation has

expressed on various occasions our strong condemnation of the
attacks perpetrated against United Nations Operation in Somalia
(UNOSOM II) personnel in Somalia.

We would like to take this

opportunity to reiterate our stand on that question.

That UNOSOM

II should be prevented from performing its mandate, which is aimed
at improving the humanitarian situation in Somalia, is in itself
sad, indeed tragic.

That UNOSOM II personnel should be subject to

attacks against their safety and against their lives is simply
outrageous.

Such attacks have to be prevented and have to be dealt

with in a rigorous manner.

Resolution 868 (1993), adopted by the

Council on 29 September, established an important general framework
for doing just that.
Brazil gives its full support and encouragement to UNOSOM II
efforts to promote the process of national political reconciliation
among all Somali parties as the only real basis for an irreversible
improvement in the situation in Somalia.

It is our hope that

significant progress will soon be achieved in that political
process.

Having these considerations in mind, the Brazilian

delegation supported the resolution adopted today by the Council,
which authorizes the establishment of a Commission of Inquiry to
investigate armed attacks that led to UNOSOM II casualties.

It is

S/PV.3315
9
(Mr. Sardenberg, Brazil)
particularly important that in adopting this resolution the Council
act on suggestions coming from the region, notably the proposals
submitted by President Meles Zenawi of Ethiopia, as contained in
document S/26627.

We are hopeful that the work of the Commission

will contribute to bringing an early and satisfactory solution to
the serious problems posed by the attacks against UNOSOM II.

By

doing that, it will no doubt make an important contribution to the
future work of the United Nations in Somalia.
The PRESIDENT:

There are no further speakers.

The Security

Council has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration
of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 7.30 p.m.
