S/PV.8627*

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8627th meeting

Thursday, 26 September 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lavrov/Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Polyanskiy. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Van Der Pluijm
Mr. Wang Yi
Mr. Amon-Tanoh
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Angue
Mr. Le Drian
Mr. Annen
Mrs. Marsudi
Sheikh Al Sabah
Mr. Popolizio Bardales
Mr. Czaputowicz
Mrs. Pandor
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Partnership to strengthen regional peace and security
Letter dated 13 September 2019 from the Permanent Representatives of Côte
d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, the Russian Federation and South Africa to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/743)

* Reissued for technical reasons on 3 October 2019.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-29372 (E)
*1929372*

S/PV.8627

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

Collaboration among the United Nations, the
African Union and its member States, Africa’s regional
economic communities and other regional mechanisms
has never been greater. Our partnership is underpinned
by shared values, enshrined both in the Charter of the
United Nations and the Constitutive Act of the African
Union, as well as by the principles of complementarity,
respect and African ownership.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Partnership to strengthen regional peace
and security
Letter dated 13 September 2019 from the
Permanent Representatives of Côte d’Ivoire,
Equatorial Guinea, the Russian Federation and
South Africa to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General (S/2019/743)
The President (spoke in Russian): I wish to
warmly welcome the Ministers, our briefers and the
other representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Egypt to participate in the meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Ms. Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the SecretaryGeneral; and Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson
of the African Union Commission.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite Mr. JeanChristophe Belliard, Deputy Secretary-General for
Political Affairs and Political Director for the European
External Action Service, to participate in the meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/743, which contains the text of a
letter dated 13 September 2019 from the Permanent
Representatives of Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea,
the Russian Federation and South Africa to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting
a concept note on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. Viotti.
Ms. Viotti: I thank the Russian Federation for
organizing this meeting on peace and security in Africa.
2/24

26/09/2019

In 2016, the African Union Peace and Security
Council identified 20 challenges to peace and security.
But what stands out today are not the challenges that
the continent faces. Rather, it is the determination of
African Heads of State and Government to address
them in a holistic manner. In 2013, they pledged,
“not to bequeath the burden of conflicts to the next
generation of Africans and to undertake to end all
wars in Africa by 2020”.
In July in Niamey, the African Union Assembly
adopted “Silencing the Guns: creating conducive
conditions for Africa’s development” as the theme for
2020. That speaks to an increasingly strong partnership
among African States members as the cornerstone
for advancing peace and security, underpinned by
inclusive sustainable development on the continent. The
African Union and its States members have achieved
important milestones in their pursuit for a higher level
of effectiveness, self-reliance and cooperation.
The African Union Peace Fund has so far
secured $124 million — the highest level of assessed
contributions since its establishment in 1993. And the
African Union Mediation Support Unit and the FemWise
Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention and
Mediation are now operational, boosting capacity to
defuse crises and making such efforts more inclusive.
The United Nations and the African Union have
also strengthened their partnership with the signing of
two joint frameworks by the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union, namely, on peace and
security and on sustainable development. Partnership
has been evident at the country level in peace processes
and the lives of people. Close coordination among
the Southern African Development Community, the
African Union, the United Nations and other partners
supported dialogue and reconciliation in Madagascar
and thereby contributed to the holding of peaceful, free,
fair and credible elections in 2018.
19-29372

26/09/2019

Peace and security in Africa

In the Central African Republic, the African Union
led a mediation process, with support from the United
Nations and involving the Economic Community of
Central African States and neighbouring countries.
That process culminated in African Union-led peace
talks in Khartoum and resulted in the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic of 6 February. The United Nations is
now actively supporting its implementation, including
through the Peacebuilding Fund, with a focus on top
priorities of the Government and partnering with
civil society.
In Guinea-Bissau, the group of five comprised of
the United Nations, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the African Union, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the
European Union continues to assist efforts to restore
stability and sustain peace.
In the Sudan, the signing of the constitutional
declaration last month, following efforts led by Ethiopia
and the African Union with support from the United
Nations, has allowed for the establishment of a civilianled transitional Government.
Partnering with African civil society is also
bearing fruit, and the progress achieved in nations
such as Liberia and, more recently, Guinea-Bissau and
the Sudan shows us the critical contributions made by
women to peace and stability.
Beyond geography, the thematic areas of partnership
are extensive and diverse. Cooperation among the
United Nations, the African Union and subregional
organizations is also growing in the area of electoral
processes. Ahead of legislative and presidential elections
in West Africa over the last couple of years, the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel organized
joint or coordinated visits with various African partners
to Sierra Leone, Nigeria, Senegal and other countries to
promote peaceful and inclusive processes.
The United Nations is helping to implement the
recommendations of a study conducted by ECOWAS
and the Economic Commission for Africa to address
challenges related to pastoralism and security in
West Africa, with support from the United Nations
Peacebuilding Fund.
The United Nations and the African Union cooperate
closely to ensure that the voices of women and youth are
integrated within peace processes. Next year will mark

S/PV. 8627

the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. It
coincides with the 2020 goal on gender mainstreaming
in peace and security of the African Peace and Security
Architecture — an opportune moment for reinvigorating
resolve. Both the African Union and the United Nations
have in place youth strategies and envoys. They are
valuable not only as advocates, but also as agents for
change in our organizations.
In Central Africa, the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa is working closely with
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) to develop and strengthen its capacities,
including with regard to conflict prevention, mediation,
early warning, collaboration with civil society and
gender mainstreaming. And the alignment between the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and
the African Union strategy in the region has enhanced
collaboration in response to the multifaceted challenges
facing the region, including through the Ministerial
Coordination Platform for the Sahel, co-chaired by the
African Union and the United Nations.
Partnerships among subregional organizations are
also intensifying. The United Nations Regional Offices
for Central Africa and West Africa are supporting the
implementation of the memorandum of understanding
signed between ECCAS and ECOWAS last year.
Notwithstanding the progress achieved, the
international community needs to support African
efforts more effectively. The United Nations continues
to work closely with the mediation teams of the African
Union, the subregional organizations, Member States
and civil society groups. Institutional capacity needs
to be further strengthened to be able to undertake
preventive diplomacy.
Central to the United Nations support for peace
and security on the African continent are our peace
operations. More than 80,000 peacekeepers currently
serve in seven peacekeeping operations in Africa.
In fact, in terms of personnel and budget, all of our
largest missions are deployed on the African continent.
Contributions from African nations themselves have
been indispensable to our peacekeeping operations, not
only in Africa but also beyond.
Africa is now the largest troop-contributing
region to United Nations missions, and there is direct
cooperation between the African Union and the United
Nations on peacekeeping operations themselves.

19-293723/24

S/PV.8627

Peace and security in Africa

In Somalia, Mali and the Sahel, the United Nations
supports African Union-led operations, in addition to
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur.
However, we can and have to do better. The
Secretary-General has stressed the need to ensure the
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of financing
for African Union-led peace support operations
authorized by the Security Council and under the
Council’s authority. Political will and resources are also
required in peacebuilding and sustaining peace efforts,
including through support for infrastructure for peace
at the local and national levels and policy dialogue with
the Peacebuilding Commission.
It is also important that the international community
actively support the Silencing the Guns by 2020
initiative of the African Union. The Council has already
signalled its strong backing in resolution 2457 (2019).
The Secretariat, as well as United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes, is scaling up support for
realizing the objectives of the African Union initiative.
Building partnerships and harnessing their
power requires long-term vision and commitment.
Collaboration between the African Union Commission
and the Secretariat will remain strong. The SecretaryGeneral looks forward to even greater partnership and
collaboration, enabling the African Union to achieve its
2063 vision of equitable, people-centred transformation
and lasting peace and security.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Ms. Viotti
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Faki Mahamat.
Mr. Faki Mahamat (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by addressing you, Mr. President, to thank you
and your Government for organizing this important
meeting on the state of peace and security in Africa and
partnership to strengthen regional peace and security.
Peace in Africa is undergoing significant changes.
We have finalized the preparation of a well-engineered
peace architecture with relatively effective organs. In the
interest of harmony and coherence, that architecture has
combined the efforts of our regional organizations — the
pillars of our African Union — with those of the Union
itself. On a doctrinal level, that architecture reflects a
foundation of shared values, coordinated around the
double principle that African problems must be solved
by Africans themselves and that the cost of so doing
4/24

26/09/2019

should be borne, to a large extent, by Africa’s own
resources. It is on the basis of that double principle that
the African Union has proposed here in the Security
Council and beyond an original model to fund African
peacekeeping operations.
While the overarching duty of Africa is to bear
responsibility for a significant part of that funding, that
cannot in any way relieve the Security Council, the sole
organ truly responsible for peace in the world, of its
obligations to provide funding for those operations from
the appropriate resources of the universal Organization.
That issue is today at the heart of peace and security
concerns in Africa.
The factors threatening peace in Africa make
it urgently important that we develop innovative
approaches to considering such factors and the
best ways and means to effectively respond. The
traditional mechanisms for responding to threats to
peace, peacebuilding and peacekeeping no longer
fully correspond to the new situation. Terrorism
in all its forms and illegal trafficking of all kinds
are unmanageable through the former models. The
costs, bureaucratic red tape, ways of functioning and
operational and tactical redeployment methods of
those models make them — to be frank — unsuitable,
ineffective and obsolete. A new model endowed with
a legal, political, financial and operational mechanism
that is better adapted to the social, cultural and religious
context of African societies must be conceived.
The African Union has repeatedly reiterated its
full readiness to work with the United Nations, and
the Security Council in particular, towards the desired
doctrinal and operational progress. I have come today
to reiterate Africa’s continued readiness in that regard.
The panorama of peace in Africa highlights
some indisputable success stories. The normalization
of the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Central African Republic through the
implementation of the agreements concluded under the
auspices of the African Union; the significant progress
made towards peace and reconciliation in South
Sudan; and a certain level of positive stabilization
against terrorism in Somalia and the Lake Chad area
are noteworthy. The latest addition to that series of
achievements is the significant success of African
mediation in the Sudan, which paved the way towards
a peaceful and consensus-based democratic transition
in the country.
19-29372

26/09/2019

Peace and security in Africa

Progress towards peace in Africa must not, however,
hide the weaknesses and, above all, the darker realities
that continue to cast shade on the overall outlook. In
the Sahel, the efforts of the international community to
contain and eradicate terrorism are not yet producing
the expected results as the phenomenon continues to
grow and threaten regions beyond northern Mali alone.
The countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel) have therefore joined forces and decided to pool
their resources in order to provide the appropriate
responses. The support of the Security Council is
essential in that regard.
I take this opportunity to reiterate my calls for
real and effective solidarity with those countries, since
their fight against poverty and the cancer of that region,
terrorism, are concerns worthy of the most active
international solidarity. Any weak point in that desired
solidarity, regardless of the pretext, would facilitate
the spread of the terrorist hydra, which, at least in the
Sahel, has been fuelled by the fragmentation of another
African crisis. By way of conclusion, I will say a few
words on the crisis in Libya.
The Libyan crisis has been marked from the very
beginning by the frustrating marginalization of Africa,
which has been replaced by a plurality of external
actors, each of which is pursuing its own agenda, as
everyone knows. In less than a decade, that way of
addressing the Libyan issue has revealed the full extent
of its limitations as the crisis continues to deteriorate
and the suffering of the Libyan people only persists.
It is time to stop that infernal, senseless process. The
Security Council and Africa have an obligation to
collectively reconsider that situation and experiment
with another way.
First, we must clearly decide that there is no
military solution to the crisis. Rigorous enforcement
of the embargo on weapons — which continue to
proliferate throughout the country and allow those
waging war to continue to do so by financing their
weapons from Libya’s own resources — is therefore
a matter of extreme urgency. We must then engage
in a process of genuinely inclusive and revitalized
political negotiations in order to outline a democratic
and consensual transition capable of dealing with
humanitarian emergencies and the organization of free
and transparent elections, which are the foundations of
true political legitimacy in that country.

S/PV. 8627

That objective is easy to formulate, but complicated
to achieve. It requires a joint implementation
mechanism — with emphasis on “joint” — to take the
lead. In the establishment of that new joint mechanism,
it is crucial that we underscore the central role of
Africa in an issue that is just as African as any other
on our continent, in which the continental organization
has demonstrated its own competence, knowledge,
experience and expertise.
The centrality of the African Union is not a matter
of ego or self-importance. It is a matter of common
sense and the quest for efficiency and concrete results.
To implement it, the African Union, which has no
specific agenda, is seeking only collective action based
on respectful partnerships and not a substitute for
taking orders or clearing one’s conscience. It is a matter
of working together, on the basis of common values,
in the sole and unique interest of peace, reconciliation
and democracy in Libya. In such a joint effort, we will
give specific content to our partnership with the United
Nations, in accordance with the framework agreement
signed in April 2017 here in New York.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Mahamat for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation.
Today’s meeting, organized by the Russian
Federation, together with the African members of
the Security Council, reaffirms the special place that
African issues occupy on the Council’s agenda. Ensuring
peace and security on the continent is of the utmost
importance for the entire international community.
The African continent today is facing many
challenges. The region with the highest population
growth in the world remains unstable. Some of its
countries are facing acute political and socioeconomic
crises. Conflicts between nations and ethnic groups
remain unresolved, which is often exploited by
terrorists. There are hotspots of activity of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida and
their affiliated local groups, such as Al-Shabaab, Boko
Haram and other groups, are now found throughout the
continent, from Mali to Somalia.
We must not forget the tragic history of the
continent. As a result of their uncompromising struggle
for freedom and independence in the 1960s, African
peoples have been able to determine their own future. A

19-293725/24

S/PV.8627

Peace and security in Africa

key role in the decolonization process was played by the
adoption by the General Assembly of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, at the imitative of my country.
Nevertheless, since then African States have
continued to face serious challenges to their
sovereignty. The armed intervention in Libya launched
by NATO eight years ago plunged the country into
chaos, undermined the security system in North Africa
and fuelled flows of arms and criminals throughout
the continent. Libya became a refuge and platform
for various kind of terrorism, in addition to fighters
coming from Iraq, Syria and elsewhere. The States
of the Sahara and the Sahel are also suffering. The
security of West and Central African countries, as well
as that of Southern European, is threatened. Africans
themselves, at the recently held meeting of the African
Union Peace and Security Council dedicated to foreign
military presence on the continent, condemned foreign
military interference in the continent’s affairs and
appealed for foreign partners of Africa to respect
regional initiatives.
Recent successes in resolving crises, in spite of
everything I mentioned earlier, show how effective
efforts can be when led and undertaken by Africans
themselves. Comprehensive peace agreements have
now been signed and implemented in the Central
African Republic and South Sudan. Thanks to very
brave and responsible steps taken by leaders in Ethiopia,
Eritrea, Somalia and Djibouti, the situation in the
Horn of Africa has improved. In such large countries
as the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Nigeria,
we have seen peaceful and democratic elections take
place. I believe that the most important fact here is
that at the core of each of these achievements was
the political will of the leaders of the African States
themselves, with the assistance of the African Union
and subregional organizations.
Against the backdrop of such progress, the
ambitious goal set six years ago to end armed conflict
in Africa is no longer beyond reach. The attainment
of that goal is being helped by the creation of the
African Standby Force within the continent’s peace
and security architecture. The African Union Centre
for Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development is
now operational and African Union conflict-prevention
efforts are also being enhanced by leveraging the
potential of regional bodies and the good offices of
African leaders.
6/24

26/09/2019

At the same time, Africans still require stalwart
support from the international community, including
the Security Council. We believe that there is significant
potential to increase the interaction between the United
Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council. A good opportunity for pursuing
such cooperation is provided by the regular consultative
meetings between the two Councils, the next of which
will be held next month in Addis Ababa. There is also
cooperation between the secretariats of the United
Nations and African Union, from joint missions to
conflict areas to the participation of African Union
experts in preparing reports and country reviews,
which serve as important guidelines for the Security
Council’s decisions.
In our view, it is entirely justified that the Security
Council pay close attention to the issue of sustainable
financing for African Union peacekeeping operations.
We note the progress made in the replenishment of the
African Peace Fund, indicating the determination of
African leaders to assume their share of the expenses
for African peacekeeping operations. Of course, the
predictability, reliability and flexibility of funding
such operations should be enhanced, and we in the
Russian Federation are ready to work substantively on
the corresponding draft resolution to be prepared for
our consideration by the troika of African members
of the Security Council. Russia also supports other
initiatives of the African troika in the Council relating
to peace and security on the continent. We believe that
the African troika is a crucial link between our Council
and the African Union.
Russia provides assistance to uphold peace and
security in Africa in accordance with international
law, including the principle of non-interference in the
internal affairs of States enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, and only with the agreement of
host countries. Such assistance is aimed at building
countries’ own capacities to deal with crises.
We attach great importance to providing training
programmes for peacekeepers from African and other
developing countries. This month, another course
began in the training academy of the Russian Ministry
of Internal Affairs, tailored specifically to African
policewomen. We continue to provide bilateral military
and law-enforcement training programmes and to
extend military and technical assistance. Over the past
18 months in the Central African Republic, Russian
instructors have trained more than 3,000 military
19-29372

26/09/2019

Peace and security in Africa

personnel for the armed forces of that sovereign State.
With the knowledge of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013), we have
already supplied two batches of Russian weapons to
meet the needs of the Central African Republic, with
the final delivery arriving this month.
Effective armed forces are only one aspect of
ensuring national security. Eliminating the root
causes of conflict requires us to address the acute
socioeconomic issues of the countries of the region
and the strengthening of their State institutions. It is
particularly important to train African specialists with
a broad spectrum of expertise. Russia is expanding the
practice of providing fellowships and free training for
Africans in medicine, education, advanced technologies,
transport and other civilian areas of expertise.
The first Russia-Africa Summit, to be held in
Sochi in one month’s time at the initiative of President
Putin, will herald a new chapter in our relationship
with the continent. We expect that the Heads of State
or Government of almost all countries of the continent
will attend, as well as the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Mr. Mahamat, and the leaders
of subregional organizations. The agenda will cover
a broad range of issues, from maintaining peace and
security to socio-economic development. We expect
the Sochi Summit will contribute to the overall
normalization of the situation in the African region.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Amon-Tanoh (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I congratulate the Russian Federation on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of September and thank it, on behalf of Côte
d’Ivoire, for agreeing to co-organize, with the African
members of the Security Council, this briefing on the
subject of “Peace and security in Africa: Partnership
for strengthening regional peace and security”. This
choice of theme is of highly significant and reflects
our common concern regarding the need to identify
the ways and means to forge sustainable responses on
matters of peace and security in Africa.
The enlightening briefings by the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and the Chef de
Cabinet of the Secretary-General lead us towards the

S/PV. 8627

same alarming conclusion that there is a disturbing
deterioration in the security situation in Africa in
general, and in the West African subregion in particular.
This situation calls for urgent and concerted responses
from regional organizations, focused on strong and
mutually beneficial strategic partnerships with all
bilateral and multilateral actors. Such partnerships,
however, will allow us to our objectives only if based
on a common understanding of the local and regional
dynamics that fuel insecurity and instability. To cite just
few, these include poverty and unemployment, which
serve as incubators for the expansion of cross-border
criminal networks, violent extremism and terrorist
armed groups; vulnerabilities related to political
and institutional governance; and weak regional and
subregional peacekeeping capacities.
Before they spill over and generate regional
repercussions, crises originate within States. If it is
to be effective, our partnership actions must therefore
focus first and foremost on supporting national
strategies to fight poverty and unemployment, thereby
strengthening States’ resilience to crises.
Côte d’Ivoire therefore welcomes the consensus
among the international community on this essential
requirement, as reflected by the launch in 2018 of the
United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel, covering
the period 2018-2030, in order to step up efforts and
accelerate the growth of prosperity in the Sahel; the
launch of the Sahel Alliance, with commitments
totalling approximately €7.5 billion; and the adoption
by the Group of Five for the Sahel of a priority
investment programme with a portfolio of 40 core
projects targeted at ensuring better balance and strong
links between development and security. In our view, all
these initiatives would benefit from better coordination
under the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel, so as to avoid duplication of effort and make the
best use of resources.
Building the capacities of regional institutions
and subregional mechanisms in the areas of conflict
prevention and peacebuilding is equally essential. In
that regard, the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security is a model of cooperation for peace and
security, in keeping with Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations.
As for the West African subregion, Côte d’Ivoire
wishes to highlight the high-quality cooperation

19-293727/24

S/PV.8627

Peace and security in Africa

between the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel, which facilitates
preventive diplomacy, builds State resilience and
supports peacebuilding.
I would also like to express my country’s support
for the productive partnership between the pan-African
organization and the European Union. We take note of
the European Union’s important role in financing the
African Peace and Security Architecture — a structural,
long-term response mechanism for addressing threats
to peace and security on the continent.
Moreover, Côte d’Ivoire urgently calls for improving
the early warning capacities and the proactive crisis
response of the African Union and ECOWAS, as a core
pillar of partnerships for regional peace and security.
My country sees the ECOWAS Early Warning and
Response Network and AU Continental Early Warning
System as relevant tools for strategic monitoring,
identifying nascent conflicts and formulating rapid
responses at the local, national and subregional levels.
In the ECOWAS region — which, in the past
four years, has seen more than 2,200 attacks that
have killed an estimated 11,500 people and displaced
thousands — that commitment has taken on a new
dimension, as reflected in the Extraordinary Summit
of Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS, held
in Ouagadougou on 14 September. Without prejudice
to existing security initiatives that have experienced
funding difficulties, ECOWAS Heads of State and
Government decided to pool their resources and
coordinate their efforts to combat terrorism and
transnational organized crime. The Ouagadougou
Summit adopted an action plan that will be financed by
internal resources of up to $1 billion.
While insecurity and instability in Africa in general,
and West Africa in particular, are exacerbated by local
dynamics, we must recognize that external shocks such
as the Libyan conflict have, since 2011, contributed to
the proliferation of weapons, transnational criminal
networks and terrorist armed groups. Côte d’Ivoire
therefore calls for a strengthened partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union, which will
undoubtedly contribute to identifying a lasting solution
to the Libyan crisis through an inclusive and credible
political process.
Threats to peace and security are a regional security
issue, with repercussions that extend far beyond African
8/24

26/09/2019

borders. In our regions, one facet of international peace
and security is undoubtedly at stake, and it can only
be bolstered through long-term, multifaceted responses
forged in the spirit of an invigorated partnership
between the United Nations, bilateral and multilateral
partners and regional organizations.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea.
Mr. Esono Angue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Given the topic’s importance for the African
continent and the international community, Equatorial
Guinea thanks Russia for having organized this
ministerial meeting, together with the three African
countries elected to serve on the Council. We also thank
Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the
Secretary-General, and Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, for
their detailed briefings on the issue before us today.
Formerly, African conflicts were characterized
by ethnic and tribal wars for access to and control of
land and natural resources, as well as other factors
such as politics, culture, beliefs and social needs.
Those traditional African conflicts underwent a radical
change upon the arrival of new phenomena that have
exacerbated violence, such as terrorism, which has
many forms and is involved on active fronts throughout
the world through its affiliates Al-Qaida, Al-Shabaab,
Boko Haram and groups linked to the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Shams, all currently based in Africa.
Other no less relevant phenomena are the increase
in illicit arms trafficking and trade, piracy, the growth
of armed groups, sexual violence, illicit trafficking in
diamonds and other minerals and more. Their effects
pose a significant threat to peace and security in Africa
and its economic development projects, creating chaos
and causing displacement, poverty, disease, hunger
and death.
Arms proliferation, the exploitation and illicit
trafficking of natural resources and competition for
them, poverty and weak State institutions are the main
causes of conflicts that create ongoing instability in
conflict-prone areas or regions in Africa. Despite the
progress made towards peace and security by regional
and subregional bodies and their international partners,
those causes have been exacerbated by the growth of
extremism, terrorism, transnational organized crime,
violence between communities and the effects of
19-29372

26/09/2019

Peace and security in Africa

climate change, such as drought, floods, increased land
degradation and desertification affecting agriculture,
which is the main livelihood for the vast majority
of Africans.
The consequence of climate change and armed
conflicts is reflected in the increase in the number of
refugees and internally displaced persons. This forced
displacement, be it internally or externally, is a crisis
that mainly affects Africa. In order to give visibility to
this crisis, the theme of the African Union for 2019 is
“Year of Refugees, Returnees and Internally Displaced
Persons: Towards Durable Solutions to Forced
Displacement in Africa”, by His Excellency Mr. Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo, President of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea.
Every year, the Security Council holds several
sessions and debates on issues related to peace and
security, focusing mainly on Africa. These ongoing
meetings demonstrate that both the Security Council
and the international community recognize that
the peace operations of the African Union are key
instruments for the establishment of peace and security
on the African continent.
Peace and security in Africa are important for
global stability, and Equatorial Guinea gives top priority
to African issues in its foreign policy. That is why,
during our presidency of the Council, we had the high
honour of presenting, on behalf of the African Union,
resolution 2457 (2019), on the Silencing the Guns in
Africa by the Year 2020 initiative. The implementation
of that resolution would be a solid foundation for
Africa’s economic development. The African Union
itself must ensure political and operational synergy and
coordination among the regional economic communities
and regional mechanisms.
We also need to increase consultations between the
African Union’s peace and security bodies and economic
communities and thereby improve and strengthen
the strategic partnership to jointly address and better
coordinate coherent and effective initiatives to prevent,
resolve and manage conflicts on the continent, as we
believe it important and necessary that collaboration in
conflict prevention, resolution and management include
the regional economic communities and regional
mechanisms as important partners in the global peace
and security architecture.
The participation and empowerment of women and
young people in Africa’s development are crucial to

S/PV. 8627

laying strong foundations for conflict resolution and
peacebuilding on the continent.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on the
Minister for International Relations and Cooperation of
the Republic of South Africa.
Mrs. Pandor (South Africa): I join my colleagues in
thanking you, Mr. Minister, for convening this meeting.
We appreciate the useful briefings by Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, and Ambassador Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General.
This is a timely and pertinent debate, as the majority
of the Security Council’s work is dominated by conflict
situations on the African continent. This debate affords
us a unique opportunity to reflect on efforts to resolve
conflicts in Africa, including by African countries
themselves, as well as through partnerships with
continental and external role players.
At the outset, we must acknowledge the positive
strides made by the countries of the continent in
realizing the aspirations of the African Union (AU)
to silence the guns in Africa by the year 2020 and in
pursuing African solutions to African problems. That
has led to the resolution of long-standing conflicts that
have plagued the continent.
Since the transition from the Organization of
African Unity to the African Union in 2000, the continent
has developed a strong and effective framework for
addressing security challenges and threats to Africa.
Those frameworks have created a synergy between
the AU and the regional mechanisms for conflict
prevention, management and resolution. Through the
success of such initiatives, the continent has made
strides in reducing violent and armed conflicts, guided
by the principles of subsidiarity and complementarity
between the AU and our regional organizations.
However, despite the progress made, the challenges
facing the continent are complex and many, involving
multiple cross-cutting issues. Those include the
building of peace and security, promoting inclusive
socioeconomic development and resilience, promoting
access to resources and economic opportunity
and promoting and entrenching democracy, good
governance and respect for humanity.
Historically, some of the contributing factors to
instability and insecurity on the African continent
include
poverty,
marginalization,
inequality,

19-293729/24

S/PV.8627

Peace and security in Africa

26/09/2019

unemployment, a failure to manage diversity, poor
governance, the scramble for natural resources,
external interference and, more recently, the impact of
climate change.

We have also supported peacebuilding in Africa
through support for political processes. We will
continue such support, including our work to train
women leaders in peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

Furthermore, the matters of terrorism, violent
extremism and intercommunal violence have
perpetuated instability in some parts of the continent,
taking advantage of the vacuum created by ongoing
conflicts in many areas, as well as the scourge of poverty
and inequality. Coercive and often unconstitutional
changes in Governments through military adventurism
have also served to degrade social capital and the
economies of countries, resulting in widespread violence
and humanitarian crises. The impact of such challenges
is not only felt on the continent but reverberates to
other countries and regions. Concerted efforts and
partnerships are needed to deal with all those complex
threats, including understanding the conditions that
give rise to them. Consequently, for us on the continent
to experience sustainable peace and prosperity, the
achievement of the continental aspiration envisioned
in Agenda 2063 of the African Union and the United
Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
is required.

However, the threats to peace and security require
much more. We need to strengthen the partnership
between the United Nations and the AU in achieving our
aspirations for a conflict-free and prosperous continent.
A key area pertaining to strengthening that relationship
is the financing of AU-led peace support operations. It
is unfortunate that, despite commitments to that effect,
there has not been much progress on the predictable
and sustainable funding for AU-led peace support
operations from United Nations assessed contributions.

The United Nations makes a considerable
contribution to assisting regional and subregional
organizations in Africa to resolve conflict situations,
primarily by deploying its envoys and peacekeepers, as
well as through the valuable work of the United Nations
development system. For its part, the African Union
and its subregional organizations have demonstrated
leadership by reacting rapidly in order to maintain
peace and security on the continent, drawing on their
close proximity to the situations and the ability to
comprehend internal and regional political dynamics.
Since the onset of its young democracy, South
Africa has been an active player in the United Nations
and the African Union. In recognizing the importance
of those multilateral institutions, South Africa has
contributed significant resources to both institutions.
We have consistently been one of the biggest financial
contributors to the African Union. We are also a major
contributor to United Nations peacekeeping missions in
Africa. That includes our past deployments to the AUUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, as well as
in Burundi, and our current significant presence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where our troops
are part of the highly effective Force Intervention
Brigade to build peace in our region.
10/24

Another area of importance to which we would like
to see attention given is the need for effective measures
for transitions and drawdowns from peacekeeping to
post-conflict reconstruction and development. It is
vital that efforts be coordinated and harmonized by
all relevant stakeholders to ensure that peacebuilding
activities are effective and that the peace dividends of
such operations are consolidated.
The United Nations Peacebuilding Commission and
the AU Framework for Post-conflict Reconstruction
and Development should work together to provide
assistance to post-conflict countries, as requested
by many such countries. National ownership and
leadership are pertinent to the success of peacebuilding
efforts and, most importantly, to preventing countries
from relapsing into conflict.
We would like to further underline the imperative
of involving women on an equal footing in peace and
security processes. That is not only limited to countries
in conflict but includes all States Members of the
United Nations in order to ensure the prominent role
of women in issues discussed in institutions such as
the Security Council. The inclusion of young people
in such processes would of course also be vital. Such
provisions and actions would not merely be for the
sake of gender parity in the pursuit of peace but are
a necessary requirement for sustainable and effective
peace, security and development on the continent.
In conclusion, my country is of the firm view
that partnerships for the pursuit of peace and security
in Africa can succeed only provided that all partners
complement each other, while working towards one
common objective of achieving sustainable peace and
security. That requires supporting Africa in taking a
19-29372

26/09/2019

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8627

lead in finding solutions to the conflicts that persist on
the continent.

Union to covering 25 per cent of the costs of peace
support operations.

Conflict has no boundaries. Its impact reverberates
across the world. It is therefore in the interest of all of
us to work hard to ensure a safe and prosperous world.

The concerted efforts made to address challenges
to peace and security through preventive diplomacy
and mediation must be the first line of defence in the
prevention of conflict. We can cite various examples
in this regard. The best way to sustainably silence the
guns is to build lasting peace and prevent conflict
through continued work to establish foundations for
peace, which can be achieved only by building societies
in which all citizens can effectively participate. In order
to reach lasting peace and achieve the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, in particular the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), the root causes of violence
and conflicts must be addressed before they erupt.

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kuwait.
Sheikh Al Sabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General, and
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, to the Security Council, and thank
them for their participation in today’s meeting and for
their informative briefings.
Our meeting today is a continuation of that held
yesterday morning (see S/PV.8626). The two meetings
share many elements, in particular cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in maintaining international peace and
security, as well as strengthened partnerships and
efforts to address challenges and threats to international
peace and security.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations has enjoyed significant progress that
deserves praise and admiration. Joint frameworks for
peace and sustainable development have been signed
this year. Furthermore, annual joint conferences have
been institutionalized at the summit level between the
two Organizations. A joint statement on cooperation
in support of peace operations has also been adopted.
Cooperation between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council continues,
including through the convening of annual meetings,
and we hope that this year’s thirteenth session will be
held in Addis Ababa in October.
Given the foregoing, we stress the importance of
maintaining these efforts, which have yielded many
achievements, and of building on them, in particular
through the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, in
order to ensure that peacekeeping missions are more
efficient, better equipped, stronger and safer. This
requires robust Security Council mandates, as well as
sustainable and predictable funding. In that regard, we
commend the continued commitment of the African

The African Union Agenda 2063 cites several factors
needed to prevent and resolve conflict. First of all, the
culture of peace and tolerance must be strengthened
by teaching children and young people the value of
peace. Other concepts also have to be strengthened.
These include good governance, democracy, human
rights, the rule of law, justice and addressing the root
causes of disputes, which we well know to be numerous
and interlinked.
Development is one of the pillars of the United
Nations in establishing sustainable peace, security
and human rights. That is why the State of Kuwait
attaches great importance to this pillar. We offer our
support, participation and partnership to all the African
countries, and we do so because we believe that Africa
is the strategic continuity of the Arab world, all the more
so since 10 Arab countries are members of the African
Union. That is why the State of Kuwait, in presidential
statement S/PRST/2019/5, emphasized the importance
of tripartite cooperation and coordination among the
United Nations, African Union and the League of Arab
states on issues of regional peace and security.
Furthermore, the report of former SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan entitled “The causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa” (S/1998/318) asserted that
there can be no peace without development and no
development without peace. This vision is in line with
one of the principles and pillars of the foreign policy
of the State of Kuwait, in particular the development
policy adopted by the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic
Development; since 1961, the Fund’s development

19-2937211/24

S/PV.8627

Peace and security in Africa

contribution to 51 African States has come to nearly
$10 billion.
On several occasions, Kuwait has confirmed that
we will pursue our efforts to support the implementation
of the SDGs in Africa, either through governmental
and popular cooperation or through institutions of
the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development,
which considers Africa to be a major platform for its
development activities in such areas as health, energy,
education, water and infrastructure.
Furthermore, the Amir of Kuwait, His Highness
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, was
a guest of honour at the 2012 Summit of the African
Union held in Addis Ababa. He was the first Arab
leader outside of the African Union to attend such a
summit, which is an illustration of the importance
Kuwait attaches to the African continent in general and
the African Union in particular. It also demonstrates the
solid relationship between the State of Kuwait and the
African Union as a whole, and anchors the relationship
and partnership between the League of Arab States and
the African Union.
In this context, the State of Kuwait hosted the third
Africa-Arab Summit, held in November 2013 under
the rubric “Partners in development and investment”.
At the Summit, the State of Kuwait also committed
to allocating soft loans in the amount of $1 billion for
infrastructure under the supervision of the Kuwait
Investment Authority. Furthermore, the Amir of
Kuwait, His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber
Al-Sabah, launched the Abdulrahman Al-Sumait
Prize for Development in Africa, a lofty humanitarian
initiative allocating $1 million as annual money prize
to support development research in the areas of food,
health and education in Africa. With the contribution of
the State of Kuwait, the Prize encourages economic and
social development, as well as human capacity-building
in the African continent.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait is counting
on the United Nations and its bodies to promote the
capacity of African States to implement the Silencing
the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative, the importance
of which the Security Council stressed in resolution
2457 (2019). Furthermore, the African Union 2063
Agenda, which is consistent with the SDGs and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, also has
to be implemented in cooperation with donor States.
The State of Kuwait, as an observer in the African
12/24

26/09/2019

Union, will continue to cooperate with its members
to promote the capacities of the Union for achieving
peace, progress, prosperity, conflict prevention and
resolution, as well as maintaining peace, security and
stability in Africa, while reaffirming the importance of
finding African solutions to African problems.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on the
State Councillor and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
People’s Republic of China.
Mr. Wang Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese): Let
me begin by welcoming the initiative of Russia, in
its capacity as President of the Security Council this
month, to convene a ministerial briefing on the issue
of peace and security in Africa. I listened closely to
the briefings by the Chef de Cabinet of the SecretaryGeneral and Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of
the African Union Commission. I applaud their efforts
to safeguard peace and security in Africa.
Peace and security in Africa concern not only the
well-being of the African people, but also peace and
stability in the wider world. China supports African
countries in their efforts to solve African issues in their
own way and has full confidence in Africa’s ability
in that regard. Helping Africa to achieve peace and
security is also the duty of the international community,
in particular the Security Council. We should value
Africa and prioritize its peace and security. We should
trust Africa and give full play to the role of African
countries in resolving their own issues. We should
support Africa and help enhance its ability to safeguard
peace and security.
Africa is home to one-fifth of the world’s
population and the largest number of developing
countries. Two-thirds of the issues on the Security
Council’s agenda involve African affairs. Wars and
conflicts have displaced more than 20 million people
on the continent. Silencing the guns in Africa is the
aspiration of all Africans. Moreover, it should be a
goal that the members of the international community
work together to achieve. At the start of the twentyfirst century, African countries have taken new steps to
enhance strength through unity and made headway in
building peace and security.
While independently addressing their own issues,
African countries are strengthening regional and
subregional cooperation, which has considerably
advanced the political settlement of African issues.
African countries know Africa best. The Security
19-29372

26/09/2019

Peace and security in Africa

Council should pay increased attention to African
voices, respect African views and leverage the role of
Africa. In recent years, there have been deeper dialogue
and cooperation between the Council and the African
Union (AU). That momentum should be sustained
and strengthened.
African countries have shown a strong political will
to protect their own peace and security; yet, they also
face difficulties and challenges. The most acute problem
is the lack of capacity and funding. The international
community, in particular the Security Council, must
shoulder its responsibility. We must help Africa to
enhance its capacity for maintaining peace and stability
and combating terrorism, including by accelerating the
development of the African Standby Force, the African
Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises and the
Continental Early Warning System. African countries
look to the United Nations for sufficient, stable and
sustainable funding support for African Union-led
peace actions. That demand is legitimate and justified,
and China fully supports it. We call on the members of
the Council to reach consensus on that subject as soon
as possible and take more concrete actions for peace
and stability in Africa.
We welcome the establishment of a transitional
coalition Government in the Sudan and are ready to work
with the international community to play a constructive
role for the Sudan’s peace and stability. The African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur has
achieved success and should therefore withdraw by
June next year, as scheduled. That should ensure that
valuable peacekeeping resources can be channelled to
places where there are more urgently needed.
Thanks to the mediation efforts of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
other actors, all parties in South Sudan have signed
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. We
hope that the parties will earnestly implement the
Agreement in order to genuinely usher in a new phase
of national reconstruction.
Conflicts in Libya, which have lasted more than
eight years, have brought its people untold suffering.
The international community should take genuine
action to help Libya end the conflict and resume
political dialogue. It is important to pursue a Libyanled and Libyan-owned political process, support the
work of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya

S/PV. 8627

and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Salamé, and leverage the comparative advantages and
role of regional organizations, such as the African
Union and the League of Arab States, in order to form
synergies with the United Nations.
China supports the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) in its efforts to achieve regional peace and
security. We call on the international community to
provide the necessary support for its Joint Force and
encourages regional and subregional organizations in
Africa to play a leading role.
Africa’s peace and security hinge on the peace and
stability of the Great Lakes region — the heartland of
the continent. The United Nations and the international
community should continue to support the efforts of
the East African Community and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, promote
cooperation among the countries of the region and
advance regional, political and peace processes. China
supports the notion proposed by the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region,
Mr. Huang Xia, for better development through
cooperation and greater peace through development.
China has closely followed developments with
regard to the Ebola epidemic in Africa. We have
decided to provide emergency humanitarian aid to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and other
countries. We are working with the World Health
Organization and the AU to prevent and control the
epidemic, as part of our concrete actions to stand with
our African brothers in times of need. China calls on
the international community to take more solid steps to
help the Democratic Republic of the Congo and other
countries achieve victory over the epidemic as soon
as possible.
China and Africa are good friends, good brothers
and good partners. The principle of sincerity will result
in the amity, good faith efforts and the pursuit of the
greater good and shared interests outlined by President
Xi Jinping as the fundamental guide to China’s Africa
policy. In the framework of the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation, we work with African countries to build
a China-Africa community with a shared future that
features joint responsibility, win-win cooperation,
happiness for all, common cultural prosperity, common
security and a harmonious coexistence.
With regard to helping Africa safeguard peace and
security, China has never been absent. As we speak,

19-2937213/24

S/PV.8627

Peace and security in Africa

more than 2,000 Chinese peacekeepers are defending
peace in five United Nations missions in Africa. For
more than a decade, the Chinese navy has undertaken
escort missions in the Gulf of Aden and in waters off
the coast of Somalia. It has completed more than 1,200
missions to safeguard in excess of 6,700 ships from
various countries. We support Africa in strengthening
its capacity for peace and security. The first delivery of
defence assistance worth ¥200 million has arrived in
Africa in support of the African Standby Force and the
African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises. In
addition, China has provided ¥300 million to counterterrorism efforts in the Sahel and to the Joint Force of
the G-5 Sahel.
The China-United Nations Peace and Development
Fund, announced by President Xi Jinping in September
2015, prioritizes peacekeeping, counter-terrorism and
sustainable development in Africa. Having sponsored
34 African-related programmes, the Fund has become a
new platform for China-Africa-United Nations trilateral
cooperation. Let me reiterate that on the path to Africa’s
peace and development, China will, as always, stand
firm and forge ahead with Africa every step of the way.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on
the Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of France.
Mr. Le Drian (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Russian Federation
for convening today’s very important discussion on the
strategic partnership among the United Nations, the
African Union and regional organizations.
The Council is well aware of President Macron’s
personal commitment to Africa. In his statement in
Ouagadougou in November 2017, he described the
challenge for France’s new relations with Africa — that
of shared responsibility. It means that we cannot rely
on old patterns. Africa does not expect our generosity;
it expects partnership. France will work with Africa
to build lasting economic partnerships among equals
that lead to investment in the private sector, African
innovations and Africa’s young people. That will be the
focus of the next Africa-France Summit, which we will
organize in Bordeaux in June 2020.
In our view, that partnership approach also applies to
collective security. Close cooperation among the United
Nations, the African Union and regional organizations
allows us to combine our political efforts and define
our strategies more closely in line with realities on
the ground. It also makes it possible to optimize the
14/24

26/09/2019

means at our disposal, in the interest of efficiency. We
see today that the partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations today is proving to be
of great value in terms of crisis prevention, mediation
and operations.
We could cite several examples in that regard, such
as recently in the Sudan, and Madagascar, where the
efforts of the African Union have enjoyed the support of
the United Nations, the Southern African Development
Community and other partners, including France and
the European Union. Those joint efforts enhanced the
transparency and credibility of the 2018 presidential
elections and serves as a successful model for crisis
prevention. In the Central African Republic, the joint
effort by the African Union and the United Nations
led to the signing of the peace agreement between the
Government and armed groups on 6 February. The
vigilant and coordinated engagement of all international
partners must continue in order to guarantee the full
implementation of that agreement.
Furthermore, in the Sahel, joint action by the
United Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
and the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) is
essential to ensuring that the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali — outcome of the Algiers
process — is implemented, and that the United
Nations and the African Union play a key role in the
Implementation Monitoring Committee. It is also vital
in the fight against terrorism, where the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali provides logistical support to the Joint Force of
the G-5 Sahel. Such cooperation must be strengthened
and expanded.
France supports the initiatives taken by Heads of
State and Government at the expanded ECOWAS summit
held in Ouagadougou. Heads of State and Government
called for improved coordination between international
efforts and for enhanced cooperation among the States
of the region to halt the spread of the threat. It is within
that framework that France and Germany have proposed
the establishment of a new partnership for security
and stability in the Sahel. That partnership will serve
to strengthen coordination among the various defence
and internal security actions, as well as to broaden the
perimeter, enabling further work to be undertaken in
the countries bordering Lake Chad.
19-29372

26/09/2019

Peace and security in Africa

But today it falls to us to further strengthen the
partnership among the United Nations, the African
Union and regional organizations in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
and the role of the Security Council. In his Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, the Secretary-General places
great emphasis on long-term partnerships, with good
reason. Our capacity for collective action depends
upon, first of all, our common vision. That is why we
are actively participating in the annual consultations
between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union. We must also
enhance information sharing with regard to earlywarning, as has been mentioned already several times,
in order to better anticipate and prevent crises.
We must also go further with regard to joint
African Union-United Nations funding of upcoming
African peace operations. As we know, the current
African members of the Council are asking us to ensure
the sustainability and predictability of our funding.
France supports the African Union’s approach, which
is ultimately aimed at the Security Council authorizing,
on a case-by-case basis and in accordance with specific
modalities, the use of mandatory contributions, in
addition to the African Union contribution, to finance
those operations.
We are convinced that African peace operations
meet a triple need: first, a political need, as nothing
can replace the determination of African countries
to advance peace on their own continent; secondly, a
strategic need, because the capacity to conduct peace
operations is still lacking; and, thirdly, an operational
need, as African contingents are best placed to achieve
tactical success, thanks to their knowledge and expertise
on the ground. We must consider how effectively
Nigeria, Chad, the Niger and Cameroon engaged in the
fight against Boko Haram in the early stages.
I therefore wish to commend the work undertaken
by the Secretary-General and the African Union
Commission on this issue. Significant progress has
been made, such as the commitment made by African
States at the Kigali Summit to fund 25 per cent of the
cost of those operations by 2020, through the African
Union Peace Fund. We still have a way to go in several
areas, but we sincerely hope that we can make enough
progress in the coming months to see rapid and
effective results.

S/PV. 8627

The President (spoke in Russian): I now call
on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Indonesia.
Mrs. Marsudi (Indonesia): Indonesia shares
the view of the briefers that partnership with all
stakeholders and at all levels is highly pertinent when
addressing peace and security challenges in Africa.
Indonesia’s partnership with Africa began in the days
of our forefathers as they fought for independence.
Since then, our relations have become more solid, more
developed and more action-oriented, with the aim of
addressing common global challenges. But one thing
remains unchanged — our relations will always be
based on good faith, honesty and sincerity. This is the
spirit of togetherness that we need to replicate at the
global level: a partnership that will not cause any harm
to Africa; a partnership that will bring mutual benefits
to Africa; and a partnership that will bring equality and
common progress to Africa. I would like to address
some key points in that regard.
First, I wish to stress the importance of a
home-grown solution. The report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/678) notes that the peace and security
challenges being faced in some parts of Africa
are increasingly complex and volatile. There is no
one-size-fits-all solution, and that is why we believe in
the principle of African solutions to African problems.
It is in that spirit that Indonesia supports the Silencing
the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative through enhanced
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union (AU).
Secondly, there is a need to strengthen partnership
with subregional and other regional organizations.
Subregional organizations such as the Economic
Community of West African States, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development have
played important roles in preventing and solving
conflicts in their respective regions. Stronger
cooperation and collaboration on the ground is even
more crucial. Cooperation between United Nations
peacekeeping missions and AU-led peace operations
to counter terrorism is proof of such cooperation
on the ground. Interregional cooperation is equally
as important. Efforts are under way between the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the AU to
establish closer cooperation between the two regions on
issues of common interest.

19-2937215/24

S/PV.8627

Peace and security in Africa

26/09/2019

Thirdly, international support for African
development and capacity-building must be improved.
Economic growth is one of the prerequisites to
achieve peace. Indonesia has done its part to support
Africa through technical cooperation and capacitybuilding programmes. Indonesia held the IndonesiaAfrica Forum in April 2018, and the Indonesia-Africa
Infrastructure Dialogue in August this year. Those
events resulted in concrete economic cooperation in
various strategic sectors, including infrastructure,
trade, connectivity and strategic industries. Last year,
Indonesia also hosted the Indonesia-Africa Maritime
Dialogue to strengthen cooperation on maritime security
and sustainable fisheries. Such activities have proven
effective in improving the economy, development,
food security and livelihoods of our African brothers
and sisters.

Chairperson of the African Union Commission, for
their comprehensive and insightful briefings.

Lastly, Indonesia will continue its commitment to
maintaining peace in Africa through our participation in
United Nations peace operations. Indonesia is currently
contributing to seven missions in Africa, namely, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara, the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei. Moving forward,
we will continue to work in peacekeeping missions
in Africa through community engagement to win the
hearts and minds of local communities and achieve the
objective of peace and stability in Africa.

The security challenges on the continent are
changing rapidly, with ethnic clashes and drug
and human trafficking. Elections-related violence,
irregular migration flows, border security problems
and extremism and terrorism are on the rise. Violent
conflicts have erupted in part over the abundance of
lucrative mineral resources. Tackling these problems
on the ground requires tailor-made actions and joint
international efforts.

Indonesia will remain committed, as a true partner
of Africa, to maintaining peace and security. We will
continue to work together with Africa.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland.
Mr. Czaputowicz (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank the Russian presidency and the African members
of the Council — Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea
and South Africa — for having brought us together
today to discuss partnerships in strengthening regional
peace and security in Africa. I would also like to thank
Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet to the
Secretary-General, and Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
16/24

The African continent is particularly conflictprone and has been the arena of more than one fourth
of global violent conflicts, unrest and crisis in recent
years — in Mali, the Central African Republic,
Libya and Somalia, to name but a few. In 2018 alone,
50 per cent of the Security Council’s country-specific
or regional-situations-related meetings were devoted
to Africa. The root causes of violence and conflict in
Africa are complex. Poverty and political, social and
economic inequalities compound Africa’s deep-seated
historical problems. In addition, State and non-State
actors are increasingly interfering through the use of
foreign military groups in a quest for influence, thereby
undermining already fragile situations.

Allow me to attempt to answer the questions raised
at today’s meeting and to speak from the perspective of
a country that has had the experience of a peaceful and
democratic political transformation and benefited from
local and regional partnerships.
First, let me stress that the principle of African
solutions to African problems must remain relevant. We
believe that strong and accountable State institutions
are critical to ensuring political stability and economic
growth. A weak State apparatus and a lack of regionally
led solutions are among the sources of insecurity and
instability in Africa.
However, the concept of African ownership needs
to be strengthened by strong political will, and that is
where the Security Council should seek its role. There
is a need to enhance the dialogue on challenges to peace
and security and to support the African integration
agenda through increased cooperation with the African
Union Peace and Security Council, which should
present clear and timely positions to the United Nations
Security Council.
19-29372

26/09/2019

Peace and security in Africa

Secondly, we applaud the fact that the United
Nations engages regularly with regional and subregional
organizations on peace and security issues. That
partnership should strive to bridge the development divide
through the strengthening of economic cooperation
and the promotion of sustainable development. Here
Africa’s regional economic communities constitute key
building blocks for economic integration. To be more
effective, those communities should enhance policy
convergence, harmonize their mandates and strengthen
their coordination with member countries. The
communities could also consider the idea of creating
multinational task forces in order to successfully fight
terrorists, extremists and cross-border crime.
More generally, we find it necessary to strengthen
coordination and coherence between the United
Nations and the African Union in terms of proper
analysis, planning and decision-making frameworks.
In February, we, as a member of the Security Council,
endorsed our commitment to peace and security
on the African continent through the adoption of
resolution 2457 (2019), whereby the Security Council
acknowledged that the task of building peace and
stability lies essentially with the African Union and
its 55 member States. It also recognizes the need for
international cooperation and partnership in support
of local and regional solutions. The resolution serves
as an example of the efforts made to strengthen the
partnership with the African Union.
Thirdly, we should regularly ask whether we
could do more in support of peace and security in
Africa, and what has proved most efficient. Poland
emphasizes the importance of conflict prevention and
of strengthening peacekeeping operations through a
strategic partnership between the African Union and
the United Nations. Africa’s peace-operations capacity
has increased significantly. We need a proper debate
on the role of the regional organizations responsible for
maintaining peace and security in their own regions
and their cooperation with the Security Council.
At present four out of five United Nations Blue
Helmets are based in Africa. African States have
conducted operations of their own and contribute a
very large number of United Nations peacekeepers. The
United Nations peacekeeping model, however, was not
aimed at conducting enforcement or counter-terrorism
operations or at dealing with transnational challenges
such as organized crime or regional violent extremism.
The African Union and other African bodies such

S/PV. 8627

as the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint Force or the
Multinational Joint Task Force seem to be well suited
to addressing these kinds of challenges.
Africa is a continent whose great potential is yet to
be fulfilled. Its many bright young people deserve access
to quality education and job opportunities. People who
see a better future for themselves at home do not take
the risky decision to embark on a dangerous journey
abroad. The key to reaching political, development
and security goals is the trust and involvement of
local populations. Africa is no exception. The United
Nations should remain closely engaged, in cooperation
with the African Union and other partners, in laying
solid and inclusive foundations for sustainable peace in
the region.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Peru.
Mr. Popolizio Bardales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We wish to welcome and thank you, Mr. President, and
Minister Lavrov for this timely meeting and to welcome
also the participation of the eminent authorities who are
here with us this afternoon. We are also grateful for the
important statement made by Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti, Chef de Cabinet to the Secretary-General, and
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission.
We recognize the responsibility and unity of African
peoples and leaders in terms of achieving the ambitious
goal that they have set of silencing the guns and of
promoting, in line with the efforts of the international
community, sustainable peace on the continent. We
welcome in particular the agreements reached in the
Sudan and the Central African Republic, where we
participate with a significant number of troops as a
part of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
The development of a comprehensive regional
legal basis with new administrative structures and
coordination mechanisms has been fostering synergies
and complementarities among the United Nations
system, including the Security Council, and the various
African regional and subregional organizations with
a view to institutionalizing and making the peace and
global security architecture more effective. In that
regard, we would like to refer to three areas in which
we believe there is still significant potential for shared
effort to be developed.

19-2937217/24

S/PV.8627

Peace and security in Africa

First, in the area of conflict prevention, we consider
it necessary to strengthen the continent’s monitoring
and early-warning capabilities, including the United
Nations offices in the region. In particular, it will
be crucial to continue promoting the development of
preventive diplomacy and recourse to peaceful means
of dispute settlement at the regional level, in the light
of positive experiences and lessons learned, including
those of the Economic Community of West African
States in Guinea-Bissau and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development in South Sudan, with which
the Council promotes active cooperation.
Secondly, in the area of peacekeeping operations,
we believe that the current momentum aimed at
increasing efficiency and performance standards in
such operations requires capitalizing the comparative
advantages of both global and regional bodies. The
promising results of the joint analysis and evaluation
visits carried out by officials of the Secretariat and the
African Union show the potential of that approach,
grounded in resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2457 (2019)
and the Joint Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security. We would also like to highlight
African experience with combating terrorism gained
through regional operations in Burundi and Somalia
and, recently, by the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint
Force and the Multinational Joint Task Force against
Boko Haram, which constitute innovative initiatives
under the African Peace and Security Architecture. We
believe it is crucial that the United Nations contribute
to building the capacity of those entities with the aim
of providing them with predictable, sustainable and
flexible financing, particularly where the needs are
greatest, in line with the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping initiative.
Thirdly, in the area of sustainable development
and peacebuilding, we believe that the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and Agenda 2063 of the
African Union should mutually reinforce each other
with the ultimate goal of addressing the root causes
of conflict, promoting economic growth on the basis
of the rule of law and encouraging the participation of
women and youth as agents of change in their respective
societies. We would also highlight, in the context of
national reconstruction and reconciliation processes,
the role of the Peacebuilding Commission as an advisory
body contributing to the forging of alliances required
for the consolidation of peace on the continent.
18/24

26/09/2019

In conclusion, we emphasize that investment in
the development and strengthening of African regional
and subregional capacities represents, in the current
context, the most efficient and effective alternative
for our shared responsibility to maintain international
peace and security.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on the
Secretary-General of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
of Belgium.
Mr. Van der Pluijm (Belgium) (spoke in French):
The African continent will have 2.5 billion inhabitants
by 2050. One in four people will be African. The
cradle of humankind has also become its future. It
is a young continent, endowed with extraordinary
economic dynamism and a civil society bursting with
energy. But that future continues to be thwarted by
violent conflicts, some of which are the deadliest and
longest in the world. Responding to those challenges
inevitably involves a strengthened partnership between
all peace forces.
My country, like the European Union, has long
advocated for a renewed, more global, dynamic and
ambitious partnership with the African continent. Such
a partnership would be based on strengthening the
values ​​we share. Let us move past former antagonisms
and see what brings us together, namely, respect for the
rule of law, democracy and human rights. Those same
values inspire the United Nations, the European Union
and the African Union. Let us strengthen them and
work even more closely with the African Union in the
area of ​​peace and security, with the aim of silencing
the guns in Africa. But let us also work together more
on development, human rights and good governance as
powerful vectors of stability.
As Chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat reminded
us today, the African Union has embarked upon a
voluntary and ambitious path to peace and security.
I welcome the progress made not only in revitalizing
the Peace Fund, but also in establishing a continental
framework for compliance with human rights and
international humanitarian law.
As a member of the Council, Belgium is committed
to working closely with its partners to support those
efforts. African Union operations, which complement
United Nations operations, must be eligible for strong and
predictable funding. But we must do more. The Council
and the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union must take a step further in terms of coordination
19-29372

26/09/2019

Peace and security in Africa

and collaboration. Risk and conflict analyses need to be
better aligned. That can start with simple actions, such
as better coordinating agendas, conducting more joint
visits, making our joint meetings more operational and
taking joint decisions on shared commitments.
Such renewed partnership will be relevant only if it
takes into account African diversity, both geographical
and institutional. The principle of subsidiarity, which
is also well known in Europe, requires public action
to be carried out as a priority at the most appropriate
level. Some crises are well managed at a subregional
level. The Economic Community of West African
States, for example, has demonstrated that with its
effective and swift management of the Gambian crisis
in 2017, as well as with its involvement in GuineaBissau. However — and I would like to stress this
point — the principle of subsidiarity should in no
way serve as an excuse for inaction and should not be
a barrier to progress. The peace and prosperity of all
Africans should serve as our compass. In our view,
the African Union and the United Nations still have a
leading role to play, in accordance with their founding
Charters, and must stand ready to play it.
I would be remiss if, before concluding, I did not
pay tribute to African women. How Africa harnesses
women’s skills and perspectives in the coming years
will be essential. Women leaders and entrepreneurs
prove to us every day that they are prepared to
transform the continent. Women mediators and
women’s organizations have already demonstrated time
and time again that their involvement in peace and
transitional processes is essential to achieving lasting
peace. Finally, African women, like all women in the
world, demand respect for their rights. Belgium stands
with those women, whom we support in many ways.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on
the Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office
of Germany.
Mr. Annen (Germany): Sometimes we find hope
in unlikely places. Recently, the Sudan became one of
them. German Foreign Minister Heiko Maas visited the
country last month. He met Government representatives
willing to listen to people’s demands. And he met the
brave men and women who brought down the Al-Bashir
regime through peaceful protests. Their hunger for
justice, democracy and peace will be the best assurance
for steering the Sudan through the difficult transition

S/PV. 8627

that lies ahead, but the people of the Sudan are also
telling us that they will need our support.
My first message today, therefore, is that we have to
put the African people at the centre of our efforts. They
deserve our support. That is why we are promoting the
leadership of African women in political processes
through the African Women Leaders Network and
FemWise Africa. That is why we are working to
implement resolution 2467 (2019), for example, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Sexual violence in
conflict must end once and for all, and that is why the
Council must address the situation of those suffering
from displacement, violence, malnutrition or disease.
I am glad to announce that Germany will contribute
an additional €7 million to the €60 million that it has
already contributed to combating the Ebola epidemic.
My second message today is that we must remain
committed beyond the immediate crisis phase. The
seamless transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding,
and from peacebuilding to building stable, inclusive
societies is what we should be aiming for together.
Germany will therefore increase its contribution to the
Peacebuilding Fund by €15 million this year.
As a Council, however, we also need to focus
more on the drivers of conflict. One key element is
the control of small arms and light weapons. They
cause more casualties among civilians than any other
type of weapon. We will therefore continue to support
the African Union (AU) Silencing the Guns by 2020
initiative and to address the security implications of
climate change that affect many regions, especially in
Africa. Mitigating climate change must become a key
component of all our efforts, including our resolutions
and activities.
My third message is that we need stronger and
smarter partnerships with Africa that build on African
solutions and African leadership. We are proud that
the European Union is one of the African Union’s top
security partners, having provided €2.7 billion for
African-led peace missions over the past 15 years. We
are willing to build on that. We should aim for even
closer cooperation between the Security Council and the
AU Peace and Security Council. In that regard, I would
like to say here that we look forward to their meeting
planned for October in Addis Ababa. We welcome the
efforts of the European Union, the African Union and
the United Nations to explore ways to enhance that
trilateral cooperation.

19-2937219/24

S/PV.8627

Peace and security in Africa

We will continue to invest in lasting partnerships.
In answering the call from leaders of the region for
greater support, Germany and France have initiated an
international partnership for security and stability in
the Sahel region. It focuses on the central elements in
the fight for peace and security, namely, well-managed,
well-trained and well-equipped security forces that
provide safety for their people. It is a platform to
coordinate international support for the security
sector of the countries in the region and a basis for
more effectively linking security activities involving
stabilization measures and conflict prevention.
In conclusion, the brave civil society representatives
in the Sudan, the women rebuilding their lives in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the villagers in the
Sahel, who want to live free of terrorist threats, are
all looking to us with hope. Let us make sure that the
Council is the place to which they can turn.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to
welcome today all the Ministers to the Council.
Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab had wanted to make
the intervention on behalf of the United Kingdom
today, but he had to return to London for urgent
parliamentary business.
The United Kingdom is a staunch supporter of
the African Union (AU) vision for silencing the guns
in Africa, and as we have heard today, real progress is
already under way towards achieving that noble goal,
driven primarily by African leaders, civil society and
communities. It is important that we see an integrated
United Nations approach across its three pillars in
support of that goal.

26/09/2019

their full support to the implementation of the peace
agreement in the Central African Republic and refrain
from any destabilizing bilateral activity there.
I hope that Chairperson Mahamat and SecretaryGeneral Guterres will continue to exert their good
offices in the region in the coming months. That is vital
to helping resolve and prevent conflict, for example,
by encouraging progress on the implementation of
the revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and supporting
the recently announced national dialogue process in
Cameroon. Cooperation and coordination on a range
of peace and security issues is a vital element of the
United Kingdom-AU strategic partnership. In Somalia
the United Kingdom has deployed military personnel
through the United Nations to support the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), in addition to its
extensive bilateral support to the Somali security forces.
We recognize the African Union’s vital role in
peace enforcement activity. That is why we support,
in principle, access to United Nations-assessed
contributions for future AU-led African peace support
operations on a case-by-case basis and subject to
certain key conditions. In that context, I hope that all
Member States, especially those which most support
this proposal, will back posts designed to support the
necessary standards of compliance in AMISOM in the
Fifth Committee this year.

The African Union and the African regional
economic communities are indispensable partners
in maintaining peace and security on the African
continent. The United Kingdom therefore applauds
the joint efforts of the African Union and the United
Nations in fostering dialogue and mediating peace
negotiations across Africa. Those efforts, together with
those of subregional organizations, have borne real
fruit in 2019.

The United Kingdom’s support for Africa’s peace
and stability is perhaps most obvious in its defence
and security partnerships. Our armed forces train
thousands of their African counterparts through longterm training programmes. Just this summer, United
Kingdom forces provided military training to the latest
Malawian battalion about to deploy to the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and, as our own deployment to
South Sudan ends in 2020, we will begin contributing
British troops to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali.

They have supported the transition to the civilianled Government in the Sudan, and we were glad that all
members of the Security Council were eventually able
to support the African Union’s position in the Sudan
and, of course, the recent Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
We also hope that all members of the Council will lend

The United Kingdom’s experts are also working
across the continent to help build African capacity to
tackle a range of security threats. To name just a few
examples, those include terrorism in Somalia, Nigeria
and Kenya, the illegal trade in drugs in Tanzania and
wildlife trafficking in Malawi and Zambia. We are also
supporting African security forces to prevent sexual

20/24

19-29372

26/09/2019

Peace and security in Africa

violence in conflict and to implement the broader
women and peace and security agenda.
There can be no meaningful global debate on
those topics that does not include the voices of African
women and girls, and they will be central to the global
conference that we will host November in London on
preventing sexual violence in conflict. Women and
girls also have a wider role to play in preventing and
resolving conflicts and building sustainable peace. We
know that research demonstrates that peace processes
that are inclusive of women are 35 per cent more likely
to last for a period of 15 years or longer. Women are
at the heart of many of the initiatives that we support
to find political solutions to conflict in Africa, such
as the African Union’s FemWise network and the
Commonwealth Network of Women Mediators.
However, we must look beyond the current crises.
The African Union’s own Agenda 2063 recognizes
that stability, security, good governance and inclusive
economic development are inextricably intertwined.
Africa’s long-term stability and success will depend,
in part, on whether the 20 million young Africans who
join the job market each year see meaningful prospects
for filling their enormous potential. They will struggle
to do so wherever conflict, corruption or the impacts
of climate change constrain human capital, investment
and entrepreneurship.
As one of the biggest development donors in Africa,
we will continue to focus on working with African
partners on issues that will improve the lives of African
citizens. That includes job creation, quality education,
health care and access to family planning and climate
resilience. We will also provide support to mobilize the
high-quality private investment that the region needs,
including through a major United Kingdom-Africa
investment summit to be held in London in early 2020.
The United Kingdom will remain committed to a
holistic approach to supporting peace and security in
Africa, while recognizing the mutually reinforcing
links among security, prosperity and good governance.
We will also continue to work with and through
partnerships across the region, while acknowledging
that it is Africans themselves who shape their
continent’s future.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank today’s briefers for their presentations and
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to engage
on the critical topic of peace and security in Africa.

S/PV. 8627

The United States is deeply committed to realizing
a better life for all the people of Africa and demonstrates
that through our robust bilateral programmes. The
United States has spent more than one third of
its worldwide bilateral development assistance in
sub-Saharan Africa since 2011. We spent $13.4 billion
in 2017 alone to support stability and prosperity on
the continent.
There are strong economic incentives for investment.
Africa is home to six of the world’s 10 fastest-growing
economies and over 1 billion consumers. But the
United States understands that that is only part of the
continent’s larger story — the millions of individuals
with unique callings and limitless potential. That is
why our support does not burden African countries with
unsustainable debts or unreasonable expectations. The
Security Council’s common wish should be for Africa to
be strong and vibrant, free from the limiting obligations
that some might place on it. But strengthened vibrancy
requires cooperation among regional actors. To that
end, the United States applauds the recent efforts by
African Governments and organizations to assume
responsibility for achieving those goals.
We are grateful for the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), which has urged
leaders to govern inclusively and abide by the election
timelines in Guinea-Bissau. We commend the
peacekeeping deployment of ECOWAS and its support
for the transition in the Gambia. We are also appreciative
of the work of the African Union (AU) and Ethiopia in
helping secure a civilian-led transitional Government
in the Sudan. Those examples are encouraging.
Regional actors should do even more to address
the challenges that threaten stability. For instance,
the anglophone conflict in Cameroon has led to the
deaths of thousands and the displacement of hundreds
of thousands. And, while we are also encouraged by
the Government’s announcement to hold a national
dialogue, the region could do more. We also note that
flagging regional cooperation in South Sudan has
slowed the full implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of Conflict in the Republic
of South Sudan.
As many have highlighted here today, financing is
one of the challenges confronting regional cooperation.
That is certainly true in the case of African Union
peacekeeping operations. We recognize the sacrifices
that the AU and African troop-contributing countries

19-2937221/24

S/PV.8627

Peace and security in Africa

are making, and we are aware of the challenges
associated with taking on a greater role. The United
States supports the United Nations and the AU’s efforts
to establish systems that offer predictable, sustainable
and reliable financing for future operations.
But any mechanism using United Nations-assessed
contributions requires a deliberate approach, with
the appropriate safeguards. Any draft resolution on
that topic must address long-standing United States
policy positions, including with respect to financial
transparency and trade measures. Such a draft resolution
must also address concerns regarding adequate
burden-sharing, fiscal transparency and adherence to
United Nations standards for conduct in peacekeeping
operations. Those principles will improve the integrity
and fiscal health of AU operations, but, more important,
they will allow the AU to deliver real peace and security
to vulnerable populations.
As we have heard throughout this high-level week
from world leaders, activists and countless others, our
words are ultimately empty if they are not backed by
concrete actions; we could not agree more. We want to
reiterate our commitment to doing more than speaking
of peace and security in Africa. That is one reason that
the United States has decided to co-lead with South
Africa the upcoming Security Council trip to South
Sudan. The trip will allow the Council to see how our
words and decisions are impacting lives on the ground
and to appreciate first-hand how we can help deliver
a measurably better life for every man, woman and
child in South Sudan, and on the African continent
more broadly.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank the Russian
Federation for organizing this briefing, and we reiterate
our congratulations on your assumption, Mr. President,
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of September. It is an honour to have among us Minister
Pandor and Ms. Viotti. Allow us to also extend our
thanks to the briefers for their detailed remarks.
The reasons that States find themselves immersed
in ongoing conflicts are varied, but among the most
common are economic crises, the struggle for access
to, and control of, natural resources, terrorism, ethnic
and religious differences and the effects of climate
change. That diverse set of factors makes it necessary
to approach the issue of security and development in
Africa from a broad and holistic perspective.
22/24

26/09/2019

Mali, the Sudan, Libya and Somalia, to mention
a few places, serve to demonstrate that the threats
facing the African continent must be addressed in
a comprehensive manner, while maintaining the
understanding that the primary responsibility for the
future of the region is in the hands of African countries,
with cooperation from the international community.
First, we wish to underscore the importance of the
Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020. That initiative
is quite ambitious but also necessary, and we welcome
the progress made by the member States of the African
Union in implementing the Master Roadmap of
Practical Steps to achieve that overarching objective.
Despite the efforts undertaken by the international
community and the significant strides made by many
African countries in achieving peace and stability,
major challenges remain. Efforts must be redoubled
to continue supporting the region in that endeavour,
bearing in mind that the aspirations for peace, security
and stability in Africa and the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals are common priorities,
as outlined in the African Union’s Agenda 2063 and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which
constitute a reinforced alliance for peace and security
in the region.
With a view to addressing the major challenges
facing the African region, it is crucial to address the
immediate and root causes of conflicts before they
reach the agenda of the Security Council. The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, with its goal of
peaceful, inclusive and sustainable societies, represents
the master plan for prevention.
Collective action can be strengthened by engaging
regional and subregional bodies, particularly in
prevention, development and post-conflict efforts.
We recognize the work being carried out by the
Peacebuilding Commission and understand that
enhanced collaboration with the Security Council
must be ensured in order to guarantee due attention
to countries emerging from conflict. It is important
to continue using the Commission’s convening
power to strengthen strategic alliances with regional
and subregional organizations, since they serve as
forums for promoting coherence with initiatives
undertaken at the national level by allowing for regular
information exchange.
The Dominican Republic reiterates its commitment
to achieving and maintaining international peace and
19-29372

26/09/2019

Peace and security in Africa

security, which is why we extend our support to the
States of the African Union in their efforts to realize a
conflict-free continent. We urge regional organizations
to step up their activities in mediation and promoting
dialogue between the parties, including civil society,
with the aim of building the trust and political will
necessary to build sustainable peace in the region. The
active participation of organizations such as the African
Union is a vital tool for the peaceful and inclusive
resolution of conflicts. Its leadership is essential for
building trust and readiness among parties to enter into
dialogue conducive to peace.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on
the Assistant Foreign Minister for Multilateral Affairs
of Egypt.
Mr. Fawzy (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would like,
at the outset, to thank the Russian presidency of the
Security Council for the month of September for having
convened this important meeting on the topic “Peace
and security in Africa: partnership to strengthen
regional peace and security”. I would also express our
appreciation for having invited Egypt to participate
in this meeting as Chairperson of the African Union,
thereby reflecting the important African vision on
issues of peace and security on the continent and the
principle of African solutions for African problems.
The African continent is facing a number of
interlinked challenges affecting peace and security,
foremost of which are the threats of terrorism and
extremism spreading across different regions in Africa,
as well as organized crime, human trafficking, arms
trafficking and the impacts of climate change, such as
desertification, water shortages and scarcity of natural
resources, at a time of peoples’ growing aspirations to
peace, stability, development and well-being. On this
occasion, I would like to focus in my statement on three
main messages.
First, Egypt believes that the best means to ensure
stability and peace in the world, especially on the
African continent, is by addressing the root causes of
problems that constitute a threat to peace and security,
while working on conflict and crises prevention in
the first place. Furthermore, the role of preventive
diplomacy and mediation in settling disputes among
States is important. In that context, we stress the need
to respect the established principle of African solutions
for African problems. That principle was the basis for
the successful Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020

S/PV. 8627

initiative, which complements other ongoing African
efforts to establish security and peace in Africa,
constituting also an important added value to the
pillars of the African Peace and Security Architecture
with the aim of promoting mediation and preventive
diplomacy to prevent, resolve and manage conflicts and
crises and achieving post-conflict reconstruction and
development. That would revive the relevant African
policy, including through launching the activities of the
African Union Centre for Post Conflict Reconstruction
and Development in Africa, which is based in Cairo.
Secondly, Egypt stresses the importance of all
international and regional concerted efforts to support
stability and security on the African continent. In that
regard, we underscore the importance of achieving
continued consistency and coordination between the
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council. The aim is to unify visions and
positions related to all the issues included on the agenda
of both Councils. In that connection, I would like to
commend the important role played by the group of the
three African States members of the Security Council.
Thirdly, all international and regional efforts aimed
at achieving stability and security on the continent
must be based on the principle of the sovereignty of
States and the central role of Governments in designing
peace agreements and development plans in accordance
with national priorities and national ownership.
Sustainable and long-term peace can be achieved
only by strengthening the capacity of Governments
to extend their authority throughout their territories
and promote their institutional capacities in all fields,
thereby achieving security and stability while ensuring
their gains in that regard.
In conclusion, I cannot but to emphasize the close
link between peace and security, on one hand, and
achieving sustainable development, on the other, as
well as ensuring the transition from achieving peace
and security to peacebuilding and sustainable peace.
All international and regional efforts to achieve peace,
security and stability must go hand in hand with
efforts to achieve socioeconomic development. We are
therefore currently preparing for the Aswan Forum for
Peace and Sustainable Development to be launched
at the summit level on 11 and 12 December. The
Forum will be a platform for dialogue and interaction
among leaders, decision-makers and experts in
order to lay out an integrated African vision linking
aspects of development and peace, and to practically

19-2937223/24

S/PV.8627

Peace and security in Africa

implement existing African initiatives and policies
as well as achieving sustainable development. That
would contribute to the stability of societies while
minimizing the risks of polarization of destructive and
extremist ideologies.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on
the Deputy Secretary-General for Political Affairs
and Political Director of the European External
Action Service.
Mr. Belliard (spoke in French): I speak on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
The Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ukraine
and the Republic of Moldova align themselves with
this statement.
As stated by the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, the
African continent is no longer defined by conflict.
A continent where change is in full swing, fuelled
by vigorous and creative youth, Africa will be one
of the drivers of future global growth. At the same
time, despite the successes mentioned by Chairperson
Mahamat — in the Sudan, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Madagascar — Africa continues to face
security challenges. That is why the European Union
fully supports the African Union’s Silencing the Guns
by 2020 initiative. It is also the reason the European
Union places conflict prevention and early warning,
mediation and crisis response measures at the heart of
its Common Foreign and Security Policy.
Given that the conflicts and their causes are
multifaceted and deep-rooted in socioeconomic,
historic and climatic factors, the European Union is
committed to taking a comprehensive approach to
strengthen the resilience of States and societies. The
Sahel is perhaps the best example of such an approach,

24/24

26/09/2019

a subregion in which the European Union has invested
€8 billion over recent years.
The European Union also supports the African
Peace and Security Architecture and has learned to
listen to the voice of the African Union Peace and
Security Council and to ensure our actions are anchored
in African ownership. That is an absolutely crucial area
for Europe. The European Union is entering into the
fourth phase of its support for the African Peace and
Security Architecture, whose capacity development it
has been supporting since 2007, with up to €2.7 billion
to help in the African Union Mission in Somalia/Group
of Five for the Sahel fight against Boko Haram.
The African Union and the European Union
established a strategic partnership 20 years ago, in
Cairo. The most recent Summit of European Union and
African Union Heads of State and Government, held
recently in Abidjan, was an opportunity to redefine
our common priorities. Ministerial meetings, meetings
between the African Union Peace and Security
Council and the European Union Political and Security
Committee and regular meetings between all of the
commissioners of both organizations have all been
opportunities to define and renew those commitments
in order to enhance our joint work.
In conclusion, I would like to cite the excellent
relationship among the United Nations, the African
Union and the European Union, especially in the areas
of peace and security, the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the African
Union’s Agenda 2063, sustainable and inclusive growth,
human rights and the fight against climate change, as
well as in the implementation of African Union and
United Nations reforms.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

19-29372
