A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/191
20 January 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 99 (a)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/48/725)]
48/191. Elaboration of an international convention to combat
desertification in those countries experiencing serious
drought and/or desertification, particularly in Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 44/172 of 19 December 1989, 44/228 of
22 December 1989 and other relevant General Assembly resolutions, as well as
decisions of by the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development,
in particular the recommendation by which the Conference invited the General
Assembly to establish, under its auspices, an intergovernmental negotiating
committee for the elaboration of an international convention to combat
desertification in those countries experiencing serious drought and/or
desertification, particularly in Africa,
Recalling also its resolution 47/188 of 22 December 1992, by which it
established the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee for the Elaboration of
an International Convention to Combat Desertification in those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in Africa,
with a view to finalizing such a convention by June 1994,
Recalling further that in Agenda 21, 1/ chapter 12, in particular
paragraphs 12.1 to 12.4 thereof, desertification and/or drought is recognized
as a problem of global dimension, in that it affects one sixth
__________
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
1/
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I and
Vol. I/Corr.1, Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1)) (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I, Resolutions adopted
by the Conference, resolution 1, annex II.

/...

A/RES/48/191
Page 2

of the world population and one quarter of the total land area of the world
and requires a broad response, as set out in paragraph 12.4 of Agenda 21, and
that concrete measures have to be taken in all regions, particularly in
Africa, within the framework of the convention,
Reiterating the objective of finalizing the convention
and of implementing it as soon as possible,

by June 1994,

Noting with appreciation the work of the Intergovernmental Negotiating
Committee at its first 2/ and second 3/ substantive sessions,
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General concerning the
progress of the negotiations on the convention, 4/
1.
Urges the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee for the
Elaboration of an International Convention to Combat Desertification in those
Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in
Africa, to complete the negotiations successfully by June 1994, in accordance
with resolution 47/188;
2.
Decides that the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee shall
hold one session after the adoption of the convention in order to review the
situation in the interim period pending its entry into force, in particular
with regard to the implementation of provisions adapted to the specific needs
of each region;
3.
Also decides that the session of the Intergovernmental Negotiating
Committee after the adoption of the convention shall be held not later than
31 January 1995, and requests the Secretary-General to make appropriate
arrangements for the functioning of the ad hoc secretariat and the
multidisciplinary panel of experts to service that session;
4.
Further decides that the negotiating process shall continue to be
funded through existing United Nations budgetary resources, without negatively
affecting its programmed activities, and through voluntary contributions to
the trust fund established pursuant to its resolution 47/188 specifically for
that purpose for the duration of the negotiations and administered by the head
of the ad hoc secretariat under the authority of the Secretary-General, with
the possibility of carrying over contributed resources from one fiscal year to
the next;
5.
Notes the contributions to the work of the Intergovernmental
Negotiating Committee in the conduct of its mandate made by the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office, the United

__________
2/

A/48/226, annex.

3/

A/48/226/Add.1, annex.

4/

A/48/226 and Add.1.

/...

A/RES/48/191
Page 3

Nations Environment Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the United Nations Conference on Trade Development, the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the World
Meteorological Organization, the International Fund for Agricultural
Development and other relevant international organizations dealing with
desertification, drought and development, and invites them to continue to
provide such support;
6.
Notes with appreciation the initial contributions made to the
trust fund and invites Governments, regional economic integration
organizations and other interested organizations, including non-governmental
organizations, to continue their support for the fund;
7.
Invites the international community, in particular the developed
countries and other countries in a position to do so, to make voluntary
contributions to the secretariat of the Intergovernmental Negotiating
Committee and/or the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office of the United
Nations Development Programme and any other relevant international and
regional organizations to allow them to assist countries affected by drought
and/or desertification in all regions, particularly in Africa, in their
preparation for the negotiating process;
8.
Notes with appreciation the contributions made to the special
voluntary fund established pursuant to its resolution 47/188 to assist
developing countries affected by desertification and drought, in particular
the least developed countries, to participate fully and effectively in the
negotiating process, and invites Governments, regional economic integration
organizations and other interested organizations, including non-governmental
organizations, to continue to contribute generously to the fund;
9.
Notes the arrangements made by the Secretary-General and the
welcome support of relevant or interested organizations, organs, programmes
and concerned agencies of the United Nations system and intergovernmental,
subregional and regional organizations in the work of the Intergovernmental
Negotiating Committee, and invites them to continue to participate actively in
the work of the Committee in the future;
10.
Urges Governments to continue, in close collaboration with the
regional commissions and national, subregional and regional organizations, to
organize activities to support the process of the Intergovernmental
Negotiating Committee, involving, as appropriate, the scientific and
industrial communities, trade unions, the relevant non-governmental
organizations and other interested groups;
11.
Notes the assistance provided by the United Nations
Sudano-Sahelian Office to the countries covered under its mandate in their
preparations for and participation in the negotiating process and invites the
Office to continue to support the Governments concerned and to continue to
mobilize resources for that purpose;
12.
Also notes the constructive contribution of relevant
non-governmental organizations to the success of the negotiating process, in
accordance with the rules of procedure of the Intergovernmental Negotiating
Committee and taking into account procedures used in the process of the United
Nations Conference on Environment and Development, and encourages them,

/...

A/RES/48/191
Page 4

particularly non-governmental organizations from developing countries, to
continue to contribute to the success of the negotiating process;
13.
Reiterates its request to the Chairman of the Intergovernmental
Negotiating Committee to continue to submit progress reports on the
negotiations to the Commission on Sustainable Development and other
appropriate bodies;
14.
Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to
the attention of all Governments, relevant intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, and scientific and other institutions
concerned;
15.
Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General
Assembly at its forty-ninth session a report on the implementation of the
present resolution;
16.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-ninth
session, under the item entitled "Implementation of decisions and
recommendations of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development", the sub-item entitled "Elaboration of an international
convention to combat desertification in those countries experiencing serious
drought and/or desertification, particularly in Africa".
86th plenary meeting
21 December 1993
