United Nations

A/RES/60/129

General Assembly

Distr.: General
24 January 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 39

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 16 December 2005
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/60/499)]

60/129. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees on the activities of his Office 1 and the report of the Executive Committee
of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the
work of its fifty-sixth session 2 and the conclusions and decisions contained therein,
Recalling its previous annual resolutions on the work of the Office of the High
Commissioner since its establishment by the General Assembly,
Expressing its appreciation for the leadership shown by the High
Commissioner, commending the staff and implementing partners of the Office of the
High Commissioner for the competent, courageous and dedicated manner in which
they discharge their responsibilities, and underscoring its strong condemnation of all
forms of violence to which humanitarian personnel and United Nations and
associated personnel are increasingly exposed,
Endorses the report of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the
1.
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the work of its fifty-sixth
session;2
2.
Welcomes the important work undertaken by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and its Executive Committee in the
course of the year, and notes in this context the adoption of the general conclusion
on international protection, the conclusion on the provision of international
protection, including through complementary forms of protection, and the
conclusion on local integration, 3 which are aimed at strengthening the international
protection regime, consistent with the Agenda for Protection, 4 and at assisting

_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/60/12).
Ibid., Supplement No. 12A (A/60/12/Add.1).
3
Ibid., chap. III, sects. A–C.
4
Ibid., Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 12A (A/57/12/Add.1), annex IV.
2

05-49534

A/RES/60/129

Governments in meeting their protection responsibilities in today’s changing
international environment;
3.
Reaffirms the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees 5 and
the 1967 Protocol thereto 6 as the foundation of the international refugee protection
regime, recognizes the importance of their full and effective application by States
parties and the values they embody, notes with satisfaction that one hundred and
forty-six States are now parties to one instrument or to both, encourages States not
parties to consider acceding to those instruments, underlines in particular the
importance of full respect for the principle of non-refoulement, and recognizes that
a number of States not parties to the international refugee instruments have shown a
generous approach to hosting refugees;
Notes that fifty-eight States are now parties to the 1954 Convention
4.
relating to the Status of Stateless Persons 7 and that thirty States are parties to the
1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, 8 and encourages the High
Commissioner to continue his activities on behalf of stateless persons;
5.
Notes with interest the Mexico Plan of Action to Strengthen International
Protection of Refugees in Latin America, endorsed by States participating in the
meeting commemorating the twentieth anniversary of the Cartagena Declaration on
Refugees convened in Mexico City on 15 and 16 November 2004, 9 and expresses its
support for the efforts of interested States and the Office of the High Commissioner
to promote its implementation, with the cooperation and assistance of the
international community;
Welcomes the successful conclusion of the follow-up process to the 1996
6.
Geneva Conference on the problems of refugees, displaced persons, migration and
asylum issues in the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States, and
encourages States, the Office of the High Commissioner and other relevant actors to
continue to work collaboratively, building on the successes of the Conference
process to date;
Re-emphasizes that the protection of refugees is primarily the
7.
responsibility of States, whose full and effective cooperation, action and political
resolve are required to enable the Office of the High Commissioner to fulfil its
mandated functions;
Urges all States and relevant non-governmental and other organizations,
8.
in conjunction with the Office of the High Commissioner, in a spirit of international
solidarity and burden- and responsibility-sharing, to cooperate and to mobilize
resources with a view to enhancing the capacity of, and reducing the heavy burden
borne by, countries that have received large numbers of refugees and
asylum-seekers, and calls upon the Office to continue to play its catalytic role in
mobilizing assistance from the international community to address the root causes
as well as the economic, environmental and social impact of large-scale refugee
populations in developing countries, in particular the least developed countries, and
countries with economies in transition;

_______________
5

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
7
Ibid., vol. 360, No. 5158.
8
Ibid., vol. 989, No. 14458.
9
Available from www.unhcr.org.
6

2

A/RES/60/129

9.
Emphasizes that international protection of refugees is a dynamic and
action-oriented function that is at the core of the mandate of the Office of the High
Commissioner and that it includes, in cooperation with States and other partners, the
promotion and facilitation of, inter alia, the admission, reception and treatment of
refugees in accordance with internationally agreed standards and the ensuring of
durable, protection-oriented solutions, bearing in mind the particular needs of
vulnerable groups and paying special attention to those with specific needs, and
notes in this context that the delivery of international protection is a staff-intensive
service that requires adequate staff with the appropriate expertise, especially at the
field level;
10. Notes the activities undertaken in pursuit of the objectives of the
Convention Plus initiative, 10 and encourages the High Commissioner and interested
States to strengthen the international protection regime through the development of
specific, multilateral, comprehensive and practical approaches to resolving refugee
situations, including improving international burden- and responsibility-sharing and
realizing durable solutions within a multilateral context;
11. Welcomes the progress that has been achieved in increasing the number
of refugees resettled and the number of States offering opportunities for
resettlement, notes that the Multilateral Framework of Understandings on
Resettlement9 sets out the strategic use of resettlement as part of a comprehensive
approach to refugee situations aimed at improving access to durable solutions for a
greater number of refugees, and invites interested States, the Office of the High
Commissioner and other relevant partners to make use of the Multilateral
Framework, where appropriate and feasible;
12. Recalls the important role of effective partnerships and coordination in
meeting the needs of refugees and other displaced persons and in finding durable
solutions to their situations, welcomes the efforts under way, in cooperation with
countries hosting refugees and countries of origin, including their respective local
communities, United Nations agencies and other development actors, to promote a
framework for durable solutions, particularly in protracted refugee situations, which
includes the “4Rs” approach (repatriation, reintegration, rehabilitation and
reconstruction) to sustainable return, and encourages States, in cooperation with
United Nations agencies and other development actors, to support, inter alia,
through the allocation of funds, the development and implementation of the 4Rs and
other programming tools to facilitate the transition from relief to development;
13. Strongly reaffirms the fundamental importance and the purely
humanitarian and non-political character of the function of the Office of the High
Commissioner of providing international protection to refugees and seeking
permanent solutions to refugee problems, and recalls that these solutions include
voluntary repatriation and, where appropriate and feasible, local integration and
resettlement in a third country, while reaffirming that voluntary repatriation,
supported by necessary rehabilitation and development assistance to facilitate
sustainable reintegration, remains the preferred solution;
14. Acknowledges that the provision by States of complementary forms of
protection to ensure that persons in need of international protection actually receive
it is a positive way of responding pragmatically to certain situations, and affirms

_______________
10

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/60/12), chap. III.

3

A/RES/60/129

that measures to provide complementary forms of protection should be implemented
in a manner that strengthens the existing international refugee protection regime;
15. Notes that local integration in the refugee context is a sovereign decision
and an option to be exercised by States guided by their treaty obligations and human
rights principles and that it is a dynamic and multifaceted two-way process that
requires efforts by all parties concerned, including a preparedness on the part of
refugees to adapt to the host society without having to forego their own cultural
identity and a corresponding readiness on the part of host communities and public
institutions to welcome refugees and to meet the needs of a diverse population, and
acknowledges that the process of local integration is complex and gradual,
comprising three distinct but interrelated legal, economic, and social and cultural
dimensions, all of which are important to the ability of refugees to integrate
successfully;
16. Acknowledges that the global refugee situation represents an international
challenge requiring that international burden- and responsibility-sharing be
addressed effectively, and recognizes that allowing for local integration, where
applicable, is an act of States that is a durable solution for refugees, which
contributes to the said burden- and responsibility-sharing, without prejudice to the
specific situation of certain developing countries facing mass influxes;
17. Emphasizes the obligation of all States to accept the return of their
nationals, calls upon States to facilitate the return of their nationals who have been
determined not to be in need of international protection, and affirms the need for the
return of persons to be undertaken in a safe and humane manner and with full
respect for their human rights and dignity, irrespective of the status of the persons
concerned;
18. Condemns all acts that pose a threat to the personal security and wellbeing of refugees and asylum-seekers, such as refoulement, unlawful expulsion and
physical attacks, and calls upon all States of refuge, in cooperation with
international organizations where appropriate, to take all necessary measures to
ensure respect for the principles of refugee protection, including the humane
treatment of asylum-seekers;
19. Affirms the importance of mainstreaming the protection needs of women
and children to ensure their participation in the planning and implementation of
programmes of the Office of the High Commissioner and State policies and the
importance of according priority to addressing the problem of sexual and
gender-based violence;
20. Encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to continue to improve
its management systems and to ensure effective and transparent use of its resources,
recognizes that adequate and timely resources are essential for the Office to
continue to fulfil the mandate conferred upon it through its statute 11 and by
subsequent General Assembly resolutions on refugees and other persons of concern,
recalls its resolutions 58/153 of 22 December 2003, 58/270 of 23 December 2003
and 59/170 of 20 December 2004 concerning the implementation of paragraph 20 of
the statute of the Office, and urges Governments and other donors to respond
promptly to annual and supplementary appeals issued by the Office for requirements
under its programmes;

_______________
11

4

Resolution 428 (V), annex.

A/RES/60/129

21. Requests the High Commissioner to report on his activities to the General
Assembly at its sixty-first session.
64th plenary meeting
16 December 2005

5
