S/PV.8502

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8502nd meeting

Wednesday, 3 April 2019, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Heusgen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Duclos
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (S/2019/198)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-09758 (E)
*1909758*

S/PV.8502

The situation concerning Haiti

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
The President: Before we adopt the agenda, let me
make a few remarks in my national capacity as President
of the Security Council for the month of April.
Let me start by picking up where we left off on
Friday when a colleague from the Dominican Republic
said that I should take the French presidency as an
example when leading the Council in April (see
S/PV.8498). I will do that, but I would first like to thank
both Mr. François Delattre and Mrs. Anne Gueguen, as
well as their team, for the wonderful cooperation that
we had during the first leg of the German-French twin
presidencies for the months of March and April. I hope
Council members have seen that these are substantially
innovative bilateral presidencies. We very much
appreciate that France, during the first presidency,
actually did share a lot of things with Germany, and not
just in a pro forma way. In particular, France shared its
presidency when we went on the trip together to Africa,
so our trip to Burkina Faso and Mali was really a trip
with three presidencies. I think that was a good sign
of cooperation among the five permanent members and
the elected 10. I thank the French delegation very much
for that.
The presidency of the Security Council is something
very special for Germany because the Security Council
is at the core of multilateralism and of the United
Nations, which is at the top of the international rulesbased order. We started the month with the issue of
humanitarian law, which is very important to us. We
met with regard to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons yesterday (see S/PV.8500), again
together with our French friends. I am very happy that,
under the agenda that we are about to adopt today,
we will have as a briefer the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights for her first-ever
meeting with the Security Council in that capacity.
Human rights are very important for us. We want this
to work. We will do everything possible to ensure that
the next weeks of the Security Council are successful.
We want to have an enlightened Security Council. I
am very grateful to the Secretariat that our intervention
to have the curtains opened was successful and
we now have natural light in the Council. But we
have another innovation in the Chamber, which we
announced through the Political Coordinator, namely,
this hourglass here. It was hand made in Thuringia. It
takes about five and a half minutes, after it is turned,
2/28

03/04/2019

for the sand to drop down. That is a bit longer than the
recommendation for interventions in presidential note
S/2017/507, which is for five minutes, but we thought
we would give an extra 30 seconds. However, let me say
that — and I am looking a bit by chance at our friend
Jerry Matjila — there is an inalienable right to speak,
so nobody wants to cut you short, Jerry, or anybody
else. We will follow the proposal of our South African
friend and put forward a draft resolution about that.
As the President of the Security Council this
month, I would suggest that I thank the briefers and
United Nations officials for their interventions so that
participants do not need to repeat words of thanks.
However, of course, all members are free to do it
individually.
We would like meetings to really be interactive, so
participants should not hesitate to ask questions. Also,
please use the two-finger rule if you have a question
that you want to put to a speaker and, at the end, I
will ask all the briefers if they are ready to respond
to questions. Let us see how it works. We are not
doing this to annoy members, but because we believe
in the Security Council. We believe that this is a very
important body and that, at a time when there are many
difficult issues on the international agenda, we have to
meet the expectations of our citizens and make it work.
I thank everyone very much for giving me the
chance to say a few words at the beginning of the
routine agenda.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (S/2019/198)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Canada and Haiti to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations; Ms. Veronica Michelle Bachelet Jeria,
United Nations High Commissioner for Human
19-09758

03/04/2019

The situation concerning Haiti

Rights; and Ms. Loune Viaud, Executive Director of
Zanmi Lasante.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. João
Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/198, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief the Security
Council on recent developments in the situation in Haiti
and on the implementation of resolution 2410 (2018), in
the context of the Council’s discussions on the recently
issued report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/198).
I am pleased to be accompanied today by His
Excellency Mr. Bocchit Edmond, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Haiti, Ms. Michelle Bachelet, United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, and Ms. Loune
Viaud, who is beside me.
(spoke in English)
Since the briefing by Special Representative La
Lime in February and the publication of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) on 1 March,
developments in Haiti continue to combine progress in
some areas and volatility or stagnation in others. While
efforts to improve the security situation yield mitigated
results, political uncertainty has continued with the fall
of the Government.
No violent demonstrations have taken place since
the 10 days of unrest in February, which regrettably
led to 41 deaths and 100 injuries, according to the
most recent estimates, and limitations to the enjoyment
of human rights. The repeated mobilization calls
by opposition and activist groups to the population,
demanding the resignation of the President, gained little
traction. Nevertheless, rival gang clashes, potentially
mirroring conflicting interests linked to criminality,
continued to disrupt life in the southern neighbourhoods
of Port-au-Prince and to produce isolated incidents in

S/PV. 8502

the North and Artibonite regions. In that context, we
strongly condemn the attack on 27 March by heavily
armed individuals against the Chilean Ambassador’s
convoy, which was visiting a project of a Chilean
non-governmental organization in Croix de Bouquets,
leaving one person dead and three individuals injured.
The Haitian National Police (HNP) continued to
demonstrate its capacity to handle security threats
in the country, including through the planning and
execution of anti-gang operations, with limited support
from MINUJUSTH. Furthermore, the reactivation
by President Moïse of the National Commission for
Disarmament, Dismantlement and Reintegration on
12 March is an important step towards the assumption
of national ownership in violence reduction efforts.
Through its community violence reduction expertise,
MINUJUSTH is identifying areas of support for the
implementation of the Commission’s mandate.
On the political front, on 18 March, in a tumultuous
sequence of events, Prime Minister Céant’s Government
was subjected to a motion of no confidence by
Parliament’s Lower Chamber of Deputies, with 93 votes
in favour, 6 against and 3 abstentions, after an earlier
interpellation session at the Senate failed to reach a
quorum. President Moïse has initiated consultations
for the selection of his third Government since he took
office in February 2017 and has appointed Minister of
Culture Jean Michel Lapin as an interim Prime Minister
of the caretaker Government.
On the socioeconomic front, an agreement reached
on 8 March among the International Monetary Fund,
the Haitian Government and the Central Bank of Haiti
has initially created a sense of optimism able to boost
the fledging economy, which is characterized by high
inflation, at 17 per cent, and a depreciating national
currency. The concessional zero per-cent, three-year
loan of $229 million was designed to provide support
to the most vulnerable sectors of the population, while
promoting governance reform and anti-corruption
measures. However, it is no longer going forward,
pending the appointment of a new Cabinet. The same
is true for the submission of the draft 2018-19 State
budget to Parliament and an electoral law for the
October elections.
The establishment by President Moïse on
25 February of a facilitation committee for an
intra-Haitian dialogue has the potential to revitalize the
national cohesion process. The five-member committee,

19-097583/28

S/PV.8502

The situation concerning Haiti

including four women, has started consultations with
a broad range of stakeholders and is developing the
dialogue methodology. Its report on the way forward is
to be submitted by the end of its 90-day mandate. While
MINUJUSTH supports the work of the committee,
including with expertise advising on technical and
procedural aspects, the process of national dialogue
is a complex one, especially in a context of lingering
mistrust and polarization. In that respect, stronger
efforts are required from all key actors to ensure the
success of the committee’s work and the crafting of a
national vision able to bring about the economic reform
essential to a healthy economy and to attracting direct
investment, as well as measures for social protection,
improving the rule of law, the fight against corruption,
and, more urgently, the organization of the October
elections in a timely manner and in accordance with
international standards.
(spoke in French)
The end of peacekeeping in Haiti is within reach.
In that context, in order to create the conditions for a
successful transition, MINUJUSTH will continue to
implement its mandate to continue and anchor progress
in the implementation of the benchmarks. While
developments in the situation in Haiti since last July
have underlined the country’s political fluidity and
economic fragility, we cannot lose sight of the progress
made over the years and, more recently, in strengthening
the country’s institutions, with the Haitian National
Police at the forefront. Looking at the matrix in annex
I of the report before the Council, members can see
that the Haitian National Police’s five-year strategic
development plan for 2017-2021 is on track. The ratio
of police officers per 1,000 inhabitants is 1.32, close to
the target of 1.45, and the percentage of HNP personnel
present in the regions has exceeded 35 per cent.
We support the Haitian leaders’ wish to end
peacekeeping in Haiti and the mandate of MINUJUSTH
in October of this year, as well as their desire for
the Haitian authorities to take full responsibility for
the country’s security and the responsibility that it
entails. We are confident of the Haitian National
Police’s ability to manage risks to the security without
international operational support. For its part, the
United Nations will continue to provide strategic
advice to the HNP on its institutional development and
on strengthening its logistical capacities, including
through bilateral assistance.
4/28

03/04/2019

At the same time, the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to continue to support Haiti with good
offices, human rights and advisory capacities is based
on our assessment of the most pressing United Nations
assistance needs. We believe that the recommended
small strategic advisory office, whose functions are
described in the Secretary-General’s report, is the ideal
configuration to address such needs in Haiti at this
time. Recent developments have only served to affirm
that assessment. They have also again highlighted the
importance of making parallel progress towards the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
through the activities of the United Nations country
team in order to address the socioeconomic causes of
instability in Haiti.
If the Secretary-General’s recommendations
are adopted, MINUJUSTH’s work over the next six
months will be devoted to supporting the priorities
of the Haitian leadership and people, as I mentioned
earlier, as well as any other urgent priorities that meet
the benchmarks. At the same time, we would therefore
phase out some activities, withdraw the operational
presence of the United Nations police and prepare for
a smooth transition to a post-peacekeeping presence. It
will be a period of intense work, in which the sustained
attention and political support of the Council to the
Haitian people, the Mission and the preparations for
the transition will help to maximize the impact of our
collective efforts and ensure their continued success.
I would like to call on the members of the Council,
as well as the countries of the region, to increase their
engagement with Haiti during this critical period.
Options for such engagement include bilateral support
to the country’s development priorities, as outlined in
the United Nations Development Assistance Framework
for 2017-2021, in particular to strengthen national
capacities for stability and the rule of law. Support
similar to the humanitarian priorities reflected in the
2019 humanitarian response plan, in particular food
security, disaster management and the interruption of
cholera transmission, which now seems achievable, will
strengthen the resilience and preparedness of the Haitian
people, thereby achieving continued progress towards
the Sustainable Development Goals. In that context, I
welcome the recent request of the Government of Haiti
to the Secretary-General to access the Peacebuilding
Fund. Discussions are ongoing on targeting sectors that
can be catalysts for further strengthening stability in
the country.
19-09758

03/04/2019

The situation concerning Haiti

S/PV. 8502

The United Nations partnership with Haiti is
expected to develop in the near future, in line with
our discussions with Haitian leaders and other key
stakeholders. However, that partnership will remain
strong and rooted in our ongoing commitment to
democratic progress, security and prosperity for the
Haitian people.

since last July. Since July 2018 at least 60 people have
been killed, including members of the Haitian National
Police, and many more injured. From 7 to 15 February,
the longest and most violent protest in years almost
entirely paralysed the country. Hospitals and conditions
in prisons were affected by the unrest, with food, water
and medicine less accessible.

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.

While verification during and after the protests
showed that some members of the Haitian National
Police were the perpetrators of human rights violations,
overall the police demonstrated a greater adherence to
human rights norms compared with previous protests.
The Haitian authorities responded by announcing
measures to curb high prices, raise wages, attack
corruption and act on the PetroCaribe case. We support
and commend these important efforts. In addition,
ensuring accountability for violence while fostering a
constructive and inclusive dialogue among the various
actors of Haitian society will also be essential to
stability and sustainable development.

(spoke in English)
I now give the floor to Ms. Bachelet.
Ms. Bachelet: I thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting me to update the Security Council on the
human rights situation in Haiti. It is an opportunity to
mark the progress made on human rights to date and to
also highlight how the Council can continue supporting
Haiti’s commitments to human rights and prevention.
Haiti today is a very different country from what it
was in 2004, when United Nations peacekeeping troops
were deployed. Yet while the scale of human rights
violations recorded then does not compare with the
current situation, serious structural challenges persist.
Social grievances, corruption and weak institutions
constitute major obstacles to the realization of human
rights in Haiti. With about 59 per cent of the population
estimated to live below the poverty line, the country
remains the poorest in the Americas and faces
considerable economic and social difficulties, including
limited employment opportunities, particularly for
the youth. Basic services such as health care, water,
electricity and education are out of the reach of many.
This is exacerbated by Haiti’s vulnerability to natural
disasters, with every earthquake and hurricane further
impeding development and intensifying the already
precarious living conditions of many.

Despite significant improvements in the
professionalism of the Haitian National Police, incidents
of serious human rights violations, including cases of
summary executions, continue to be reported, with
limited accountability. The National Police conducts
administrative investigations into the majority of
allegations; yet judicial proceedings are rarely initiated
against the alleged perpetrators. In 2018, only 12 per
cent of cases of confirmed human rights violations
were prosecuted, and no judicial measures were
taken in the most emblematic cases. Perpetrators are
consequently emboldened, and silenced victims may
develop grievances.

Poverty creates a fertile environment for criminal
activity to thrive, especially in the most underprivileged
areas of the capital, where heavily armed gangs
take advantage of the limited presence of the State.
Competition between rival gangs has resulted in deaths,
sexual violence against women and girls, and the
destruction and looting of houses. As tensions persist,
the protection of the population must be addressed
urgently, including by law-enforcement entities.

The weakness of the judicial system also has a
negative impact on the penitentiary system. More than
75 per cent of inmates are estimated to be in pre-trial
detention — on average for 1,100 days — well over the
limit set by national law. Prolonged pre-trial detention
contributes to extreme overcrowding and practices
amounting to degrading and inhumane treatment.
Prisons lack basic sanitary conditions, and few
detainees have access to legal counsel. Accountability
should be considered as an effective measure to build
trust in institutions. Strengthening the bedrock of the
rule of law is a means to prevent further human rights
violations and enable the advent of a sustainable peace.

These long-standing issues have contributed to
triggering increasingly violent unrest across Haiti

The delegate Minister for Human Rights and
the Fight against Extreme Poverty — appointed in

19-097585/28

S/PV.8502

The situation concerning Haiti

September 2018 — will contribute to re-energizing
the Government’s engagement on human rights and
to restarting key actions that had been pending since
2014. I encourage the Haitian authorities to seize
the opportunity of this important appointment to
ensure that the needed leadership is provided to the
Inter-Ministerial Committee on Human Rights. The
Committee has recently made strides towards the
development of a national action plan on human rights.
I encourage authorities to bring this to fruition so as
to offer a comprehensive and realistic road map to
strengthening human rights in Haiti.
Haiti’s national human rights institution — the Office
of the National Human Rights Ombudsperson — has
been acknowledged since 2013 as independent and
functional, reflecting the highest status of compliance
with the Paris Principles endorsed by the General
Assembly. I welcome the significant increase in the
Ombudsperson’s budget, recently announced by the
executive, and the efforts of the Ombudsperson to
consolidate the Office’s presence across Haiti.
I am encouraged by the engagement of civil society
for the promotion and protection of human rights and
in accompanying victims of human rights violations.
Yet it has not been able to fully assume a monitoring
and advocacy role. Some civil-society organizations
continue to be targeted by acts of intimidation.
I encourage all stakeholders to work together to
strengthen the human rights protection system.
Haiti’s return to constitutional order following the
presidential, legislative and local elections in 2017 was
a significant achievement. Today, as Haiti stands at the
crossroads between peacekeeping and development,
we must recognize the progress accomplished. We
must also continue building on it, or risk losing it. I
encourage the Council to provide the people of Haiti
with the support necessary to strengthen institutions,
fight against impunity and promote and protect human
rights as a foundation for stability and development.
My Office intends to pursue its work in Haiti
through a possible follow-on United Nations mission
and, eventually — something on which we are working
jointly with the Government — a stand-alone presence,
with the support of the Security Council and Member
States. We want to remain engaged and to support
Haiti’s commitment to achieving democratic and
economic development so that the rights of all people
in Haiti are upheld.
6/28

03/04/2019

The President: I thank Ms. Bachelet for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Viaud.
Ms. Viaud: First, I would like to thank the Council
for the invitation to provide an update on the situation
in Haiti. Haiti is not only the country I was born in, but
also the country I have dedicated my life to serving.
My name is Loune Viaud, and I am the Executive
Director of Zanmi Lasante, one of Haiti’s largest
non-governmental health-care providers and sister
organization to Partners in Health, based in Boston.
Partners in Health is a social justice organization
providing access to education and health care to
communities across four continents.
I am honoured to have the opportunity to brief the
Security Council today on the situation of women and
girls in Haiti. I would like to thank MADRE and the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security
for their efforts to ensure that the voices of women in
civil society are heard.
Over the past 30 years, Haiti has been through
significant challenges, including the devastating 2010
earthquake and cholera outbreak, from which we
continue to recover. We have also seen a number of
positive changes in my country: roads exist where they
never did before, access to health services has increased,
and we are seeing better partnerships between local
organizations and their foreign counterparts on health
and education. Yet much more remains to be completed.
The United Nations promised to right Haiti’s wrongs in
2014, four years after the cholera outbreak began, and
we hold it to this promise.
My briefing today will focus on three specific
areas: addressing inequality, sexual and gender-based
violence and women’s political participation.
Addressing the root causes of conflict has been
increasingly highlighted by this body and the broader
United Nations system as an important priority.
Years after the United Nations first deployed a peace
operation in Haiti, my country serves as an example of
how failure to do so can contribute to instability.
Today women in Haiti face barriers to achieving
basic access to services, education and health care. For
example, Haiti has one of the highest maternal mortality
rates in the world: 359 women die for every 100,000
live births in Haiti. Watching a woman die because she
reached us too late, or seeing families devastated after
19-09758

03/04/2019

The situation concerning Haiti

losing a mother, a wife or a daughter in childbirth, are
images one cannot forget. They haunt me, and they
should haunt all of us. Childbirth should not be a death
sentence in Haiti.
Cancer is another issue that primarily affects
women in Haiti; 75 per cent of our patients are women.
In partnership with the Haitian Ministry of Health,
Zanmi Lasante has provided free cancer care to
patients across the country for almost 20 years. Today I
am friends with Roselene Jean, our first cancer patient.
Without the care we provided, she would no longer be
with us.
No woman should die in Haiti because of a lack of
access to obstetric care or cancer. The lack of access
to women’s health care poses one of the greatest
challenges to development in Haiti. Reinforcing the
relationship between sustainable development and
peace and security should therefore be central to the
way the Council addresses the situation in Haiti and is
fundamental to placing my country on the path to peace
and stability.
The difficult work to end sexual and gender-based
violence in Haiti remains a silent fight. It is a topic no
one wants to discuss, yet it can change a young woman’s
life forever. More than 40 per cent of all sexual assault
victims in Haiti are under the age of 25, with many
whom we serve being below the age of 15. I speak
on behalf of all survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence when I say that impunity for violence against
women and girls in Haiti must end.
We need not only a comprehensive law on genderbased violence, we must also educate Haitians to
respect women and girls and shift the harmful social
norms that cause the violence in the first place. The
Security Council and the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) should work
with the Haitian Government to advance the adoption
of the draft penal code and ensure that the definition
of sexual assault under the code is based on consent.
That would bring the penal code further in line with
international legal standards and ensure access to
justice for survivors.
As service providers, we know the critical
importance of medical care for survivors. We also
know that throughout the country such services are
insufficient. Survivors of gender-based violence need
timely and comprehensive care to address the risks of
sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV, as well

S/PV. 8502

as unwanted pregnancies. That means psychosocial
support, medical intervention and fair and safe access
to the justice system.
Haiti is a small country full of larger-than-life
women. Those women have helped their communities
and families flourish despite the most dire and tragic of
conditions. Those communities and families sacrifice
everything for their children’s education and survival.
Yet girls have limited role models or advocates in Haiti’s
halls of power. For a better future for our mothers,
sisters, cousins and daughters, we must support women’s
participation in public and political life at all levels
and advocate for better laws, affordable health care,
education and justice. The women of Haiti have so much
to offer their country and the world. However, we need
the Council’s help to make that happen. The Council
should call on MINUJUSTH to build the capacity of
local organizations to provide the Government with
high-quality gender-sensitive services for survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence. Such work must
continue through the upcoming transitional period and
United Nations mission reconfiguration.
The Council should ensure sustainable and
continued funding and mission support in addressing
the urgent humanitarian needs of women and girls,
including sexual and reproductive health services for
gender-based violence survivors, and services in the
wake of natural disasters. The Council should also call
on Haiti to take the important step of creating greater
legal protections for women and girls. That should
include supporting the adoption of a comprehensive
law on gender-based violence and sections of the 2017
criminal code reform proposal that seek to fill some of
the protection gaps for survivors of sexual and genderbased violence.
In any transition or drawdown, the Council should
ensure that any positive gains made on gender equality
are preserved and properly resourced. In its consideration
of the forthcoming report on MINUJUSTH and in
any briefings, senior United Nations officials should
include information on efforts to ensure women’s
full and meaningful participation in all aspects of
parliamentary elections, including as candidates and
voters and as part of formal electoral mechanisms.
Women and girls in Haiti want to stay hopeful. As
author Rebecca Solnit said,

19-097587/28

S/PV.8502

The situation concerning Haiti

“Hope is not a lottery ticket you can sit on the sofa
and clutch, feeling lucky. It is an axe you break
down doors with in an emergency”.
The emergency is now.
The President: I thank Ms. Viaud for her briefing,
which impressed us.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
We will now inaugurate our hourglass.
Mr. Cohen (United States): I am glad to be the first
to be subjected to the hourglass test.
We would like to thank Foreign Minister Edmond
for joining us in the Security Council today.
The United States welcomes this opportunity
to address human rights, not only in Haiti but in the
broader context of peacekeeping operations. Promoting
respect for human rights, as embodied in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, is a central goal of
our foreign policy. The protection of human rights
helps secure peace, deter aggression, promote the
rule of law, combat crime and corruption, strengthen
democracies and prevent humanitarian crises. Human
rights are inextricably linked to both the mission of the
Security Council and to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We rely on the information gathered by the
human rights teams of various peacekeeping operations
and honour the courage of peacekeepers on display as
they carry out their task.
The United States has just released its annual
country reports on human rights for 2018. When we
document human rights issues, we shine a spotlight
on the plight of victims and show our commitment to
exposing perpetrators. Through ongoing monitoring
and exposure of human rights challenges, we use our
influence and power to help promote human rights
and fundamental freedoms and effect change by
Governments and societies.
We have seen positive change in Haiti. The
Haitian National Police (HNP) has taken steps to
impose systematic discipline on officers found to have
committed abuses or fraud. As we have stated on several
occasions, the HNP can further enhance its effectiveness
by increasing accountability and transparency. As
we note in our human rights report, there have been
improvements in the still very problematic prison and
8/28

03/04/2019

detention conditions. We also not the progress made in
filling positions in Haiti’s judiciary.
The United States welcomes Haiti’s progress in
promoting respect for human rights. We commit to
continuing to work with the Government of Haiti to
further address the country’s significant challenges,
which include isolated allegations of unlawful killings
by police, the excessive use of force by police, arbitrary
detention, harsh and life-threatening prison conditions,
a judiciary subject to corruption and outside influence,
physical attacks on journalists, widespread corruption
and impunity and human trafficking, including forced
labour. The United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) has a central role in promoting
human rights. Its task to strengthen national human
rights institutions is essential to promoting the rule
of law, democratic institution-building and security
in Haiti. It contributes to ensuring accountability as
well as respect for human rights, including of women
and children.
Last month, the Secretary-General provided
an assessment (S/2019/198) of where the United
Nations and Haiti stand with achieving the goals and
benchmarks of MINUJUSTH. The dashboard is always
a very helpful tool in seeing that. We agree with his
assessment that Haiti is on a positive trajectory, with
improvements in the professionalism and efficiency
of rule-of-law and security institutions, as well as in
the protection of human rights. We also agree that the
HNP has been increasingly self-sufficient in providing
security across the country.
That brings me to the upcoming transition, as
we prepare for the final renewal of the MINUJUSTH
mandate. We look forward to continued updates from
the Secretariat regarding the Secretary-General’s
recommended follow-on special political mission, so that
the Council can establish the special political mission
in a timely manner and ensure a smooth transition. The
mission should include a human rights pillar that can
further advance progress achieved by MINUJUSTH on
human rights benchmarks. In the interim, we expect
the Government of Haiti, together with MINUJUSTH,
to keep working to achieve the benchmarks until the
drawdown of the Mission and beyond.
We expect a renewal of the MINUJUSTH mandate
for six months, until 15 October. This timetable is
consistent with the two-year exit strategy and the
assessment of the Secretary-General. As his 1 March
19-09758

03/04/2019

The situation concerning Haiti

report states, unless there are mounting challenges to
the Government’s capacity to respond to the crisis, the
HNP will be able to fully assume responsibility for the
security and protection of Haiti by 15 October. The
United States shares this assessment and notes that it
reflects the will of the Government of Haiti to conclude
the peacekeeping operation by that time.
We do not believe that the Council should link
MINUJUSTH’s scheduled transition to legislative and
local elections in Haiti, scheduled for October. Rather,
the United States encourages the Government of Haiti in
support of its election planning. In this broader context,
we encourage the President and elected representatives
of Haiti to work together in accordance with Haiti’s
Constitution to form a new Government to serve the
Haitian people as soon as possible. We continue to
support a constructive and inclusive dialogue among
Government leaders from across the Haitian political
spectrum, civil society, faith-based organizations and
the private sector to find lasting solutions to the current
political and economic crisis.
We are convinced that genuine dialogue and
compromise leading to a transparent and accountable
Government can best serve the needs and the aspirations
of the Haitian people.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I will follow your instructions, Sir, and refrain
from thanking the briefers. I would nevertheless like
to welcome the presence of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Haiti among us.
I will focus on three points: first, the country’s
political situation; secondly, current human rights
challenges; and, thirdly, the importance of continuity
and the gradual transition from the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) to
the new mission.
First, concerning the political situation, although
Haiti has experienced weeks marked by tensions, it is
crucial that those tensions do not jeopardize the progress
made in recent years. The violent demonstrations that
took place remind us of the need to pursue institutional
reforms. Political instability can be resolved only
through an inclusive internal dialogue to address
socioeconomic challenges. Democratic governance
involves constructive dialogue with the opposition
and civil society, including on the sensitive issue of
PetroCaribe funds and combating corruption. Moreover,

S/PV. 8502

the renewal of legislative power is a key step towards
the consolidation of democracy. Belgium reiterates
the importance of rapidly adopting the electoral law
and updating the electoral lists to pave the way for the
holding of credible, inclusive and timely elections.
Secondly, with regard to human rights, we welcome
the appointment of a delegate minister for human rights
and the fight against poverty. Belgium also welcomes
the prompt reaction of the Haitian authorities following
reports of human rights violations committed by the
Haitian National Police. In addition, we are pleased
to note the publication of the first public report of the
Office of the National Human Rights Ombudsperson.
We call on the authorities to further strengthen the
capacity of the General Inspectorate of the national
police and to implement its plan in response to the
recommendations of the Human Rights Council.
Thirdly, Belgium underlines the importance
of continuity and a smooth transition during the
withdrawal phase of MINUJUSTH. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s recommendations concerning the
future United Nations presence in Haiti and support
the choice of a special political mission. We believe
that a mandate under Chapter VI is appropriate, and
we note that such an option was favoured by the
Haitian authorities in their meetings with the strategic
assessment mission.
It is important that high-level strategic political
and consultative capacities be available on the ground
to support the Haitian authorities. We advocate for
the inclusion of the following components within the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral: good offices, police development, justice
reform, reduction of community violence, penitentiary
administration and the protection and the promotion of
basic rights, including women’s rights. We believe that
it is important not to dissociate the various elements of
the criminal system by keeping the elements of support
for the police and the justice and penitentiary systems
together. A holistic approach will be needed within
the mission.
Belgium is convinced of the need for a robust
human rights component in the future mission.
Important emphasis should be placed on encouraging
women’s participation, with regard to which I am
merely echoing what Ms. Loune Viaud said earlier.
The future mandate should also include mechanisms

19-097589/28

S/PV.8502

The situation concerning Haiti

for regularly evaluating the goals and results achieved,
including through specific indicators.
Lastly, we often talk about the transition, but
it is mainly to the national authorities that a series
of functions will be transferred. Responsibility lies
first and foremost with the Haitian Government, in
particular through the adoption and implementation of
legislation aimed at consolidating the rule of law.
In conclusion, I express my gratitude for the
important work of MINUJUSTH.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Belgium for having followed our
proposal to discuss only the relevant points to be
covered in representatives’ statements.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): You
have not been very democratic today, Mr. President, as
you have subjected us to this barbaric tool, but we will
make do.
We note with interest that the mandate of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) will end on 15 October, as envisaged
by the Security Council. The encouraging gains made
by the Mission in several areas must not obscure the
many challenges facing the transition to a new United
Nations presence in Haiti. In that regard, my delegation
would like to comment on three major issues relating to
human rights, the fragility of the current sociopolitical
situation and the activities planned for the new
United Nations mission in the wake of the withdrawal
of MINUJUSTH.
With regard to human rights, Côte d’Ivoire
welcomes the efforts of the Haitian authorities aimed
at their promotion, which is a key component of the
MINUJUSTH mandate and a necessary condition
for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
My country welcomes the development of a national
action plan on human rights, pursuant to the April
2017 recommendations of the Human Rights Council,
and the launch of the new action plan to address
prolonged pretrial detention, as well as the adoption of
the draft criminal code and the draft code of criminal
procedure to fill structural gaps. My delegation remains
concerned, however, about the conditions of detention
in prisons and the persistence of activities by armed
gangs. In that regard, we urge the Haitian authorities to
redouble their efforts to address the persistent problems
associated with prison overcrowding.
10/28

03/04/2019

In addition, Côte d’Ivoire appreciates the efforts
of the Haitian Government to implement the national
plan for gender equality and the national plan for the
elimination of violence against women, which are
part of the policy to promote gender equality and
empower women. My country believes that actions
taken to promote human rights should also consider
the improvement of the existing humanitarian system
in place and the allocation of adequate resources to the
humanitarian aid programme in Haiti.
With regard to the fragility of the sociopolitical
situation in Haiti, my country regrets that the
recurrence of social disputes is jeopardizing the longsought sociopolitical stability. It would therefore seem
necessary to take urgent multisectoral measures to
restore and strengthen public trust in public institutions
and to attract national and foreign investment. To that
end, Côte d’Ivoire encourages the Government to
intensify dialogue with all Haitian actors, including
civil society, so as to forge a common vision on the
priorities concerning peacebuilding and the responses
needed to meet the immediate needs of the population.
In addition, my delegation welcomes the
commitment of the Government of Haiti to the holding
of the 2019 elections on the agreed dates. It therefore
calls for a consensual reform of the electoral process
that would guarantee the holding of transparent,
credible and inclusive elections.
With regard to the new United Nations mission,
following the withdrawal of MINUJUSTH, my country
supports the Secretary-General’s recommendations
and encourages Haitian stakeholders to strengthen
cooperation with the United Nations so as to identify
together the priorities of the special political mission,
which will be called on to consolidate democratic gains
and contribute to socioeconomic development.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire calls on the entire
international community to support the Haitian people
and Government in their efforts to create the necessary
conditions for the restoration of lasting peace and
stability in Haiti.
The President (spoke in French): I will speak very
slowly until the sand runs out.
(spoke in English)
I am very disciplined.
19-09758

03/04/2019

The situation concerning Haiti

S/PV. 8502

Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): My delegation appreciates the
convening of this meeting and the important briefings
delivered by our guest speakers: Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix, High Commissioner Bachelet and
Executive Director Viaud, whose heartfelt words
touched everyone here. I would also like to welcome
the presence of His Excellency Haitian Minister for
Foreign Affairs Bocchit Edmond.

access to psychological assistance, vocational training
and leadership opportunities. Young Haitians need to
be able to count on having opportunities to develop
their skills and receive and acquire knowledge, as they
are the driving engine of the sustainable development of
their people. We recently made available to the Office
of Rule of Law and Security Institutions our experience
in the area of social inclusion with a view to spurring
the implementation of similar projects in Haiti.

The Dominican Republic and Haiti are two nations
that are irrevocably tethered by geography and history.
Our past is as connected to our neighbour’s as our
future undoubtedly is, and that requires a common
commitment to the well-being of our peoples. That is
why, at the bilateral level, our solidarity with Haiti is
ongoing, as is our desire for the relations between our
two countries to make progress in all areas.

We are steadfast in sharing the Secretary-General’s
desire to move towards a new stage in the relations
between the United Nations and Haiti. However, we
also believe that it is important to not rush, so as to not
jeopardize the gains already achieved. We believe that
only once the achievements made in Haiti have proved
to be sound and sustainable can new forms of relations
be explored.

At the multilateral level, we are pleased to note
that all those present also recognize the importance of
ensuring that Haiti receive all possible support in order
to fully develop its capacities and improve the living
conditions of its citizens. We therefore support all the
initiatives that have so far been implemented by the
United Nations for the stabilization and reconstruction
of Haiti.

Despite the hopeful progress already mentioned,
the report notes that only 49 per cent of the benchmarks
will be met or will remain on a positive trend. The others
show a static or negative trend. The report therefore
points to several areas where significant structural
weaknesses persist.

The transition from the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti to the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) in October
2017 marked a milestone by moving from a stabilization
operation to a justice support Mission. In doing so, the
progress made was recognized, which led to elections
that the international community recognized as valid,
both for their transparency and smooth running. The
emphasis is now on supporting and reinforcing areas
such as the training of the Haitian National Police and
the judicial institutions. Since then and according to
the report of the Secretary General (S/2019/198), we
have seen clear progress made in the strengthening of
those areas, with greater capacity for the independent
action of the Haitian National Police, the uptick in
the number of officers and its increased access to
training programmes.
We are also optimistic about the successes of
MINUJUSTH’s
community
violence-reduction
programme, as well as the drafting of a new law to
combat gender-based violence, among other actions.
That programme will be of particular benefit to young
people, given that they have support in cases of risk and

In spite of the increasing professionalization of
the police, it still lacks the tools to ensure consistent
performance, with adherence to human rights and a
proportional use of force. Its investigative capacity is
low, as well as the rate of cases that is referred to the
courts. According to the report, a significant portion
of the recent protests surpassed the Haitian National
Police’s capacity to respond, in addition to the conditions
not being in place to secure the budgetary allocation
necessary to just maintain the pace of progress to date.
At the same time, we also see that the report
concludes that progress in judicial matters has been
very limited. While the number of officers, prisons and
their staff has increased, the rate of pre-trial detention,
which exceed two years, as well as the rate of deaths
in custody have increased. We also have not seen the
legislative advances needed to remove the obstacles to
access to justice that afflict citizens and to give due
attention to cases involving minors.
The Special Envoy concludes that the conditions
are not yet in place to ensure political stability. In fact,
she believes that the risk presented by violent armed
groups has increased, and that there is a very high
level of mistrust within the population regarding the
effectiveness of the judiciary.

19-0975811/28

S/PV.8502

The situation concerning Haiti

Haiti also lacks system to respond to threats, such
as natural disasters, environmental degradation, cholera
transmission and food insecurity. In the meantime, the
report notes that, by its publication, only 13 per cent of
the funds pledged for the humanitarian response plan
had been mobilized, which would benefit 2.2 million
people — only 13 per cent.
From an economic point of view, the situation has
been seriously affected by a fiscal shortfall, inflation
and the devaluation of the Haitian gourde, with the
well-known impacts on governance. In addition, both
tariff and non-tariff barriers are causing artificially
high prices and stimulating the illegal trade in goods.
For all those points, in our opinion, there is reason
enough to prompt a rethinking of the time frame for
implementing the road map proposed in the SecretaryGeneral’s report.
The situation facing the interim Government,
which was formed after the recent resignation of the
Prime Minister, Mr. Jean Henry Céant, has highlighted
the fragility of the strides made to date on the way
towards entrenching democratic institutions. The truth
is that Haiti is in danger of getting caught in a vicious
cycle. To break it, the key is no other than resolving
the political instability in the country. Understanding
that will make it easier for us to have a clearer idea of
the next steps to take. It is absolutely crucial that the
legislative elections scheduled for October of this year
take place in a climate of peace, calm and transparency,
in accordance with Haitian law. The ability of the
Haitian Government to lead this process is key to the
legitimacy of the democratic system and, therefore, to
the current and future stability of the country.
In that connection, we must ensure the full
participation of women in this process as candidates,
as voters and as part of formal electoral mechanisms
to ensure equitable representation. The prudent thing
to therefore do at this time is to leave all doors open
with respect to the ways that the United Nations can
help. The Council could assess whether the conditions
are right for postponing the start of the dissolution of
MINUJUSTH. In addition, we call for the continued
preparation of a political mission to make substantive
contributions to the creation of solid and modern
institutions. We believe that such a mission should
be ambitious in scope and support the exploration of
all available mechanisms, including an exhaustive
study of how to include Haiti on the agenda of the
12/28

03/04/2019

Peacebuilding Commission and ensure its access to the
Peacebuilding Fund.
The Haitian people and the Government have
shown that they are willing to do the work to fix their
situation. As such, they deserve the unconditional
support of the Security Council. If we succeed in
consolidating political stability in Haiti, it will become
the cornerstone upon which to bolster the economic,
social and human rights progress that the Haitian
people deserve and demand.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the convening of this meeting and thank
the panellists for their informative briefings. We also
welcome the participation of the Haitian Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Bocchit Edmond.
Peru is closely monitoring the situation in Haiti and
supports the important role played by the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH),
in line with the goals and indicators proposed by the
Secretary-General for the Mission’s sustainable exit.
Recognizing the significant progress that Haiti
has made in recent years with the support of the
United Nations, we remain concerned about the
political volatility, institutional fragility and economic
stagnation that have exacerbated social tensions and
adversely affected the humanitarian situation in the
country. In that regard, we welcome President Moïse’s
initiatives to promote national dialogue, as well as the
governance pact. Moreover, the fight against corruption
and impunity must go hand in hand with those efforts
with a view to strengthening the rule of law and the
people’s confidence in their institutions. In that regard,
it would be useful to have additional information
regarding the Government’s announcement to create an
independent commission to monitor the investigations
of the PetroCaribe case.
We endorse United Nations support for the
Government of Haiti with regard to the legislative
elections scheduled for October, and we stress the
need for Congress to expeditiously approve the law
on the permanent electoral council. We also commend
the strengthening of the operational capacities of the
Haitian National Police. It is crucial to continue to
make progress in the implementation of the strategic
development plan in order to strengthen respect for
human rights, oversight capacities and accountability
mechanisms. We also believe that it is essential to
revitalize the mechanisms for reducing communal
19-09758

03/04/2019

The situation concerning Haiti

violence, along with programmes for the regulation of
arms and ammunition. That approach should replace
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration policies,
which are no longer suited to the context in Haiti.
We stress the need to finalize the national action
plan on human rights, specifically to promote women’s
rights, as well as to ensure the timely approval of the
necessary pending legislative pieces to strengthen
access to justice, which include the criminal code, as
noted by Ms. Viaud, the code of criminal procedure and
the law on prisons. In that connection, we welcome the
first round of the evaluation of prisons to be carried
out by the Directorate of Prison Administration with
a view to strengthening the resources devoted to this
area, which we hope, together with regulatory reforms,
will contribute to solving the acute problems of health
care and prison overcrowding.
Peru believes that, in line with resolution 2410
(2018), MINUJUSTH’s exit and transition process
must take into account the security conditions on the
ground and Haiti’s overall capacity to ensure stability
in its territory. It is a matter of taking the necessary
precautions — as noted by the representative of the
Dominican Republic — so as not to jeopardize the
progress achieved. In line with the Government’s
priorities, the new mission should pursue MINUJUSTH’s
efforts to strengthen the rule of law, train the Haitian
National Police, reduce communal violence, reform the
justice system, and protect and promote human rights.
In that regard, we agree with the Secretary-General
that the new mission should take the form of a strategic
advisory office that works in an integrated manner with
the country team. We believe that the Economic and
Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti and
the Peacebuilding Commission should continue to play
an important role in that new architecture in order to
ensure an adequately resourced, orderly and peaceful
transition that will allow for a sustained United Nations
presence that can respond and contribute effectively
and continually to Government efforts.
In conclusion, I wish to express Peru’s support for
the important responsibilities of MINUJUSTH and
the United Nations system on the ground, as well as
our firm commitment to ensuring the stability and
prosperity of Haiti and the region as a whole.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we sincerely thank the briefers and welcome

S/PV. 8502

the participation of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Haiti in this meeting.
In April 2004, that is 15 years ago and during the
German presidency of the Security Council, the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti was established
and tasked with restoring stability to Haiti. Since
then and to this day, the United Nations has achieved
success upon success at all levels thanks to the hard
work of all actors and staff members in the Mission. We
would like to express our appreciation and respect for
all they have done during this period, and in particular
to those who have sacrificed their lives in defence of
the purposes and principles of the United Nations,
embodied in the establishment of peace and security
and the restoration of stability to a founding Member
of our Organization. That led the Council to draw down
the Mission and to its replacement with another for
two years, tasked with supporting the justice system in
Haiti and planning for the future presence of the United
Nations beyond peacekeeping.
That Mission has pursued its tireless efforts, within
its mandate, to consolidate and build upon the successes
already achieved. We are today on the verge of the end
of that mandate. Before us are recommendations and
proposals of the Secretary-General, which have been
submitted after careful and meticulous assessment,
as well as after consultations with all stakeholders in
Haiti on the ideal future presence of the United Nations
following the closing of the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti.
Much progress has been made in recent years at
different levels, leading to an environment of relative
security and stability in Haiti. That is apparent, first,
in the professionalism and efficiency of the Haitian
National Police, as was seen in its handling of the
demonstrations this year, through which it earned
the respect and trust of the international community
concerning its ability to maintain security and
public order.
Second is the continued reduction of the reported
crimes as a result of the efforts of the United Nations
Mission and the Haitian National Police alike.
Thirdly, progress has been achieved in combating
the cholera epidemic as a result of the continued
support provided by the United Nations to the national
authorities in order to implement the national plan with
the aim of eradicating the epidemic.

19-0975813/28

S/PV.8502

The situation concerning Haiti

03/04/2019

Fourthly, the justice appointments of recent days
will positively affect the progress of the justice system
in the country and increase its efficiency, especially
after the adoption of the law on establishing and
organizing the National Council on Legal Aid.

At the outset, we wish to welcome the positive
gains and progress made in Haiti, particularly in the
development of the national police force, which showed
its professionalism and efficiency under heavy pressure
during the recent demonstrations.

There have also been many other successes that are
hard to enumerate. However, there are at the same time
numerous significant challenges that must be taken into
consideration. First, the scheduled legislative elections
next October will require tireless efforts from the
national authorities so as to ensure that they are held in
the best possible way. Secondly, the economic depression
has caused many problems that have affected the basic
needs of citizens and will require all parties and political
stakeholders to put aside their differences and engage in
a comprehensive national dialogue to agree a national
plan for implementing economic reforms and creating
an environment conducive to investment. Thirdly, the
overcrowding in the penitentiary system has negatively
affected the humanitarian situation. Fourthly, financial
shortcomings have undermined the strategic plan to
increase the efficiency of State institutions. Fifthly, all
forms of corruption must be combated and a foundation
laid for the achievement of good governance and the
promotion of the rule of law.

We wish to express our concern about the
deteriorating security situation in the country. The
recent protests throughout the country not only
exacerbated the humanitarian and human rights
situation but also undermined prospects for the conduct
of peaceful elections in October this year.

We must make a concerted effort to provide
support to the national authorities in order to overcome
those challenges so as to preserve the many gains
achieved. We therefore support the Secretary-General’s
recommendations and suggestions concerning the
establishment of a special political mission in Haiti
to provide good offices and advice for the duration of
one year.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Before we begin,
we would like to welcome and support the German
presidency for its innovation. We hope that drawing
open its curtains and shedding light on the Security
Council will lead to greater transparency in its work
and perhaps ultimately to the reform of the Council
demanded by most Member States, especially the
African States.
We would like to thank Germany for convening this
meeting following the recent developments in Haiti. We
will not thank the briefers, pursuant to the President’s
directive, but perhaps it would be appropriate to
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Haiti to
our meeting.
14/28

I would remind the Haitian Foreign Minister
that those events highlighted the persistent need for
reconciliation in the country. It is worth noting that
a State that takes steps towards reconciliation not
only unites its people and encourages a nationally
owned process but also, through those efforts, creates
environments that are conducive to more effective
institutions. It is in that context that the Foreign Minister
should understand that South Africa supports the call
by the Secretary-General for a national and inclusive
dialogue among Haitians in order to encourage calm
and long-term stability in their country.
The United Nations has historically played a
critical role in Haiti through the Secretary-General and
his good offices, by building the capacity of institutions
like the Haitian National Police, which is critical for
strengthening efforts aimed at the democratization in
Haiti. Furthermore, we believe that it is the role of the
United Nations and the Government, in partnership
with civil society organizations, to bring together
all disputing parties in order to reach an agreement
that benefits the people of Haiti. Civil society has
much to contribute in that regard given its experience
of realities on the ground, including the security
situation, the economic crisis and deteriorating
humanitarian conditions.
South Africa has noted the proposals of the
Secretary-General in his latest report on Haiti
(S/2019/198), particularly with regard to the drawdown
of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) and the establishment of a special
political mission thereafter. We believe it is important
that the Council continue to play a stabilizing role in
Haiti, which would require close monitoring of the
situation on the ground as well as a needs assessment,
particularly in the lead-up to the October elections.
19-09758

03/04/2019

The situation concerning Haiti

Furthermore, it is important to note that election
processes can give rise to uncertainty but also the
possibility of calm later on. As such, United Nations
support in the run-up to and aftermath of the elections
in Haiti will be important, including by working closely
with the Government and authorities of Haiti to ensure a
smooth transition as the MINUJUSTH mandate comes
to an end in October.
Finally, and ceding some of my time to my colleague
from the Dominican Republic, the continued support
of the international community for the Government
and the people of Haiti remains a critical element in
achieving security, stability and inclusive democracy in
the country and the region.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): This has been
an especially rich and informative meeting on Haiti,
thanks largely to our briefers this morning. I think the
presence of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights in the Chamber today reminds us all
that human rights are of vital importance, both in their
own right and across the other two pillars of the United
Nations. We know that States that violate human rights
are less prosperous, less stable, less able to meet the
demands of their people and more likely to pose a threat
to international peace and security. I want to focus on
three issues today.
First, I would like to address the issue of women
and peace and security. Ms. Viaud drew our attention to
the many barriers faced by women in Haiti, including
gender-based violence and a lack of access to health
care and justice. We strongly agree with the calls she
made this morning, in particular for improved services
to survivors of gender-based violence, especially
with regard to fair and safe access to justice, and for
ensuring that whatever United Nations entity succeeds
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH), it must ensure that any gains made on
gender equality are preserved and should also support
women’s protection and empowerment.
I would also echo the call that Ms. Viaud made for
improved participation by women in political life, a
point made by my Belgian and Dominican colleagues
as well. Surely that will help to accelerate progress
towards securing improved rights, justice and access
to services for women. I also agree that it is very
important that the United Nations, in its reports to the
Security Council, should focus on that issue and update
us on progress.

S/PV. 8502

Secondly, turning to the human rights situation in
Haiti, we very much agree with other speakers that,
while there has been progress in the human rights
situation in the country, that progress has been uneven
and serious concerns remain. We welcome the work
that has been done on the development of a national
action plan on human rights and the appointment of a
ministerial-level human rights focal point. We welcome
the other improvements mentioned in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2019/198).
However, at the same time, we remain concerned
about the human rights abuses allegedly committed by
the Haitian National Police during the demonstrations
of October and November 2018, including allegations
of summary executions. It is also a concern that,
according to the Secretary-General’s report, 74 per cent
of the prison population is still on pretrial detention
and the death rate of those in prison, according to this
helpful handout from the United Nations, has actually
increased from 11.8 to 14 per 1,000 inmates.
Those concerns remain. I want to emphasize
that, if Haiti is to accelerate on its path to stability
and prosperity based on a reinforced social contract
between the State and its citizens, then human rights
need to come front and centre, and that is a particularly
important element of the shift away from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding that we really hope can be given a
higher priority.
In the spirit of interactivity, Mr. President, you
encouraged us to ask questions. It would be useful
to know from the United Nations when the results of
the MINUJUSTH investigation of events at La Saline
will be completed and hopefully made available to the
Security Council.
Thirdly, and finally, on the question of the
reconfiguration of the United Nations presence
that many speakers have touched upon, the United
Kingdom broadly supports the Secretary-General’s
proposal for MINUJUSTH to be succeed by a
special political mission. We especially welcome the
fact that human rights and women’s protection and
empowerment will be at the centre of its mandate. I
hear the concerns of the Dominican Republic loud and
clear. It will be important to ensure that the transition
is conducted responsibly and smoothly, taking account
of the situation on the ground as we move from a
peacekeeping presence to a special political mission.
We would like to reiterate our appreciation for the work

19-0975815/28

S/PV.8502

The situation concerning Haiti

of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and encourage all States to cooperate
with it and offer it their full support. The United
Nations has a clear role to play to ensure an integrated
and sustainable transition, but it will ultimately be the
Government of Haiti’s leadership that will make the
transition a success.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
welcoming Foreign Minister Bocchit Edmond of Haiti
and by saying, Let there be light in this Chamber and in
Haiti. Indonesia is pleased to hear about the continuing
progress on peace and stability in Haiti despite the
challenges on the ground, especially during the recent
violent protests in several parts of Haiti in February.
We appreciate the efforts of the Haitian National
Police to manage those violent situations. It is very
important to ensure that they do not escalate in any
way, since we cannot afford such setbacks or the related
humanitarian consequences.
I would like to thank the Departments of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations for the
United Nations Mission in Support of Justice in Haiti
(MINUJUSТН) dashboard, which certainly brings the
Council into the twenty-first century of infographics
and millennial thinking. There are still some targets to
be reached, and I also have some questions about the
targets for numbers of kidnappings and other crimes,
which I think should be zero rather than any other
figures, but perhaps that can be clarified later. I would
like to highlight three points.
First, like other members, Indonesia is deeply
concerned about the humanitarian situation in Haiti,
and we urge that the suffering of people in need be
promptly addressed and alleviated, considering that
27 per cent of the population is still in a crisis phase and
5.5 per cent in an emergency phase where food security
is concerned. The Government of Haiti should take the
lead and work together with all stakeholders to address
those issues.
Secondly, the rule of law remains key to
accelerating structural reforms and improving the
people’s living conditions. The Government should
take concrete measures to investigate high-profile cases
in order to gain public trust. We share the SecretaryGeneral’s view of the importance of a national
dialogue for underpinning longer-term stability. It is
the responsibility of all Haitian leaders, whether in the
Government, the opposition or other sectors of society,
16/28

03/04/2019

to support this. In addition, the political process for the
upcoming election should help to strengthen Haitian
democracy. Stability and security in Haiti must be
maintained at this critical moment.
Thirdly, for its part, Indonesia will fully support
the implementation of the MINUJUSTH mandate, in
accordance with resolution 2410 (2018), in order to help
establish a more stable and secure environment. On
3 March Indonesia sent two women individual police
officers (IPOs) to Haiti, to be followed by eight more
IPOs. We believe that MINUJUSTH should continue
its community violence reduction programme with a
view to mitigating violence and promoting dialogue,
and that the Mission’s peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts should make community engagement a priority,
promoting dialogue among local communities and
including the participation of women and young people.
We also support the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral on the deployment of a special political mission
mandated to provide its good offices and advise the
Government of Haiti on specific areas.
In conclusion, Indonesia would also like to emphasize
its appreciation for the work that MINUJUSTH has
done and encourage it to continue creating a propitious
environment, providing capacity-building and helping
to strengthen governance and reform. We believe that
the people and the Government of Haiti know what
is best for them and that the Council should listen to
their wishes. We look forward to a successful transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding with the aim of
achieving a peaceful and prosperous Haiti. We have
confidence in the country’s Government and people,
and the international community should continue to
support Haiti in its development process.
Since I still have several grains of sand remaining
in the hourglass, I will donate them to my colleague
from Equatorial Guinea.
Mrs. Gueguen (France): I would first like to
congratulate you, Sir, on the start of Germany’s
presidency, following that of France and linked to it in a
twin relationship that illustrates the special partnership
between our two countries, which have put together
a shared programme and spirit for these two months
aimed at improving not just our customs and methods
but also our results on the ground. France will be at
your side throughout this month. I would also like to
join previous speakers in expressing my pleasure at
the opportunity to hear from the United Nations High
19-09758

03/04/2019

The situation concerning Haiti

Commissioner for Human Rights, and I hope we will be
having regular interactions with her in the future. And
I welcome the presence here today of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Haiti.
We are all agreed that this is a pivotal moment
of transition in the relationship between the United
Nations and Haiti, as we near the end of the term of the
United Nations Mission in Support of Justice in Haiti
(MINUJUSТН). As the briefers emphasized, Haiti
still faces many challenges, to which I will return,
that require not only the ongoing commitment of the
Haitian authorities but also the robust support of Haiti’s
international partners, beginning with the Security
Council. It is in that context that France fully supports
the Secretary-General’s recommendation for a special
political mission. That transition, which has now
been in preparation for two years, will turn the page
on peacekeeping operations and open a new chapter
in the cooperation between the United Nations and
Haiti. In that context, we should focus on two points
in particular in order to enable the United Nations to
continue helping to make a positive difference in Haiti.
First, the country’s political and economic
instability continues to be central to our concerns.
More than a quarter of the population is currently food
insecure. Economic and social hardships continue.
Haitians are being hit hard by the deteriorating
economic situation and are demanding better access to
basic services. The resurgence of violence produced by
those problems is worrying. We have seen unacceptable
acts of violence, particularly on the fringes of the
February demonstrations, which paralysed the country
yet again and had a disastrous impact on Haitians’ daily
lives. Violence can only aggravate the problems, and
we call on all Haitian political stakeholders to firmly
condemn the use of violence and take a constructive
approach, including within the framework of the goodoffices mission led by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
There is still much to be done to build the solid
institutions and legislative framework that are essential
to establishing the rule of law. France urges the
Haitian authorities to carry out the reforms that will
ensure a justice system for Haitian society that is more
accessible, efficient and representative. We also deplore
the fact that only one of the 12 seats on the Supreme
Court is held by a woman. The fight against corruption
and impunity, which is at the heart of the protesters’
demands, must also be given top priority. It is leading

S/PV. 8502

that fight that will enable Haitian politicians to rebuild
a relationship of trust with the population. While
some programmes have been implemented, primarily
by МINUJUSТН, especially those aimed at reducing
community violence against women, human rights
violations persist, as Ms. Bachelet pointed out. We are
particularly concerned about the links mentioned in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/198) between
political actors and criminal organizations. There must
be credible investigations and prosecutions of this
problem where appropriate.
Secondly, considering these challenges, France
urges that we stay on the path established by the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and
MINUJUSTH and supports a transition to a special
political mission. The special political mission that
will succeed MINUJUSTH will provide an opportunity
to focus United Nations efforts on the three areas
where the added value of the United Nations has been
proven — first, the Council of the Haitian National
Police, which is already autonomous in most Haitian
regions; next, building the rule of law, including the
prison system; and lastly, monitoring the human rights
situation and reducing violence within communities.
The High Commissioner’s recommendations on
that will be valuable. As the Secretary-General has
suggested, the provision of good offices should also be
a focus of the future mission’s mandate.
Besides the special political mission, it is the United
Nations system as a whole, particularly the country
team, that will have to adapt to meet Haiti’s needs.
In that regard, we welcome the Haitian Government’s
decision to call on the Peacebuilding Fund. The
projects it finances will provide the Haitian population
with valuable assistance. The fight against the cholera
epidemic, which is on the verge of being eradicated,
will not stop.
Finally, France encourages Haiti’s political
leaders to do everything possible to create the
conditions for the country’s sustainable and stable
development. Among the projects for which the Haitian
authorities are responsible, I would like to mention the
interministerial action plan on human rights, which
must now be finalized. As Ms. Viaud’s briefing showed
us, civil society is already overflowing with initiatives
and talents and deserves our full and complete support.
Ms. Viaud’s compelling appeal for the protection
of women and the promotion of their rights and
participation must be fully heard.

19-0975817/28

S/PV.8502

The situation concerning Haiti

In conclusion, I simply want to point to the motto
on Haiti’s coat of arms, “Unity is Strength”, which
reminds us how vital national unity is if Haiti is to
be able to build its future, particularly in view of the
upcoming elections.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank the
briefers for their valuable remarks and presentations.
Poland aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union
later today.
Let me start on a positive note by saying that the
progress that has been made in Haiti is undeniable.
We acknowledge the understanding that the Haitian
Government’s representatives have expressed of
their people’s grievances and their assessment that
the situation in the country needs improvement. We
agree that a dialogue is the only way out of the crisis.
Tackling corruption, especially where the PetroCaribe
case is concerned, and the promotion of new economic
measures to provide relief are steps in the right direction
and should help those facing serious economic hardship.
However, we are concerned about the recent
outbreaks of violence. It is disappointing that despite
the significant upgrade in the capabilities of the Haitian
National Police (HNP), there are still frequent episodes
of violence resulting in deaths and tensions. Regrettably,
some members of the police are being accused of
overstepping their powers. It goes without saying that
human rights and development are interconnected and
mutually reinforcing. Haiti cannot be truly rebuilt
without addressing those two areas on an equal footing.
The Government’s cooperation with civil society is
extremely important in that respect, as it provides a
healthy foundation for the future.
We hope that President Moïse and the new
Government will explore every avenue in their efforts
to break the current stalemate by engaging in deep,
inclusive and sincere political dialogue. We believe that
the October elections will be a significant milestone
in Haiti’s efforts to achieve stability. We therefore
hope that the Haitian authorities will do everything in
their power to ensure that the elections are free, fair
and transparent, and that the current electoral calendar
remains intact. The new authorities will be expected
to undertake deep structural reforms to revive the
country’s economy and social structure.
18/28

03/04/2019

We recognize the positive role that the United
Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) has played in transforming the
National Police and the significant growth of its role
and capabilities. However, we are concerned about
whether the HNP will be able to conduct effective
operations after various components of MINUJUSTH
have withdrawn. If there are problems, we will not be
able to give the national forces support if they need it,
especially during the usually heated election period.
Turning to the humanitarian situation, we hope that
the Government will work closely with United Nations
agencies and all relevant international actors to bring
humanitarian aid, including food assistance, to the more
than 2 million people in need. It is worrying that the
crisis remains constantly underfunded. We therefore
support the plan of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to concentrate on four strategic
aspects that will prioritize the most vulnerable groups.
We are pleased with the work that MINUJUSTH
has done so far in helping Haiti to address structural
and operational shortcomings in the areas of police
development, human rights, justice, corrections and
strengthening institutional responses with a view to
promoting public trust in those areas. As we approach
the closure of the peacekeeping chapter in Haiti’s
modern history, we must bear in mind that a number of
the objectives established for MINUJUSTH’s two-year
exit strategy, including those relating to the rule of law
and human rights, are not expected to be fully achieved
by this October. That means that the political mission
that is set to replace MINUJUSTH should be made up
of key components related to democracy, the rule of
law and human rights in order to better assist Haitian
authorities in their rebuilding efforts.
There is a great deal of work to be accomplished
in a short time. We therefore call on the Haitian
authorities to stay vigilant in prioritizing their efforts
so that history does not repeat itself. We stand ready
to assist them in order to secure stability and a better
future for all Haitians.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): As you suggested, Mr. President, we will
dissolve all our welcomes and diplomatic formalities in
the sand of the Thuringian hourglass and get right down
to business.
We have very mixed feelings about the situation
in Haiti. On the one hand, we are seeing increasingly
19-09758

03/04/2019

The situation concerning Haiti

optimistic assessments of the restoration of national
ownership in each succeeding report on the United
Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti. The
Secretary-General’s assertion that the Haitian National
Police will be able to assume full responsibility for the
country’s security and protection by October is quite
indicative in that regard. On the other hand, the Haitian
people’s awareness of their national responsibility
for the future of their country is spurring society to
greater social activism and the expression of its civic
views. That has led to challenges that are typical for
mature States.
We have been watching the spiralling new tensions
in the social and political life of the country with alarm.
The popular unrest of recent months has been unfolding
in waves, with outbreaks in October and November of
last year that ripened into mass protests by February
that swept across the entire country and claimed dozens
of lives. While we see that the leadership is attempting
to normalize the situation, we have nonetheless been
compelled to conclude that the resignation of the Prime
Minister and his Government could not prevent the
opposition forces from calling for a general protest.
Needless to say, while peaceful assembly and freedom
of expression are inalienable rights, we should not
forget that they should be exercised in strict compliance
with national legislation.
Such disagreements between Government and
society are not new. They occur in other parts of the
Western hemisphere and indeed all over the world. We
will continue to reiterate that the only effective way
to resolve internal differences is through an inclusive
national dialogue, which is the only path to a viable
and sustainable resolution regardless of the State in
question. We have always said that we see attempts to
forcibly oppose legitimate authorities to be extremely
dangerous, as they do not help to consolidate society
or meet the demands of States’ gradual development.
Like the Secretary-General, we therefore hope that
the people of Haiti will be able to overcome their
differences through a constructive internal dialogue
that is as inclusive as possible and, crucially, peaceful.
That is particularly important in the light of the
country’s upcoming elections.
At this difficult moment for Haiti, we also believe
firmly that the international community cannot
remain indifferent and must help the Government
and the people of Haiti to implement their national
responsibility for post-conflict peacebuilding. a great

S/PV. 8502

deal of work lies ahead for the United Nations staff,
whose task is to provide the Haitian authorities with the
greatest possible assistance.
The issue is how exactly international assistance
can be most effective. For example, we have long said
that the situation in Haiti is not a threat to international
peace and security. That means that there is no need to
continue to act under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations in the country. That is why a year ago,
we abstained in the voting on resolution 2410 (2018) (see
S/PV.8226), which, at the insistence of the American
delegation, extended the application of the provisions of
Chapter VII even to the Mission’s mandate to support
human rights monitoring in the country. Our position
on that remains unchanged.
In conclusion, allow me to affirm that Russia
supports Port-au-Prince and will continue to work to
ensure that the Security Council’s efforts will result
in genuinely normalizing the situation in Haiti and
strengthening its sovereignty and self-sufficiency.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We would like to extend our congratulations
to the German presidency for the good innovations.
I would be remiss if I did not personally express our
thanks to Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and High
Commissioner Bachelet, as well as Ms. Viaud, for their
informative briefings, which truly spoke to our hearts.
We congratulate the Government of Haiti and
would first like to say how happy we are to have
among us today the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Haiti, whom we welcome and wish a good stay here
in New York. We would also like to thank him for the
significant improvements seen in Haiti with regard
to both the functioning of institutions and respect for
human rights, as we have just heard in the briefings.
Given those improvements, for which we give credit
to the United Nations support mission and the political
will and leadership of the Government of Haiti, we
now need to increase and further strengthen support
for the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) and the Government in order to
build on those improvements and prevent them from
being reversed.
The humanitarian situation in Haiti is still very
fragile. Indeed, according to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, more than
2.5 million Haitians in the country currently need

19-0975819/28

S/PV.8502

The situation concerning Haiti

03/04/2019

humanitarian assistance, a significant part of the
population does not have access to drinking water and
hundreds of thousands of children do not have access
to education. We sincerely believe that insufficient
attention has been paid to the humanitarian risk.
There should therefore be a considerable increase in
humanitarian assistance in order to significantly reduce
the current figures regarding the humanitarian situation
in the country by the end of the year, in particular all
those adverse events suffered by children and women.

constructive nation-wide dialogue and properly
resolve differences through consultations so that the
overall security and development of the country can be
achieved as soon as possible and the people of Haiti can
live and work in peace. The United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) and
Special Representative La Lime have made significant
efforts to maintain stability in Haiti and to promote
the capacity-building of relevant departments of the
Haitian Government. China commends them for that.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea fully supports
the renewal of the MINUJUSTH mandate for six months
and a review of the possible options to be adopted for
the period after 15 October, on the basis of resolution
2410 (2018). In our view, the United Nations presence
is essential in order to support the process of rebuilding
the country’s institutions. That should be carried out
through a special political mission, not a peacekeeping
one. We fully share the Secretary-General’s desire for
a smooth and orderly transition to maintain a strong
United Nations political presence in Haiti, since a
gradual approach is necessary if we wish to see a
successful transition.

The Mission will conclude its work in October
of this year. China supports the Secretary-General’s
road map for drawdown and exit. The Mission should
continue to transfer responsibility to the Haitian
Government in a steady and orderly manner and
complete the drawdown and exit on schedule. With
regard to the transition to a special political mission
following MINUJUSTH, the members of the Security
Council, the Secretariat, the Haitian Government and
other stakeholders should fully discuss the relevant
issues. The Haitian Government should continue to
strengthen its coordination and collaboration with the
United Nations to ensure a smooth transition.

In conclusion, the Government of Haiti must
give high priority to addressing gang violence and
to building stronger links with communities affected
by violent crime. At the same time, the international
community must give greater support to MINUJUSTH
in its community violence reduction programme in
order to even further mitigate violence in hotspots in the
Port-au-Prince metropolitan area. It must also continue
to promote dialogue in fragile neighbourhoods affected
by a chronic lack of socioeconomic opportunities and
limited access to basic services, including the police
and justice systems.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.

Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and
Ms. Bachelet, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, for their briefings. We listened very
carefully to the intervention of Ms. Viaud. I welcome
the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Haiti
in the Chamber today.
The recent political situation in Haiti remains
complex, with challenging economic and humanitarian
situations. China hopes that the Haitian Government
can assume responsibility for maintaining the country’s
stability and development, enhance its development
capacity, strengthen the rule of law, conduct a
20/28

Let me first say that, from our national point of
view, everything in my statement has already been
said so I will refer to what was said earlier. First of
all, I would like to welcome the Foreign Minister of
Haiti. I thank him for being here. I would also like to
thank his delegation for the very good cooperation we
had in preparation for today’s meeting. I would like to
thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his intervention. His
dashboard was widely praised. I think that it is very
good. I will give him the floor a little later because
there were a few questions put by the representative of
the United Kingdom and other speakers. Also listening
around the table to our Chinese and Equatorial
Guinean colleagues, as well as the representatives of
Kuwait, France and others, I think that the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2019/198) and his proposal with
regard to a special political mission as a follow-up was
widely praised.
I would like to thank in particular Ms. Bachelet
for her presence and for her briefing. From a German
perspective, I would just like to highlight her phrase
when she said that the promotion and protection of human
rights is a foundation to stability and development. I
19-09758

03/04/2019

The situation concerning Haiti

hope that we will be able to give the necessary support
with regard to the special political mission. I am also
very happy to have heard that she is working with the
Haitian Government regarding a stand-alone presence.
Perhaps the Haitian Foreign Minister could say a few
words about where Haiti stands with regard to that and
to such an office.
Let me also thank Ms. Viaud for what she said in a
very impressive way about inequality, sexual and genderbased violence and women’s political participation.
These are key issues. We fully support what she said,
and, as she has seen, many around the table also
back what she said. Our colleagues from France, the
United Kingdom and the Dominican Republic noted
how important this is for the stability of society and
of the country. Again, I do not wish to overburden
the Minister, but perhaps he can say something in his
intervention about the promotion of the issues that were
raised, the protection of women and the fight against
sexual and gender-based violence. Our French colleague
mentioned the fact that only one of the 12 seats on the
Supreme Court is held by a woman, so perhaps that
issue can be addressed.
Briefly, I would say that the remarks all went in
pretty much the same direction. As our American
colleague said, Haiti is on a positive trajectory, and
there are many examples of where things went well,
but, of course, there are still some deficits. There is one
issue where I personally do not see this as clear, where
Jonathan said that we should not link the length of the
mission to the elections. Elections in Haiti have always
been a case involving problems related to the duration.
On the substance of the special political mission
there, I would fully support what our Belgian, French
and Russian colleagues said concerning maximum
assistance, so we should do everything with the special
political mission to support the Government. I would
also add to the list what my colleagues from Belgium
and the Dominican Republic said with regard to the
Peacebuilding Fund. South Africa, Poland and Côte
d’Ivoire stressed the need to hold a dialogue with civil
society. Our Russian colleague said that there has to
be an inclusive national dialogue; I think that it is very
important to include civil society in the way forward.
Let me conclude by echoing what the Ambassador
of the Dominican Republic said: we should not rush
ahead or endanger what has been achieved, and so we
must move carefully ahead. We are on a good trajectory,

S/PV. 8502

but it is fragile. I think that the Minister will take away
from the Security Council that there is a strong wish to
support him.
I think that I did not overstep my five minutes.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Haiti. With my colleagues’ permission, he
can have some extra time.
Mr. Edmond (Haiti) (spoke in French): On the
contrary, Mr. President, I was going to ask you to put
the hourglass down horizontally.
I should like to begin by thanking Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, for her very enlightening briefing and for
her interest in promoting and protecting human rights
in Haiti. I wish also to thank my fellow countrywoman,
Loune Viaud, Executive Director of Zanmi Lasante,
for her remarks on the situation of women and girls, of
which I took good note.
At the outset, I wish to thank the Security Council
for having invited me to participate in this meeting
of the Council to share the views and observations
of the Government of the Republic of Haiti on the
report of Secretary-General António Guterres on the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) (S/2019/198), submitted pursuant to
resolution 2410 (2018).
Let me start by saying that the report provides a
very objective assessment of developments in Haiti,
the support provided by the United Nations in the
framework of MINUJUSTH, the efforts undertaken by
the national authorities in a very difficult context and
the steps that remain to be taken in the promotion of
human rights, the rule of law and the strengthening of
the democratic gains made in the country.
The President of the Republic of Haiti, His
Excellency Mr. Jovenel Moïse, has tasked me with
reiterating to the Secretary-General his heartfelt
gratitude for the relevance of the report and his full
support for the success of his lofty and delicate mission
in the service of the international community.
Here I refer in particular to the painstaking
consultations carried out by representatives of the
United Nations with the country’s highest authorities in
the quest for a better option involving a presence that
is better adapted to the socio-political developments in
the country following the drawdown of MINUJUSTH.

19-0975821/28

S/PV.8502

The situation concerning Haiti

In that connection, I congratulate Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, both for the excellent coordination of the
strategic assessment mission as well as for the accuracy
of his briefing on the most recent events in the country.
My thanks also go to Ms. Helen La Lime, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti, for
her exemplary commitment.
It would be remiss of me not to commend here the
unwavering courage and sense of responsibility of all
my Haitian brothers and sisters, who, despite the major
difficulties of the present context, remain resolutely
committed to the lofty ideals of the founding fathers
of our national independence. History calls on us,
my fellow countrymen, to work together selflessly,
guided by the tripartite Republican motto “Liberty,
equality, fraternity”, so that the Republic of Haiti,
one of the founding Members of the United Nations
in 1945, can once again play its rightful role in the
international arena.
Resolution 2410 (2018) provides, in its paragraph 8,
for the drawdown on 15 October 2019 of MINUJUSTH,
which was established in 2017 following the closing of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. The
progress that has been made as part of MINUJUSTH’s
mandate is allowing us today to opt for a new United
Nations presence in Haiti, one that is not a peacekeeping
mission. The Government of the Republic of Haiti
fervently hopes that the new role of the United Nations
will remain coherent with the changing overall context
in the country as well as national needs in the areas of
security, justice, stability and sustainable development.
The Government of the Republic of Haiti is fully
aware of the fact that it bears responsibility for, first and
foremost, adopting the strategies necessary to provide
lasting responses to the real needs and legitimate
claims and expectations of its people. In that regard, I
am firmly convinced that the political will to achieve
that goal must go hand in hand with the mobilization
of the necessary resources. Therefore, the substantive
and organizational contributions of the United Nations,
its specialized agencies, funds and programmes and all
international partners will remain essential.
The Government of Haiti wishes to emphasize
the findings of the strategic assessment, the options
considered for a United Nations presence other than a
peacekeeping operation in Haiti and the very relevant
observations and recommendations contained in
22/28

03/04/2019

the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/198), which
highlights the significant events that have taken place
in the country since the publication of his previous
report (S/2018/1059), including the demonstrations held
in the main cities since 7 February. The demands of the
demonstrators focused on the country’s socioeconomic
problems, especially the steep rise in the cost of living.
Regrettably, such demonstrations were marked by
unfortunate acts of violence that resulted in deaths,
including the deaths of two police officers who were
burned alive, and considerable property damage.
The Secretary-General quite rightly noted that
demonstrators vandalized public and private property,
used firearms, erected barricades and disrupted
economic activity in the country’s main urban centres.
The unrest disrupted trade and markets and had a
serious impact on income-generating activities, in
particular in households headed by women, which are
often dependent upon market-oriented employment.
With regard to women’s rights, my country
has made considerable efforts to promote women’s
rights. As the Council is undoubtedly aware, the
amended 1987 Constitution incorporated a 30 per
cent constitutional quota for women throughout the
country’s social structure.
At the humanitarian level, the report mentions the
persistent migration crisis, increasing food insecurity,
progress in combating the cholera epidemic, the
situation of the Central Emergency Response Fund
and the funding gap in the humanitarian assistance
plan. It acknowledges the joint efforts of the Haitian
Government and MINUJUSTH to reduce the level
of gang violence and establish closer links with
communities affected by violent crime.
Significant progress has been made in
implementing the mandate of MINUJUSTH in areas
such as combating local violence, enhancing the
performance of the Haitian National Police, improving
security, justice and the rule of law, improving prison
administration, promoting human rights and preparing
for the upcoming parliamentary elections.
The Secretary-General commended the efforts
of the Haitian National Police and the ongoing
improvements within that institution. The National
Police has been increasingly autonomous in providing
security throughout the country. Its performance in the
recent demonstrations attests to its enhanced capacity
for maintaining order throughout the country.
19-09758

03/04/2019

The situation concerning Haiti

Regarding the concerns expressed by the
representative of the United Kingdom about the
incident at La Saline, the President of Haiti has
condemned such acts of violence. He has instructed
the relevant institutions, such as the Haitian National
Police and the Government Commissioner, to conduct
an investigation in order to shed light on events that
have regrettably been portrayed as a massacre planned
by the State. I would like to refute that accusation and
inform the Council that, unfortunately, what happened
at La Saline remains in dispute. Nonetheless, I assure
the Council that the Haitian Government is in the
process of conducting an investigation to shed light on
what took place.
As the Secretary-General indicated in paragraph
70 of his report,
“the Haitian authorities expressed support for the
deployment of a special political mission under
Chapter VI of the Charter designed to accompany
current priorities in specific and strategic rule
of law, security, human rights and development
areas for a transitional period, so that Haiti would
be subsequently removed from the Security
Council agenda.”
The demonstrations held in recent months have
highlighted, if there were still a need to do so, the
crucial steps that need to be taken, including the urgent
need to strengthen the fight against insecurity and
multifaceted corruption and to improve, significantly
and without delay, the living conditions of all segments
of the Haitian population.
The President of Haiti has not in any way
underestimated the difficulties that his Administration
had been tasked to overcome. That is reflected in the
Change Caravan, which he launched on 1 May 2017,
with, regrettably, very limited resources. Unfortunately,
that innovative and ambitious initiative, which could
be improved upon, has not yet received all of the
support needed.
Council members will surely agree with me that
the promotion of democracy, human rights, the rule of
law, justice and the reform of key national institutions
must go hand in hand with sustainable economic, social
and environmental development, including through
risk reduction and natural disaster preparedness
initiatives, in a country that is extremely vulnerable
to environmental threats. It is in that spirit that future
cooperation between the Government of Haiti and the

S/PV. 8502

Organization must be carried out, in harmony and in
compliance with obligations within the framework of a
special political mission.
The President of Haiti is aware that no political
party or sector of national life can claim to be able to
overcome on its own the major challenges facing the
country. That is why he reiterated the unconditional
call for constructive and inclusive dialogue among all
national stakeholders. He is convinced that the nation’s
recovery is the responsibility of all Haitians who
demonstrate goodwill. In that spirit, and in compliance
with the provisions of the amended 1987 Haitian
Constitution, the President initiated discussions with
several sectors, with a view to selecting a new Prime
Minister, in consultation with the Presidents of the
Senate and the Chamber of Deputies, and to forming a
Government that reflects the legitimate aspirations of
all sectors of national life.
On behalf of the President of the Republic, I
have already requested and been assured that the
United Nations, through the good offices of the
Secretary-General, will play the role of observer in
that inter-Haitian dialogue. A request for technical
assistance was therefore issued by the facilitation
committee of the inter-Haitian national dialogue to
provide an experienced United Nations expert in
that area.
Within that same framework, on 12 March, the
President reactivated the National Commission for
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration to
deal with all issues related to local violence, which
constitutes an obstacle to the country’s socioeconomic
development. That decision by the President provided
the necessary impetus to the development of a national
strategy to control the flow of weapons and support
vulnerable young people prone to being recruited by
armed groups.
Accordingly, the Government of Haiti is
energetically seeking the United Nations strategic
support within the framework of a special political
mission. Such support will make the reconfiguration
of the Commission possible, while considering
the following main points: the development of a
weapons and ammunition management programme;
the implementation of socioeconomic projects to
reduce community violence; and the expansion of the
presence of community police in high-risk areas. I look
forward to continuing discussions with Ms. La Lime,

19-0975823/28

S/PV.8502

The situation concerning Haiti

which should lead to the provision of United Nations
technical support for the national dialogue as well as
the development of a national strategy to combat the
proliferation of armed gangs.
The year 2019 will be in many ways a pivotal one
for my country, which will ultimately be defined by
the effectiveness of the national authorities’ efforts
to respond to the urgent demands of every segment of
the population. The upcoming holding of legislative
elections in a peaceful security environment will be
particularly crucial. The Government of the Republic of
Haiti is committed to taking all the necessary measures
to ensure that those elections are held in accordance
with constitutional deadlines and within a renewed
environment of constructive dialogue. I strongly hope
that the United Nations and Haiti’s main international
partners will not fail in providing concrete support
for the priorities defined by the national authorities,
with a view to ensuring security and stability and
encouraging direct foreign investment and the longterm development of the country.
Rest assured that the main institutions of the
Haitian State, under the leadership of the President
of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Jovenel Moïse,
will continue to play their full role in the major
transformations necessary to improving the living
conditions of the Haitian people and, moreover,
maintain the climate of trust and safeguard the hope for
a better future.
Long live the Republic of Haiti.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada): I congratulate you, Sir,
on your leadership and reforms. They may be small
steps for humankind, but they are giant ones for the
Security Council.
(spoke in French)
I thank the members of the Security Council for
holding this important debate on the future of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) and for inviting Canada. I particularly
thank and welcome the presence of Foreign Minister
Edmond and Ms. Bachelet, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
Allow me to stress my agreement with the statement
delivered by Ambassador Ndong Mba of Equatorial
24/28

03/04/2019

Guinea with regard to the urgent humanitarian situation
in Haiti. That worrisome situation cannot continue to
be ignored by the international community. We must
not overlook that difficult humanitarian situation when
we discuss the other issues concerning the situation
in Haiti.
Much progress has been made since 2004 in the
areas of security, governance, justice and human rights
thanks to the efforts of the Haitian authorities, the
meaningful presence of a United Nations mission and
the continued support of the international community.
Canada is pleased to have contributed to those efforts.
We are particularly proud to have supported the
strengthening of the Haitian penitentiary administration
and the Haitian National Police with the establishment
of the police academy. Recently, the national border
police of Haiti was established through the support of
Canada and the United States. Owing to its presence
in the north-eastern part of the country, it has seized
more than 600 kilogrammes of drugs over the past
month alone . Close cooperation with the authorities
of the Dominican Republic has also enabled restricting
human trafficking. In that area, as in others, Canada
will pursue its support for the development of Haiti in
cooperation with its partners to improve the quality
of life for all Haitians, especially those who are most
vulnerable. Successive events since July of last year
have demonstrated the need to continue efforts to help
Haiti improve governance and ensure the rule of law in
the country, including through — as the representatives
of Indonesia and France pointed out earlier — combating
corruption and impunity, as the foundation of the social
contract, stability and economic growth for all.
We also need to work in a more integrated
way by using all the peacebuilding tools at our
disposal — diplomacy, mediation, security support
and development — to achieve a greater inclusive and
lasting impact. Our efforts must encourage political
solutions to underlying tensions and conflicts.
(spoke in English)
For those reasons, Canada supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to establish
a special political mission in Haiti to take over
from MINUJUSTH. The transition to a political
mission, however, must be carefully managed and
objectives-based. We should listen carefully to what
was said this morning by the representative of the
Dominican Republic, Haiti’s neighbour, as well as the
19-09758

03/04/2019

The situation concerning Haiti

representative of Peru, a witness in the region. The
objectives that have not been achieved by MINUJUSTH
should serve as a starting point for the special political
mission. Reducing the United Nations presence must
also be gradual and carefully sequenced to minimize
any negative impact and preserve hard-won gains
made since 2004. We encourage the establishment
of a robust special political mission with significant
resources and with a high-level political team under
the leadership of a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. Such a mission must include wellequipped components to continue efforts aimed at
decreasing community violence and strengthening the
justice, police, corrections and human rights sectors.
The transition should also include a strong electoral
monitoring mechanism. The Mission should also
include a focus on economic security. That has been
missing in MINUJUSTH. As mentioned by Minister
Edmond this morning, there will be no stability Haiti
without economic opportunities for young people.
Canada wishes to emphasize the need to also have a
strong gender advisory capacity in the special political
mission. We need to ensure that gender expertise in
conflict does not become a nice-to-have by ensuring
that advisers remain part of the assessed contributions.
In addition to promoting the women and peace and
security agenda, that would effectively support the
Haitian authorities and civil society in improving
the inclusion of women in all aspects of the national
dialogue and reform processes.
Canada encourages the Security Council to decide
promptly on the establishment of the special political
mission to ensure optimal preparation conditions
on which to build a sustainable, democratic and
inclusive peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): It is a pleasure to see you, Mr. President,
presiding over this meeting, and I would like to thank
Germany for organizing this debate.
I also thank the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Ms. Michelle Bachelet, and UnderSecretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for delivering
their respective briefings on the situation in Haiti and
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH). I would further like to welcome the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Haiti,

S/PV. 8502

and extend my thanks to the Executive Director of
Zanmi Lasante for her briefing.
Argentina welcomes the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/198), in particular the
comprehensive and inclusive strategic assessment of the
situation in Haiti in order to recommend the appropriate
timetable for the end of the MINUJUSTH mandate and
to identify the areas in which continued United Nations
support would contribute most to sustaining peace and
Haiti’s path towards sustainable development. Progress
in the socioeconomic situation, in an equitable manner
and in accordance with 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, remains key to long-term stability.
Argentina also welcomes the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to establish a special political mission
to provide political and advisory capacities that would
continue to pay attention to development and, in turn,
enable the Security Council to continue to support Haiti’s
efforts to achieve sustainable peace and strengthen the
role of the good offices of the United Nations. In that
regard, Argentina again underscores the need for the
Mission’s transition to that new option to be based on
the progressive fulfilment of the Mission’s mandate
in order to prevent an early exit from jeopardizing the
efforts of the past 15 years. We also understand that
the Mission must address the aforementioned transition
process and the establishment of the strategic advisory
office, in close cooperation with the Government of
Haiti and its leaders, respecting their national priorities
and taking into account the principle of national
ownership in the peacebuilding process.
We emphasize that the Haitian authorities have
expressed their approval of the deployment of a special
political mission under Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations. In that regard, Argentina believes that
such a mission should support Haitian actions related
to socioeconomic development during the transition
period, in coordination with the United Nations country
team in Haiti, the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Economic and Social Council.
Although the challenges remain numerous,
Argentina once again underscores the progress made
in implementing the Mission’s important mandate,
assisting Haiti in improving humanitarian conditions,
reducing community violence, consolidating rule of
law institutions, strengthening and developing the
professionalism of the Haitian National Police and
promoting and protecting human rights in the country.

19-0975825/28

S/PV.8502

The situation concerning Haiti

In that regard, we highlight the achievements made
by the country overall in recent years and the efforts
made by the Haitian authorities, in conjunction with
MINUJUSTH, to build lasting stability and a better
future for the country.
In addition to maintaining bilateral cooperation
with Haiti, Argentina will continue to provide trained
police personnel for the Mission, to the extent possible
and in accordance with specific requirements. We will
continue to participate in both multilateral and bilateral
efforts with the country, as we have done since the
1990s. Likewise, Argentina reaffirms its commitment
to Haiti and its people, while emphasizing the invaluable
work of the men and women of MINUJUSTH in
fulfilment of its honourable mandate to support Haiti
on its path towards the consolidation of peace and
sustainable development.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Vale de Almeida (spoke in French): I am
honoured to speak on behalf of the European Union and
its 28 member States. I thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2019/198) and Mr. Lacroix, Ms. Bachelet
and Ms. Viaud for their briefings. I especially welcome
the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Haiti.
The candidate countries Turkey, North Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate country Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well
as the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with
this statement.
Haiti has gone from a situation of latent fragility
to a fully fledged political and economic crisis that has
resulted since last July in a series of demonstrations
and riots against the elevated cost of living, owing
to inflation and the rapid depreciation of the local
currency, which culminated in February in 12 long days
of blockades in the country. In addition, demonstrations,
generally peaceful in nature, were held to denounce
the management of PetroCaribe funds by previous
Administrations and demand accountability and an
effective fight against corruption.
Unfortunately, many of the protests were marked
by episodes of violence that caused deaths and looting,
despite the deployment of the Haitian National Police
(HNP). The HNP has generally succeeded in containing
tensions and limiting material damage in a context of
26/28

03/04/2019

widespread instability. However, as a result of that
climate, the number of incidents involving armed gangs
has increased; some have been particularly serious,
with murders, rapes and violence, especially the one
that took place last November in the neighbourhood of
La Saline. An investigation is still ongoing following
accusations of the involvement of the security forces.
The European Union is concerned about the overall
situation in Haiti. Politically, the radical opposition
has exerted strong pressure in an attempt to force
President Moïse to resign. Other political, civil society
and business actors have demanded the establishment
of a genuine national dialogue, which, unfortunately,
after several unsuccessful attempts, remains behind
schedule; some are waiting for a thorough reform of
institutions and their functioning, with the electoral
mandates under review.
On 18 March, the Chamber of Deputies of the
Haitian Parliament voted to dismiss Prime Minister
Céant and his Government, to which they had given their
vote of confidence just six months ago. In that context,
and given the critical situation in the country, the
European Union considers it imperative that President
Moïse and the incoming new Government engage in a
deep, inclusive and sincere political dialogue that can
identify and implement the necessary political solutions
to overcome the current impasse. It is important
that women be able to participate meaningfully and
equitably in that process.
The holding of legislative elections for the
Chamber of Deputies and the Senate, within the
time limits provided for in the Constitution, is also
essential. Respect for the legitimacy of democratically
elected institutions and the regular cycle of elections
appears, in parallel and in complementarity with
national dialogue, to be one of the essential conditions
for the functioning of democracy in Haiti. Structural
reforms are urgently needed to restore the country’s
economy and finances and allow for properly inclusive
socioeconomic development.
As stated in the benchmarks for an exit strategy,
prepared by the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), a consensual
and far-reaching reform of the electoral system is
a key component not only in preventing further
institutional crises, but also in rebuilding a strong
link between elected officials and voters in order to
regain the people’s confidence. It is essential that the
19-09758

03/04/2019

The situation concerning Haiti

Haitian authorities and parliamentarians make every
effort to organize the parliamentary and municipal
elections in October 2019. We therefore hope that this
deadline will be maintained and prepared in the best
possible conditions.
The European Union remains a faithful partner
of the Republic of Haiti and committed to supporting
the country in this sensitive period, in cooperation
with the other partners, including in the indispensable
process of dialogue and reform. The European Union
is ready to continue its development cooperation in the
country and to facilitate the emergence of effective and
sustainable solutions to overcome the many challenges
that the country faces.
The European Union appreciates and supports
the work done by MINUJUSTH in support of the
development of the National Police, justice, the rule of
law and the defence and promotion of human rights.
However, we share the concerns expressed in the latest
debriefing provided Mr. Jenča on 8 March, according to
which the security situation remains particularly fragile
and the progress on many benchmarks insufficient.
The persistent inability of the Haitian National
Police and national authorities to control gang-related
violence, with accusations of collusion and other
dysfunctions, is of particular concern. The European
Union is particularly concerned about the ability of
the HNP to conduct effective operations after the
withdrawal of MINUJUSTH. We therefore consider
it essential to complete the work of strengthening and
professionalizing the Haitian National Police while
preserving its autonomy and political neutrality. At the
same time, we must continue to stress the importance
of the reform and strengthening of justice and the
penitentiary system, as well as the consolidation of
human rights. MINUJUSTH’s withdrawal is scheduled
for the same month in which the elections are supposed
to take place. In Haitian history, such a coincidence
has always marked a period of instability. It is
therefore an additional source of concern and it is all
the more important that the elections take place on the
dates announced.
In conclusion, let me reiterate the European Union’s
appreciation for the contribution made by MINUJUSTH
to security, conflict prevention, the consolidation
of democracy and the rule of law in Haiti. However,
we believe that the structural economic, social and
financial causes of instability in Haiti have yet to be

S/PV. 8502

overcome and that the political and security situation
remains very fragile. Special attention will need to be
paid to ensuring respect for human rights in the work of
the security forces and impartial justice for all.
It is therefore essential that the Haitian police
and judiciary be effectively prepared to assume all
the tasks currently carried out by the United Nations
Mission in the future. We believe that a gradual
transition of MINUJUSTH and the full exercise by the
Haitian National Police of its security responsibilities
on 15 October will be critical in that regard. The
European Union, along with the United Nations and
the international community, will support the Haitian
authorities in consolidating their commitment and
efforts to secure a better future in peace, democracy,
stability and well-being for the whole Haitian people.
The President: I should like to offer the briefers an
opportunity to take the floor if they have comments or
responses to questions.
Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): I shall briefly
address several points, but first I should like to thank all
speakers for their words of praise for the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH),
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti and all our colleagues working in Haiti.
Secondly, I also thank all representatives who
expressed their intention to maintain their bilateral
support for consolidating stability in Haiti. Whatever
the Security Council may decide with respect to the
nature of the future United Nations presence in Haiti,
it is clear that maintaining and even strengthening such
bilateral support will be of particular importance.
Thirdly, I should like to respond to the question
concerning the investigations into the incidents that
took place in La Saline. Obviously, as Minister Edmond
noted, it is up to the competent Haitian authorities to
pursue and complete the investigations under way.
With regard to the investigation launched by the United
Nations, it is advancing and we expect to share its
results with the Security Council in the next report
of the Secretary-General, whose date of issuance
will be determined by the Security Council in its
next resolution.
Lastly, I should like to refer to the participation
of women, in particular in the context of the coming
elections. I encourage the Haitian authorities to enshrine
in the future electoral law the constitutional provisions

19-0975827/28

S/PV.8502

The situation concerning Haiti

on the participation of women and to encourage their
full participation in the next local and legislative
consultations. Naturally, the full support of the United
Nations and the partners will be very important in
that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Bachelet
to make some brief comments.
Ms. Bachelet: I thank you again, Mr. President,
for giving me the opportunity of participating in this
important discussion and pledging our full commitment
to supporting Haiti in all issues related to the promotion
of human rights and, of course, issues close to my
heart — gender equality and women’s empowerment.
We will continue working with the Government,
independent of the decision of the Security Council
on options for the future, and will continue to pursue
the possibility of a stand-alone office, where we can
support the recommendations of the Secretary-General
and the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Viaud
for a second statement.
Ms. Viaud (spoke in French): I just want to thank
you, Mr. President. I hope to have the opportunity to
meet with some of the delegations in order to pursue the
recommendations made.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Haiti for a second statement.
Mr. Edmond (Haiti) (spoke in French): First, I want
to thank Mr. Lacroix and his team once again. I also
want to take this opportunity to thank Ms. Bachelet.
After our last encounter in Geneva, I promised her that
I would consider the establishment of an office in Haiti.
We are working diligently on that and assure her that
she will have a response soon in that regard.

28/28

03/04/2019

Mr. President, I did not want to conclude without
thanking you once again for the invitation you kindly
extended to me to participate in this meeting.
My country, Haiti, is now at a very complicated
crossroads, where we, as Haitians, must decide whether
we will continue to watch our country decline or
consolidate not only the democratic gains but the legacy
that our founding fathers left us. That is what I want to
believe today.
I know that by 15 October, Haiti will no longer
be within the remit of the Security Council, that is to
say, of Chapter VII of the Charter. But I have certainly
understood and greatly appreciate the various concerns,
particularly those related to whether Haiti will be able
continue alone after the departure of MINUJUSTH.
I would say in response that over 15 years, the
Council has shown that it knows how to feed this baby,
especially the Haitian National Police, helping it to
function on its own. It is certainly up to us Haitians to
work and to find the crucial right moment to sit down
and define the future of this country of ours. We will
always be grateful for the support of our international
friends, but today we Haitians find ourselves at this
crossroads with a choice to make. Do we want to save
this country — as I said in my remarks, to restore it to
the international scene where it was before — or will
we continue to watch its slow decline? I want to believe
that we will choose the first option: to sit down, work
together and bring Haiti back to life from its ashes.
The President: I thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Haiti for his encouraging words.
There are no more names inscribed on my list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

19-09758
