214

General Assembly

that havc extended their co-operation to thc Human
Rights Committcc in submitting their reports under articlc
40 of the Covenant and urges States partics that have not
yct done so to submit their reports to the Committcc as
speedily as possible;
3. Urges those States partics to the lnternational Covcnant on Civil and Political Rights that have becn
rcquested by the Human Rights Committcc to provide
additional information to comply with that request;
4. Commends those Statcs parties to the lnternational
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights that
have submitted their reports under article 16 of the Covcnant and urges States that have not yet done so to submit
their reports as soon as possible and, in those instances in
which it is not possible to do so, to inform the Sessional
Working Group of Governmental Expcrts on thc lmplcmentation of thc lnternational Covcnant on Economic.
Social and Cultural Rights as to when thosc rcports will be
submitted;
5. Notes wirh apprcciation that thc majority of States
partics to thc lntcrnational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and an incrcasing number of States parties to
the lntemational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, havc bccn rcpresentcd by cxpcrts for thc presentation of thcir rcports, thcreby assisting thc Human
Rights Committec and thc Economic and Social Council
in thcir work, and hopes that ali Statcs parties to both
Covenants will arrangc such representation in future;
6. Again inri/es ali States that have not yct done so to
become parties to the lnternational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and thc lntemational
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, as well as to consider acceding to the Optional Protocol to the lntcrnational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
7. Invites thc States parties to the Intcmational Covcnant on Civil and Political Rights to consider making thc
declaration provided for in article 41 of the Covenant;
S. Emphasizes the importancc of the strictest compliance by States partics with their obligations under the
lntcrnational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights and the lntemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and, where applicable, the Optional Protocol to
the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to keep
the Human Rights Committee informcd ofthe activities of
thc Commission on Human Rights, the Sub-Commission
on Prcvcntion of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and the Committce on thc Elimination of Discrimination against Women and also to transmit the
annual rcports of the Human Rights Committee to those
bodies;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Gencial Asserr:bly at its thirty-ninth session a report on
thc status of thc Intemational Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, the Intemational Covenant on
Civil and Política! Rights and the Optional Protocol to the
lnternational Covenant 011 Civil and Political Rights:
11. Urges the Secretary-General to take further positive steps to ensure that adequate publicity and other
arrangements are made to enable the Human Rights Committee and thc Economic and Social Council to carry out
ctfcctively, within existing resources, their respective functions under the International Covenants on Human
Rights:
168 ¡-\13~ ..l93.
1 ' 19 Scc Oj/in1J/ lín·ord,· o( rlw (rCfh'!iJ/ 1.nc111l1/1·
S11¡,¡,/emeni'.'vo. 40 (A 1 \8/40). para. 32

/'J111r1·-ctJ.dllh ,\'cs.\1on

Thirly-eighth Session

----------------

12. A/so urges the Secretary-General to expedite
arrangements for publication of the official public records
of thc Human Rights Committee in bound volumes, starting with its first scssion, as indicated in General Assembly
resolution 37/191:
13. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
ali possiblc steps to ensure that the Centre for Human
Rights of the Sccretariat is able to assist etfectively the
Human Rights Committee and the Economic and Social
Council in the implementation of their respective functions under the Intcmational Covcnants on Human
Rights, taking into account General Assembly resolutions
3534 (XXX) of 17 Deccmbcr 1975 and 31/93 of 14
December 1976.
/00/h p!enary meeting
16 Decemher /983

38/117.

Reporting obligations of the States parties
to the International Covenants on Human
Rights

1hc Ueneral :lssemh!r,
Recalling its resolution 37144 of 3 December 1982,
Mind.fúl of the obligation of ali States parties to the
lnternational Covenants on Human Rights 165 to comply
fully with their provisions, including articles 16 and 17 of
the lntemational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 165 which require the submission of periodic
reports in accordancc with the programme established by
thc Economic and Social Council,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 168 in which he indicates that a large number of
delays occur in the submission of reports on the implementation of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,
Noting that thc report of the Secretary-General emphasizes the interrclationship of problems affecting the reporting system under various human rights instruments,
1. Takes note with appreciation of thc report of the
Secretary-Gencral;
2. Reiteratcs the importance it attaches to the reporting systems established by the lnternational Covenants on
Human Rights;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit his
report !o the Economic and Social Council, which is
cntrusted with the consideration of the reports of States
parties to the Intcrnational Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights under article 16 thereof;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council and its
Sessional Working Group ofGovemmental Experts on the
Implementation of thc Intemational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights to consider the suggestions contained in the report ofthe Secretary-General with
a view to improving the situation regarding the submission of reports under the Covenant;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to consider the possibility of convening, in accordance with the suggestion
contained in thc report of the }fornan Rights Committee 169 and within existing resources, a meeting of the
Chairmen of thc bodies entrusted with the consideration
of reports submitted under the relevant human rights
instruments in order to consider the report of the Secretary-Gencral, taking into account thc results of General

\'l.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

215

Assembly resolution 38/20 of 22 November 1983 and of
the present resolution;

38/119.

6. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session of the views and
suggestions expressed at the above-mentioned meeting, if
it is convened.

Thc General Assemhl_,-,
Recalling the Declaration on the Protection of Ali Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 3452
(XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Bearing in mind article 7 of the lnternational Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights. 170
Recalling a/so its resolution 32/62 of 8 December 1977,
in which it requested the Commission on Human Rights
to draw up a draft convention against torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, in
the light of the principies embodied in the Declaration.
and its resolution 32/63 of 8 December 1977,
Reca/lingfurther that the Sixth United Nations Congress
on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, in its resolution 11 of 5 September 1980, expressed the
belief that the draft convention should be finalized at thc
earliest possible time, 171
Considering that it was not possible to complete thc
work on the draft convention during the thirty-ninth scssion of the Commission on Human Rights,
1. Welcomcs Economic and Social Council resolution
1983/38 of 27 May I 983, in which the Council authorizcd
a meeting of an open-ended working group of the Commission on Human Rights for a period of onc week prior
to the fortieth session of the Commission in order to complete the work on a draft convention;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
complete, at its fortieth session, as a matter of the highcst
priority, the drafting of a convention against torture and
othcr cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, with a view to submitting a draft, including provisions for the effective implementation of the future convention. to thc General Assembly at its thirty-ninth
session;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-ninth session the item entitled '"Torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment".

100th p/enary meeting
16 Decemher 1983

38/118.

Principies of Medical Ethics

The General Assemhly,
Recalling its resolution 37/194 of 18 December 1982,
by which it adopted the Principies of Medica! Ethics relevant to the role of health personnel, particularly physicians, in the protection of prisoners and detainees against
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment,
Alarmed that not infrequently members of the medica!
profession or other health personnel are engaged in activities which are difficult to reconcile with the Principies of
Medica) Ethics,
Recognizing the need for the full application ofthe Principies of Medica) Ethics and desiring that the Principies be
given wide publicity,
1. Urges ali Governments to take measures with a view
to promoting the application by ali health personnel and
Government officials, in particular those employed in
institutions of detention or imprisonment, of the Principies of Medica! Ethics relevant to the role of health personnel, particularly physicians, in the protection of prisoners and detainees against torture and other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to disseminate the
Principies of Medica) Ethics widely and in as many languages as possible and to issue a pamphlet containing the
text of the Principies in the six official languages of the
United Nations;
3. Ca/Is upon ali Governments to give the Principies of
Medica) Ethics the widest possible distribution, in particular among medica) and paramedical associations and institutions of detention or imprisonment, in an official language of the State;
4. Invites ali relevant intergovernmental organizations,
in particular the World Health Organization, and nongovernmental organizations concerned to bring the Principies of Medica! Ethics to the attention of the widest possible group of individuals, especially those active in the
medica) and paramedical field;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session on the steps taken
by the United Nations and the relevant specialized agencies, as well as by Governments, for the dissemination and
implementation of the Principies of Medica! Ethics.
100th p/enary meeting
16 Decemher I 983
170 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
171

See Sixth United Nation.i Congress on the Prevenuon o(Cnme and the
Treatment ofOlfenders, Caracas, 25 August-5 Septemher 1980: Repon prepared by the Secretaria/ (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.81.IV.4),
chap. 1, sect. B.

Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment

100th p/enary meeting
16 Decemher 1983

38/120.

Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa

The General Assemhly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
concerning preparations for the Second International C'onference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa 172 and the sections on Africa contained in the report of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 17 •1
Recalling its resolutions 37/197 of 18 December 1982.
entitled "International Conference on Assistance to Rcfugees in Africa", and 38/5 of 28 October 1983 on cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity,
Bearing in mind resolution AHG/Res.114 (XIX) on thc
Second Conference, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of
State and Governmcnt of the Organization of African
17 ~ A: 38, S26.
17.l O!f¡cwl Records uf the (;enera/ Assemhly, Thirty-eighth S,·sswn, .\11¡•p/ement No 12 (A/38/12 and f'orr. l) and Supplement No. 12A (A/38.• I 2
Add.l).
