16

General Assembly-Seventeenth Session

to the spirit and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and hinders the development of international cooperation and the maintenance of peace.
8. Foreign investment agreements freely entered into by
or between sovereign States sha 11 be observed in good faith;
States and international organizations shall strictly and
conscientiously respect the sovereignty of peoples and nations
over their natural wealth and resources in accordance with
the Charter and the principles set forth in the present
resolution.

II
Welcomes the decision of the International Law Commission to speed up its work on the codification of the
topic of responsibility of States for the consideration of
the General Assembly ;1
III
Requests the Secretary-General to continue the study
of the various aspects of permanent sovereignty over
natural resources, taking into account the desire of
Member States to ensure the protection of their sovereign rights while encouraging international co-operation
in the field of economic development, and to report to
the Economic and Social Council and to the General
Assembly, if possible at its eighteenth session.
1194th plenary meeting,
14 December 1962.

1820 (XVII). The Cairo Declaration of Developing
Countries
The General Assembly,
Having considered the Cairo Declaration of Developing Countries2 emanating from the Conference on the
Problems of Economic Development attended by a large
number of developing countrie~,
Welcoming the general approach of the Declaration,
namely, that the problems of social and economic development should be solved in a spirit of international
co-operation and within the framework of the United
Nations,
Taking cognizance of the principles of the Declaration
relating to the needs of the developing countries, the
implication of the process of their economic and social
growth, and the effective measures to be undertaken on
the national and international levels, for the attainment
of rapid and balanced economic and social development,
1. Notes with appreciation the Cairo Declaration of
Developing Countries submitted to the General Assembly
and included in the agenda of its seventeenth session ;
2. Recommends that Member States, the Economic
and Social Council, other United Nations bodies and the
specialized agencies should take into consideration the
principles of the Declaration when dealing with subjects
in the field of economic and social development.
1197th plenary meeting,
18 December 1962.
1821 (XVII). Activities of the United Nations in
the field of industrial development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1712 (XVI) of 19 December
1961, as well as Economic and Social Council resolutions
1 Official Records of the General Assembly
Seventeenth
Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/5209), paras. 67:69.
2 Jbid .. Srvcnternth Session, Anne.rrs. agenda items 12, 34,
35, 36, 37, 39 and 84, document A/5162.

872 (XXXIII) and 873 (XXXIII) of 10 April 1962
and 893 (XXXIV) of 26 July 1962,
Noting with satisfaction the programme of work and
the recommendations contained in the report of the
Committee for Industrial Development on the work of
its second session,3 the appointment by the Secretary
General of a United Nations Commissioner for Industrial Development, and the steps which have been taken
to strengthen the activities of the United Nations in
the field of industrial development,

I
Noting that the Economic and Social Council in its
resolution 873 (XXXIII), requested the Se~retaryGeneral to appoint an Advisory Committee of ten
e:xperts to examine the 9-uestion of the further organiza!1onal. changes that might be necessary in order to
mtens1fy, concentrate and expedite the United Nations
effort for the industrial development of the developing
coun_tr~es, including the advisability of establishing a
specialized agency for industrial development or of
strengthening or modifying the existing organizational
structure in that field,
Taking into consideration that the efforts of the
United Nations-including the specialized agencies and
the regional economic commissions-related to industrial
development should be closely linked with activities in
the field of natural resources, as well as in all other
related fields, since the process of industrialization is
dependent upon adequate progress in these fields,
. 1. Recommends that the Advisory Committee established under Economic and Social Council resolution
873 (XXXIII) should take into account, in its work
and recommendations :
(a) Whether it is advisable to deal with problems of
indu~trial development, natural resources, energy, and
possibly other related fields, within the framework of
one organizational structure;
( b) Whether it is possible to bring about a closer
co-ordination of all activities related to industrialization
at the national, regional and international levels;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
submit to the General Assembly, at its eighteenth session,
the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the
Advisory Committee, after consideration of that report
b)'. the Committee for Industrial Development, together
with the comments of the Committee and the Council·
'

II
Aware of the fact that the process of industrialization
in the economically less developed countries is closely
dependent on the expansion of the foreian trade of
those countries and that, as the industriali;ation of the
developing countries proceeds, the trade structure of
the world will undergo considerable changes,
Recommends to the Economic and Social Council
and to the_ Com~1it_tee for Industrial Development that
the Committee, 111 its study of the relationship between
accelerated industrialization and international trade
should take into account the urgent need of the devel~
oping countries for a steadily increasing income from
exports, their need for imports of capital goods on
favourable terms, as well as the long-term influence of
the industrialization of the developing countries upon
the structure, direction and volume of world trade and,
3 Official Records /lf thr Ec/lnomic and Social Council
Thirty-third Session, S11pp[ement No. 2 (E/3600/Rev.1).
'

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

to that end, suggests that the Committee be kept informed of the activities of international bodies concerned
with trade.
1197th plenary meeting,
18 December 1962.

1822

(XVII). International Coffee Agreement,
1962

The General Assembly,
Noting that a large group of States Members of the
United Nations and members of the specialized agencies
participated between 9 July and 28 September 1962
in the United Nations Conference on Coffee and that
at this Conference the International Coffee Agreement,
1962, was elaborated and approved,
Considering that the Agreement is an important
achievement in its field and constitutes a significant
addition to the range of commodity agreements already
in force,
Convinced that contributing to the solution of the
problems which affect international trade in primary
commodities is a necessary, suitable and fruitful subject
for international co-operation,
1. Welcomes the efforts to solve international coffee
problems by means of the conclusion of the International Coffee Agreement, 1962;
2. Calls upon all participating States to take the
steps necessary for the full operation of the Agreement
as rapidly as possible ;
3. Expresses the hope that all States Members of
the United Nations and members of the specialized
agencies trading in coffee will eventually find it possible
to participate in the Agreement.
1197th plenary meeting,
18 December 1962.

1823 (XVII). Decentralization of the economic
and social activities of the United Nations
and strengthening of the regional economic
commissions
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1518 (XV) of 15 December
1960 and 1709 (XVI) of 19 December 1961 on the
decentralization of the economic and social activities
of the United Nations and the strengthening of the
regional economic commissions,
Noting with appreciation the Secretary-General's reports on the subject, 4
Recalling the principle that countries receiving aid
should have a free choice of programmes and projects, 5
1. Reaffirms the policy of decentralization as stated
in its resolution 1709 (XVI);
2. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution 879 ( XXXIV) of 6 July 1962, and the practical
expression given to the policy of decentralization by
means of the tasks assigned to the regional economic
commissions, particularly in Council resolutions 891
4 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sci1('1lteenth
Session, Amiexcs, agenda items 12, 34, 35, 36, 37, 39 and 84,
document A/5196, and Official Records of the Economic and
Social Council, Thirty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda iterp
10, document E/3643.
5 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Thirty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda item 10, document
E/3643, para. 8.

17

(XXXIV) and 893 (XXXIV) of 26 July 1962, 903
(XXXIV) of 2 August 1962, and 916 (XXXIV),
917 (XXXIV) and 924 (XXXIV) of 3 August 1962;
3. Requests the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to submit to the
General Assembly, at the eighteenth session, its recommendations regarding the further steps that may be
necessary to carry out the Assembly's decisions on the
decentralization of the economic and social activities
of the United Nations and the strengthening of the
regional economic commissions, taking into account,
inter alia, the views of the Economic and Social Council
and of the executive secretaries of the regional economic commissions as transmitted through the Secretary-General, as well as the measures outlined in the
Secretary-General's report to the Assembly at its
sixteenth session ;6
4. Requests the Secretary-General to proceed with
the policy of decentralization of the economic and social
activities of the United Nations and strengthening of
the regional economic commissions, taking into consideration the interests of States which are not members of any regional commission by adopting such
measures as may be necessary to ensure that they receive the same benefits as they would receive through
membership in the regional commissions, and to submit
to the Economic and Social Council at its thirty-sixth
session and to the General Assembly at its eighteenth
session a detailed report on the stage reached in the
implementation of this policy and on the further steps
required to achieve the intended results ;
5. Recommends that the Secretary-General should
continue to convene meetings of the executive secretaries of the regional economic commissions to discuss
matters of common interest and to exchange experience,
particularly regarding the operation of decentralized
activities, with a view to promoting co-operation between the regions, and that he should make available
an annual report on their meetings for consideration
by the Economic and Social Council and by the General
Assembly.
1197th plenary meeting,
18 December 1962.

1824 (XVII). The role of the United Nations in
training national technical personnel for
the accelerated industrialization of the
developing countries
The General Assembly,
Considering that the task of accelerating industrialization, which is an indispensable condition for
the development of national economies, requires adequate facilities for general education and a large number of well trained national technical personnel,
Recalling its resolution 1515 (XV) of 15 December
1960, Economic and Social Council resolution 898
(XXXIV) of 2 August 1962 and the latest report
of the Committee for Industrial Development, 7 in
which the training of technical personnel is regarded
as an important factor in the economic development
of under-developed countries,
6 Official Records
of the General Assembly, Sixteenth
Session, Annexes, agenda items 12, 28, 29 and 30, document
A/4911.
7 Official Records of the Economic and Sorin/ ('ormril,
Thirty-third Sessio11, Suppleme1. f Xo. .! (F/31i00_/Rev.l ),
paras. 54-65.
