158

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

3. Notes also the efforts that the United Nations
Sudano-Sahelian Office has made in the face of these obstacles to assist, on behalf of the United Nations Environment Programme, the Governments ofthe countries ofthe
region in combating desertification, under a joint venture
between the United Nations Environment Programme
and the United Nations Development Programme;
4. Commends the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme and the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme for the
sustained and co-ordinated manner in which they have
continued to develop the joint venture through the U nited
Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office;
5. Recommends to the Governing Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme and the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme that they continue, increase and intensify their efforts to mobilize resources for the United Nations SudanoSahelian Office in order to make it more capable of responding adequately to the pressing needs of the countries
of the Sudano-Sahelian and adjacent regions;
6. Expresses its gratitude to all Governments, and ali
organizations and foundations that have contributed to
the implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian region of the
Plan of Action to Combat Desertification;
7. Draws the attention of the international community
to the pressing need to increase the efforts to implement
the Plan of Action in the Sudano-Sahelian region and
urges it to contribute to the implementation through appropriate means, including the United Nations Trust
Fund for Sudano-Sahelian Activities, and to respond
favourably to requests for assistance from the Governments ofthe countries ofthe region that are most affected;
8. Requests the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme to report to the General
Assembly at its forty-fourth session, through the Economic and Social Council, on the progress made in the implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian region of the Plan of
Action.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

e
FINANCING AND OTHER MEASURES IN SUPPORT OF THE
PLAN OF ACTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 40/198 of 17 December 1985,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation and financing of the Plan of Action to
Combat Desertification;65
2. Urges Governments as well as organs, organizations and programmes of the United Nations system,
other multilateral development-assistance institutions,
non-governmental organizations and prívate foundations
to take the necessary decisions to mobilize the funds required before the desertification process destroys more
arable lands and it becomes too late to stop the process;
3. Urges relevant research institutions, as appropriate,
in co-operation with the United Nations Environment
Programme, to give maximum priority to work in the field
of desertification;
4. Takes note of the fact that the Governing Council of
the United Nations Environment Programme, in its decision 14/15 D of 18 June 1987, 46 requested the Executive

Director of the Programme to discuss with Governments
the feasibility of adopting a new and realistic approach
that would encourage them and international financing institutions to contribute directly or indirectly to the Special
Account to finance the implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification;
5. Requests the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme to examine, in the context
of the evaluation called for in Governing Council decision
14/15 C of 18 June 1987, 46 ways and means ofenhancing
the efficiency of the Consultative Group for Desertification Control in pursuance of its mandate as contained in
the pertinent resolutions of the General Assembly;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to keep under review actions at the national and regional levels as well as
the issues pertaining to the financing of the Plan of Action
to Combat Desertification and to consult further with interested Governments on the proposals contained in his
report. 65
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

D
REPORT OF THE SECRETAR Y-GENERAL CONCERNING THE
PLAN OF ACTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION

The General Assembly
Requests the Secretary-General to report to it at its
forty-fourth session, through the Economic and Social
Council, on the implementation of resolutions A, B and C
above.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/190.

Living conditions of the Palestinian people in
the occupied Palestinian territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Vancouver Declaration on Human Settlements, 1976, 70 and the relevant recommendations for national action 71 adopted by Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human Settlements,
Reca//ing also its resolution 40/201 of 17 December
1985,
Grave/y alarmed by the continuation ofthe Israeli settlement policies, which have been declared null and void and
a major obstacle to peace,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the living conditions of the Palestinian
people in the occupied Palestinian territories; 72
2. Takes note also of the statement made on 27 October 1987 by the observer of the Palestine Liberation Organization;13
3. Rejects the Israeli plans and actions intended to
change the demographic composition of the occupied
Palestinian territories, particularly the increase and ex70 Report of Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements, Vancouver, 31 May-11 June 1976 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.7 and corrigendum), chap. l.
71 /bid., chap. 11.
72 A/42/183-E/1987/53.
73 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-second Session,
Second Committee, 25th meeting, and corrigendum.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

pansion of the Israeli settlements, and other plans and actions creating conditions leading to the displacement and
exodus of Palestinians from the occupied Palestinian territories;
4. Expresses its alarm at the deterioration, as a result
of the Israelí occupation, in the living conditions of the
Palestinian people in the Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967;
5. Affirms that the Israeli occupation is contradictory
to the basic requirements for the social and economic development of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territories;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare an indepth study on future needs in the field of infrastructure
for the Palestinian people in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session, through the
Economic and Social Council, on the progress made in the
implementation of the present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/191.

Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the Vancouver Declaration on Human
Settlements, 197670 and the recommendations for national
action 71 adopted at Habitat: United Nations Conference
on Human Settlements,
Recalling its resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980, the
annex to which contains the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade, in which, ínter alía, the importance of the provision of basic shelter and infrastructure was stressed,
Recalling also its resolution 41/190 of 8 December 1986
on the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless,
Taking note of the reports of the Executive Director of
the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) entitled "Shelter and services for the poor -a call to
action" 74 and "A new agenda for human settlements", 75
as well as the comments made by Governments at the
tenth (commemorative) session ofthe Commission on Human Settlements,
Recognizing that adequate and secure shelter is a basic
human right and is vital for the fulfilment of human aspirations,
Recognizing further that a squalid residential environment is a constant threat to health and to life itself and
thereby constitutes a drain on human resources, a nation's
most valuable asset,
Noting that this lamentable situation can adversely affect the social and political stability of countries,
Deeply concerned about the present alarming situation,
in which, despite the efforts of Governments at the national and local levels and of international organizations,
more than one billion people find themselves either completely without shelter or living in homes unfit for human
habitation, and that, owing to prevailing demographic
trends, these already formidable problems will escalate in
the coming years unless concerted, determined measures
are taken immediately,
74 HS/C/10/3.
75 HS/C/10/2 and Corr.1 and 4.

159

Fully aware of the multidimensional nature of the shelter problem, which has its main roots in poverty and, in
many countries, is aggravated by the scarcity of resources,
inadequate institutional capacities and the lack of a legal
and financia! framework for alleviating the problem,
Realizing that the problem manifests itself in slums and
shanty towns, with inadequate social and technical services, and in a general deterioration of the living environment in rural settlements,
Conscious of the vital role of the self-help efforts of the
poor to house themselves and the multiplier effects of shelter development, based on the full mobilization of local resources, and their importance to the economic development of a country, and the lost opportunities for
development represented by the neglected shelter sector,
Convinced that the continuous, co-ordinated and widely
based efforts of all relevant agencies, bodies, organizations
and individuals, when guided by an appropriate strategy,
will reverse the alarming trends and produce clear and visible improvements in the shelter and neighbourhoods of
the poor and disadvantaged by the year 2000,
Encouraged by action already taken in many countries
to prepare national shelter strategies and launch other
measures that will promote achievement of the goal of
shelter for ali,
1. Decides that there shall be a Global Strategy for
Shelter to the Year 2000, including a plan of action for its
implementation, monitoring and evaluation;
2. Further decides that the objective of the Strategy
should be to stimulate measures that will facilitate adequate shelter for ali by the year 2000;
3. Requests the Executive Director of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) to prepare
a proposal for a Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year
2000 and its implementation, including its financia) implications, for consideration by the Commission on Human Settlements at its eleventh session;
4. Requests the Commission on Human Settlements to
formulate a Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000,
to be drawn up within existing resources, for submission,
through the Economic and Social Council, to the General
Assembly at its forty-third session;
5. Urges ali Governments to commit themselves to the
objectives of the Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year
2000 by adopting and implementing shelter strategies in
accordance with the guidelines contained in section I of
the annex to the present resolution, which will permit the
mobilization of all forces and resources in the country for
the attainment of the objectives of the Strategy, and to
renew this commitment annually by, ínter alía, announcing on World Habitat Day the concrete actions to be taken
and targets to be achieved during each successive year;
6. Requests ali United Nations bodies and agencies and
the international community at large to support the formulation and implementation of the Global Strategy
along the lines defined in section II of the annex to the
present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987
