UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/59
14 October 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3436th meeting of the Security Council, held on 14 October 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
concerning Rwanda", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the Secretary-General’s progress
report on the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR)
(S/1994/1133). The Council stresses the importance it attaches to the role
of UNAMIR, whose neutral and independent presence is crucial to creating
conditions of security. It welcomes the Secretary-General’s revised
deployment schedule for UNAMIR which is intended to promote security in all
sectors of the country and create conditions conducive to the return of
refugees. It also welcomes the assistance being provided by UNAMIR to the
Government of Rwanda’s efforts to establish a new integrated police force.
It encourages UNAMIR to continue that assistance and asks the
Secretary-General to provide it with detailed information on this
programme.
"The Security Council remains extremely concerned at the plight of the
millions of refugees and displaced persons in Rwanda and the countries of
the region. It reiterates its view that their return to their homes is
essential for the normalization of the situation in Rwanda and for the
stabilization of the region. It deplores the continuing acts of
intimidation and violence within the refugee camps which are designed to
prevent the refugee population there from returning home. It welcomes the
commitment of the Governments of Zaire, Tanzania and Burundi to help
resolve the problems facing the refugees, and calls upon them to do all in
their power to ensure the safety both of the refugees and of the
international personnel providing humanitarian assistance to the refugees.
"The Security Council notes the view expressed in the report that the
most effective way of ensuring the safety of the refugees and their freedom
to return to Rwanda would be the separation of political leaders, former
RGF soldiers and militias from the rest of the refugee population, and
looks forward to receiving a further report from the Secretary-General on
this issue, as soon as possible, based inter alia on the findings of the
United Nations team participating in the joint Zairian/United Nations

94-39935 (E)

141094

/...

S/PRST/1994/59
English
Page 2

working group. It stresses once again the responsibilities which fall upon
the neighbouring countries, including that of ensuring that their
territories are not used to destabilize the situation.
"The return of refugees is also crucially dependent upon the situation
within Rwanda itself, including the existence of a climate of confidence
and the establishment of a more secure environment. The Security Council
notes the important role human rights monitors and their speedy deployment
will have in this context and notes also the importance of cooperation
between them and UNAMIR. The Security Council stresses the importance it
attaches to UNAMIR having an effective broadcasting service to provide
objective information. It hopes that the Government of Rwanda will assist
in enabling the proposed United Nations radio station to come into
operation as soon as possible.
"The Security Council welcomes the efforts being made by the Rwandan
Government to facilitate the return of refugees and to begin the difficult
process of national reconciliation and reconstruction in the country. It
notes with concern reports that some reprisals may have occurred and
affirms the importance it attaches to the avoidance of reprisals against
returnees and to the safeguarding of their property rights. It welcomes
the speed with which the United Nations and the Government of Rwanda
responded to allegations that some RPA soldiers might have been responsible
for systematic killings. It underlines the importance it attaches to the
thorough and expeditious investigation of these allegations.
"The Security Council welcomes the assurance given to Council members
by President Bizimungu of his Government’s commitment to achieving national
reconciliation and promoting respect for the fundamental rights of
individuals. The Security Council stresses the importance it attaches to
the Government of Rwanda implementing this commitment. In this context it
endorses the Secretary-General’s call to the Government of Rwanda to
maintain an open dialogue with all political interest groups in Rwanda in
an effort to achieve genuine reconciliation between all elements of Rwandan
society, within the frame of reference of the Arusha Peace Agreement. In
particular, the Security Council encourages the Rwandan Government to
continue its efforts to invite members of the MRND who were not involved in
the massacres to participate in the Government and to absorb members of the
former RGF into the new army.
"The Security Council reaffirms its view that those responsible for
serious breaches of international humanitarian law and acts of genocide
must be brought to justice. It stresses that persons involved in such acts
cannot achieve immunity from prosecution by fleeing the country and notes
that the provisions of the Convention relating to the status of refugees do
not apply to such persons. In this context, the Council is currently
considering the recommendations of the Commission of Experts in respect of
the establishment of an international tribunal and will act expeditiously
in the matter.
"The Security Council commends the assistance given by the
international community, the United Nations agencies and non-governmental
/...

S/PRST/1994/59
English
Page 3

organizations in response to the crisis in Rwanda. It calls on them to
maintain their support during the difficult transition period and to begin
to redirect their support from relief to rehabilitation and reconstruction.
It endorses the Secretary-General’s views as to the importance of immediate
and coordinated assistance, in particular to the restoration of civil
administration and the reconstruction of the social and economic
infrastructure of the country.
"The Security Council agrees with the Secretary-General that
developments in Rwanda strengthen the case for a broader approach to the
question of national reconciliation and other key aspects of the crisis.
It encourages him to continue his consultations on how the United Nations
can assist in the preparation and convening of an international conference
to look into the problems of the subregion.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
