S/PV.9021 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9021st meeting

Monday, 25 April 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Roscoe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Macaj
Mrs. Espeschit Maia
Mr. Liu Zhao
Mrs. Aubert
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Sharma
Mr. Cahalane
Ms. Nthoki
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Halle
Mr. Khloponin
Ms. AlMatrooshi
Ms. Meyer

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-32974 (E)
*2232974*

S/PV.9021 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: Before we begin, I would like
to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than four minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work as expeditiously as possible.
Flashing lights on the collars of the microphone will
prompt all speakers to bring their remarks to a close
after four minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
is deeply concerned about the extremely dangerous
incidents and developments on Palestinian territory,
particularly in the Arab city of Jerusalem. We also
condemn in the strongest terms the actions of the
racist Israeli occupation forces and extremist Israeli
settlers, such as the criminal and barbaric attacks on
the defenders and worshippers in the Al-Aqsa Mosque/
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, which claimed the lives of several
martyrs among innocent civilians and resulted in
dozens of injuries and hundreds of arrests. The practices
of the Israeli occupation authorities and settler groups
are illegal and immoral. They reflect the true image
of the usurping Israeli entity and pose a serious threat
to the rights of the Palestinian people and the historic
and legal status of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, which the
occupying Power should respect. The unfair inaction
regarding putting a stop to those aggressions — along
with unlimited United States support for the practices of
occupation, aggression, settlement, Judaization, killing
and the destruction and confiscation of Palestinian
territories — will not change the established history or
make the Palestinian people relinquish their rights.
Syria affirms that the Palestinian question
will remain its main priority. We reiterate our firm
commitment to supporting the inalienable rights of
our brother people of Palestine and to standing by their
side in their legitimate struggle to defend their land and
holy sites and restore their occupied lands and all their
legitimate rights — especially the right to establish an
independent State on their land, with Jerusalem as its
capital, and the right of Palestinian refugees to return
to their homeland, in accordance with international law
and the relevant United Nations resolutions, chief among
them resolution 194 (1948) — as well as to see Palestine
granted full membership in the United Nations.
2/23

25/04/2022

The continuing systematic Israeli attacks on Syria’s
sovereignty are a serious and grave threat to the security
and stability of Syria and the region and require the
immediate condemnation and urgent intervention of the
Secretariat and the Security Council so as to protect
the Syria-Israel Disengagement Agreement of 1974.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of
the Syrian Arab Republic recently sent a letter to the
Secretary-General in which he informed him of a series
of repeated Israeli attacks on Syrian territories, the most
recent of which occurred on 14 April around the city of
Damascus. He warned that such attacks pose a threat
to the security and stability of Syria and the region
and stressed Syria’s right to respond by appropriate
means under international law and the Charter of the
United Nations.
The silence regarding the repeated attacks by
Israel, the occupying Power, on our people in the
occupied Syrian Golan has emboldened the occupation
authorities to continue their violations of international
law and the Charter under the protection of successive
United States Administrations, which have helped them
to expand their occupation of Syrian territories and
aggressions against them. Such acts jeopardize peace
and security in the Middle East and undermine the
credibility of the United Nations and the effectiveness
of its competent bodies. In that context, my country
reiterates its call to the Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process to
carry out their duties in line with their mandates in
that regard and in accordance with the legal position
of the United Nations on the Israeli occupation of the
occupied Syrian Golan and Israel’s illegal aggression
and practices. That would raise this serious issue in
the Security Council and compel the Israeli side to
respect the relevant resolutions of the Council, abide
by the terms of the 1974 Disengagement Agreement
and stop threatening regional and international peace
and security.
The Israeli occupation authorities are continuing
their provocative practices and violations of the basic
rights of the people of the occupied Syrian Golan, in
flagrant violation of various resolutions of international
legitimacy, in particular resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1967) and 497 (1981). In doing so, they are disregarding
their international legal obligations as the occupying
Power, as well as the rules of international law and the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.
22-32974

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Syrian Arab Republic calls on the Security
Council to urgently shoulder its responsibilities in
order to bring an end to the Israeli occupation and its
aggressive practices and hold the Israeli occupation
authorities accountable for its crimes so that they do not
go unpunished. We reaffirm our unwavering adherence
to our right to restore the entire Syrian Golan, occupied
since June 1967, by all available means guaranteed
by international law, as an unbreakable eternal right.
Syria underscores that all decisions and measures taken
by Israel, the occupying Power, to change the natural
and demographic features of the Golan, or to impose
its laws, authorities and Administration on it, are null
and void and have no legal effect under international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions, in
particular resolution 497 (1981).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Gonzato: Before I deliver my statement, I want
to convey the deep concern of the European Union (EU)
about the continued tensions in Israel and Palestine. We
call on all sides to exercise maximum restraint, refrain
from violence and avoid all forms of provocation.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
North Macedonia, Montenegro, Albania, Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Georgia align themselves with
this statement.
The EU reaffirms its commitment to a just and
comprehensive settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict based on a two-State solution, with the State
of Israel and an independent, democratic, contiguous,
sovereign and viable State of Palestine living side by
side in peace and security and mutual recognition, and
with Jerusalem serving as the future capital of both
States. The EU welcomes high-level contacts between
the parties and encourages further engagement aimed
at renewing confidence, restoring the political horizon
and opening a path towards a relaunch of the peace
process as soon as possible. The EU welcomes the recent
measures that have been taken to improve Palestinian
livelihoods and calls for the immediate implementation
of the commitments that have been made, before the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee meets in Brussels on 10 May.
The EU firmly condemns the terror attacks in
Israel that claimed 14 lives in recent weeks. We remain
firmly committed to preventing and fighting terrorism

S/PV.9021 (Resumption 1)

and violent extremism. The EU firmly condemns all
acts of violence, including in East Jerusalem, and
including the increasing settler violence, and calls for
accountability for those acts. We are also concerned
about the growing numbers of casualties, including
among women and children, and affirm that the use of
force must be proportionate, in line with international
law and employed only as a last resort when it is strictly
unavoidable in order to protect life.
As the end of the holy month of Ramadan
approaches, the EU calls on all parties to exercise
maximum restraint and refrain from violence. We
recall the special significance of the holy sites and call
for upholding the status quo put in place in 1967 for
the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif, in line with
previous understandings and with respect for Jordan’s
special role. The EU will closely monitor developments
and their implications on the ground and remains ready
to take further action to protect the viability of a twoState solution. We urge both parties to demonstrate
their stated commitment to a two-State solution through
concrete action and to avoid unilateral actions, which
threaten it. The EU’s opposition to Israel’s settlement
policy and actions taken in that context, including in
East Jerusalem and especially in sensitive areas such as
Har Homa, Givat Hamatos and Area E-1, is well known.
The EU reiterates that settlements are illegal under
international law and calls for a halt to all settlement
activities. Such actions as building the separation barrier
beyond the 1967 line; demolitions and confiscations,
including of EU-funded projects; evictions; forced
transfers, including of Bedouins; illegal outposts;
settler violence; and restrictions of movement and
access severely threaten a two-State solution and will
only escalate an already tense environment. The EU is
concerned about increased demolitions and evictions,
including in East Jerusalem. It will be important to
refrain from proceeding with any planned demolitions,
evictions or settlement expansions.
The EU reiterates how vital it is to consolidate
the ceasefire in Gaza and its unequivocal position that
rocket fire and the launching of incendiary devices and
other attacks by Hamas and other terrorist groups are
unacceptable. The EU welcomes the easing of some
restrictions on Gaza, but since the measures taken so
far have been shown to be inadequate to ensuring rapid
stabilization and recovery, we call for the further lifting
of restrictions, underlining the need for unimpeded
humanitarian access to Gaza. The EU calls on all

22-329743/23

S/PV.9021 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the parties to take the necessary steps to produce a
fundamental change in the political, security and
economic situation in the Gaza Strip, including the end
of the closure and a full opening of the crossing points,
while addressing Israel’s legitimate security concerns.
The EU welcomed the holding on 26 March of the
second phase of local Palestinian elections as a step
towards national elections, and reiterates its call to
the Palestinian Authority to organize the postponed
elections without further delay. Democratic Palestinian
institutions based on respect for the rule of law and
human rights are vital for the Palestinian people and,
ultimately, for a two-State solution.
The EU urges all Palestinian factions to engage
in good faith in the reconciliation process, adhere to
previous agreements, renounce violence and terrorism,
recognize Israel’s right to exist and commit to democratic
principles, including the rule of law. Palestinian civil
society must be allowed to carry out its important task
free from obstruction, harassment or intimidation by
any party, and freedom of expression must be upheld. A
full, independent investigation into the death of Nizar
Banat must take place, and those responsible must be
held accountable. The EU is proud of its continued
support to civil society, which contributes to peace
efforts and confidence-building between Israelis and
Palestinians. We urge the parties to refrain from using
anti-terrorism legislation to undermine civil society
and its members’ valuable work and contribution to the
pursuit of accountability.
Until a just, fair, agreed and realistic solution to
the refugee issue that accords with international law is
found, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) remains
crucial to providing the necessary protection and
essential services for Palestine refugees and supporting
peace and stability in the region. The EU will continue
to support UNRWA in all its fields of operation,
including East Jerusalem. We call on all partners to
increase their contributions to UNRWA.
Eleven years after the beginning of the conflict
in Syria, the situation remains extremely worrying.
The Syrian people continue to suffer from huge levels
of violence and hardship. After more than a decade
of conflict, it is vital to ensure that the international
community keeps up the search for a durable and
comprehensive political solution and that the Syrian
people are not forgotten, despite other ongoing
4/23

25/04/2022

international crises. The European Union remains fully
committed to that goal. We want to reiterate that a
sustainable solution to the conflict requires a genuine,
inclusive political transition in line with resolution
2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex), negotiated by the Syrian parties
within the United Nations-led Geneva process, with
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women.
The EU unequivocally supports the efforts of the
United Nations Special Envoy to make progress on
all aspects of resolution 2254 (2015), including on the
issues of detainees and persons missing at the hands of
the regime and the establishment of a safe and neutral
environment for holding free and fair elections under
United Nations supervision. The EU has responded
positively to the Special Envoy’s initiative for a stepsfor-steps approach to help move the political process
forward. We urge all the participants, particularly the
Syrian regime, to engage in good faith in the political
process, including the Constitutional Committee,
with the aim of achieving meaningful progress on
constitutional reform.
By some estimates, in 2021 alone as many as
1,500 civilians were killed in Syria as a direct result
of the conflict. The continuing hostilities across
Syria provoked by various actors render ordinary life
impossible for the civilian population. The ceasefire
agreed in March 2020 in the north-west is fragile and
must be upheld without reservation. The EU once
again echoes the calls from the Security Council for
the implementation of a nationwide ceasefire. Civilians
must be protected at all times, and attacks on civilian
objects, including hospitals, must cease. The Syrian
regime must cooperate fully with the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW),
including in the OPCW’s investigations of the use of
chemical weapons in the conflict. The EU continues to
call on the Syrian regime and its allies, and all parties
to the conflict, to cease indiscriminate air strikes and
the shelling of civilians and humanitarian workers.
We strongly condemn the regime’s attacks in the Idlib
region on 4 March, which resulted in the deaths of four
children on their way to school.
All parties responsible for breaches of international
humanitarian law and human rights law — some of
which may constitute war crimes and crimes against
humanity — must be held accountable. The EU
reiterates its call to have the situation in Syria referred
to the International Criminal Court. Accountability and
22-32974

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

justice for victims is essential to the achievement of a
stable, peaceful Syria based on a credible, inclusive and
viable political solution in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015). In the absence of international justice, the
prosecution of war crimes under national jurisdiction
where possible, now under way in several EU member
States, represents an important contribution to securing
justice. In addition, the Netherlands and Canada are
engaged in an important initiative to hold Syria to
account for breaching the United Nations Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment. The EU will continue to
support efforts to gather evidence with a view to
future legal action, including by the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011, and the work of the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry.
Turkey is a key partner of the EU and a critically
important actor in the Syrian crisis and the region.
Turkey’s security concerns in north-eastern Syria
should be addressed through political and diplomatic
means, not military action, and with full respect for
international humanitarian law.
The underlying causes of the refugee and
displacement crisis — 5.6 million Syrians are registered
as refugees, and another 6.9 million are displaced within
Syria — must be addressed within the framework of
resolution 2254 (2015). The EU continues to warn
against any further displacement in any part of Syria, as
well as the potential exploitation of such displacements
for the purpose of social and demographic engineering.
The conditions for the safe, voluntary and dignified
return of refugees and displaced persons to their places
of origin, in line with the parameters defined by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and in accordance with international law, still
have to be met. The EU will be in a position to support
returns only once those conditions are satisfied.
The renewal by the Security Council of resolution
2585 (2021), for authorizing cross-border assistance
in July 2022, will be vital. Recent reports by the
Secretary-General show that there is no adequate
alternative for meeting the immense, and growing,
humanitarian needs in north-western Syria. All parties
must allow rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access, including across conflict lines, to ensure that

S/PV.9021 (Resumption 1)

humanitarian assistance reaches people in need through
the most direct routes.
Early-recovery projects are also important for the
dignity of the Syrian people and their future. EU-funded
projects are intended and designed for those in genuine
need. The EU will not fund early-recovery efforts that
might support social and demographic engineering.
Humanitarian needs in Syria continue to increase.
More than 12 million people are food insecure, and an
estimated 14.6 million are in need inside Syria. The EU
and its member States are the largest donor in this area
and have provided €25 billion to meet the needs arising
from the crisis over the past decade. We will continue
to demonstrate solidarity with the Syrian people
and call on the international community to increase
its commitments.
I would like to draw the Council’s attention to
the sixth conference supporting Syria and the region,
which the EU will host in Brussels on 10 May, this time
counting on the physical presence of the participants.
As in the past, it will be held with the participation of
Governments, international organizations and Syrian
civil society. And as in previous years, the conference
will enable the international community to renew its
political commitment vis-à-vis the Syrian people and
will provide an opportunity for fresh financial pledges
and a platform for Syrians to be heard. The conference
will enable us to continue our efforts to ensure that the
Syrian people are not forgotten.
The EU reiterates its call for a political solution and
emphasizes that no normalization, lifting of sanctions
or reconstruction will be possible until the Syrian
regime engages in a political transition within the
framework of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
process. In conclusion, the EU remains committed to
the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Syrian State and calls once again on all the parties to the
conflict to advance a credible, sustainable and inclusive
political solution based on the full and comprehensive
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). It is the only
route to a sustainable peace in Syria.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
The situation in occupied Palestine has deteriorated,
as Israel’s apartheid policies and brutalities against
the Palestinian people continue unabated and with no
accountability. The Israeli regime commits its atrocities

22-329745/23

S/PV.9021 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in full view of the international community, knowing
quite well that it will not face any consequences.
We strongly condemn the recent incursions of
Israeli occupation forces and extremist settlers within
the Al-Aqsa Mosque during the holy month of Ramadan,
which violated the Mosque’s sanctity and rites of worship
and constituted a brazen provocation with regard to
Muslim feelings. More than 200 Palestinians have been
injured and hundreds detained as a result of recent
raids and attacks by Israeli occupation forces. United
Nations reports indicate that in the first three months
of 2022 the Israeli regime continued its oppressive and
expansionist policies and unlawful criminal practices
in the occupied Palestinian territory, killing innocent
people, including women and children, requisitioning
Palestinians’ property, seizing and demolishing their
homes and forcibly evicting them. In addition, as a
collective punishment of the innocent people of Gaza,
the inhumane blockade continues. That is a crime
against humanity, a violation of all international laws
and norms and a serious threat to international peace
and security.
Any sacrilege or desecration of Muslim holy
sites or offence to the feelings of Muslims around the
world is repulsive and should not be tolerated. We
warn about the severe consequences of such a reckless
and dangerous escalation in assaults on religious
sensitivities. The current alarming trend must be
tackled immediately and seriously. If a tragedy with
far-reaching effects is to be averted, the historic and
legal status of these sacred sites must be preserved
and protected under international law. We call on
the international community to take the necessary
precautionary measures to protect the Al-Aqsa Mosque,
including its cultural heritage, from attacks by Israeli
occupation forces and extremist settlers.
In the meantime, the Israeli regime has continued
its destabilizing and malicious activities in the region
by violating Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
and threatening openly to use force against other
countries in the region. We condemn Israel’s malevolent
policies and destabilizing activities in the region, which
are a real threat to peace and security.
The conflict in Palestine can be resolved only if
the occupation ends and the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people are fully recognized, restored and
protected, resulting in the full restoration of Palestinian
sovereignty over the entirety of Palestine. However, that
6/23

25/04/2022

will not be achieved until the Security Council’s inaction
is no longer an option. The Council’s current stance has
only encouraged and emboldened the Israeli regime
to perpetuate its occupation and atrocities against the
oppressed people of Palestine. The atrocities are well
documented and irrefutable. They are regarded as war
crimes under international law, and the perpetrators of
those crimes must be brought to justice without further
delay. The Security Council must therefore shoulder its
obligation to uphold its mandate under the Charter of
the United Nations for maintaining international peace
and security and hold Israel accountable through all
legal means at its disposal. It must also make certain
that war crimes are not overlooked.
Finally, the representative of the Israeli regime
has resorted to lies and misused this platform once
again today to make bogus claims against my country,
which we categorically reject. The baseless claims are
designed simply to divert attention from the Israeli
regime’s ongoing aggression against Palestine and
other countries in the region. They are an exercise in
futility, as the international community is well aware
of Israel’s mendacity and deceit.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate the United Kingdom on presiding
over the Security Council for this month, and we
wish you every success, Mr. President. I also thank
Mr. Tor Wennesland, the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing and his
efforts to halt the escalation of violence in the occupied
Palestinian territories and foster the chances for peace
in the Middle East.
Tunisia reiterates its condemnation of the
aggressive practices of the occupying forces and settlers
in the occupied Palestinian territories, especially East
Jerusalem. We also condemn the Israeli violations of
the Al-Aqsa Mosque and its attacks on worshippers
and desecration of holy sites during the month of
Ramadan. We condemn all measures aimed at changing
the demographic structure and the legal and historical
status of the Palestinian occupied territory, including
East Jerusalem, particularly the settlement policies
whereby land is confiscated and Palestinian homes are
demolished and Palestinians forcibly displaced. Tunisia
once again urges the international community to
assume its legal and moral responsibilities towards the
22-32974

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian people and reiterates the need to ensure the
protection of the Palestinian civilian population from
the violence of settlers and the occupation forces and
their excessive use of force, including against women
and children.
It is deplorable that the international community’s
reaction to the situation in Palestine has been affected
by the episodes of violence and escalation that continue
to occur as a result of the occupying Power’s practices,
without focusing efforts on addressing the root causes
of the situation, which are precisely the occupation
and aggressive practices of the occupying Power. The
Palestinian question has continued for more than seven
decades, always marked by the suffering and violations
that the Palestinian people have been subjected to,
including through the general instability in the Middle
East. We believe that the only way out is by taking the
road of peace and international legitimacy. That will
enable the region to restore security and stability by
achieving a just and comprehensive peace in order to
give the Palestinian people their legitimate rights in an
independent and fully sovereign State within the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, as provided
for in United Nations resolutions, the internationally
agreed parameters and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Tunisia confirms the statement of the Arab
Ministerial Committee and stresses that ending this
situation, which is contrary to all international and
humanitarian conventions, is an urgent need that
cannot be delayed further. Tunisia therefore calls on the
international community to pool its efforts in order to
create the conditions conducive to relaunching serious
negotiations based on a fixed timetable. We once
again call for the strengthening of the Quartet and the
efforts made by the Security Council, in line with its
responsibilities. We also call on the parties concerned
to respond positively to the call for the holding of a
fully-fledged international conference to engage in a
genuine peace process so as to resolve the conflict.
Given the deteriorating humanitarian and living
conditions in the occupied territories, including in
the Gaza Strip, Tunisia reiterates the need to increase
assistance to the Palestinian Authority. We commend
the efforts made by the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians and the support of the donor community
to ease the crisis. We also urge the international
community to further support the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the

S/PV.9021 (Resumption 1)

Near East, given the vital role it plays as one of the most
important foundations for stability in the region.
In conclusion, Tunisia reiterates its unwavering
and principled support for the rights of the Palestinian
people, which have no statute of limitations. We
always stand ready to pursue our efforts to achieve a
fair and lasting peace and end the long suffering of the
Palestinian people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Aidid (Malaysia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate. Malaysia would also
like to thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for
his briefing.
We once again are witnessing the escalation of
Israeli aggression and incitement and violations against
Palestinian civilians and worshippers, including women
and children, particularly in and around the Al-Aqsa
Mosque. Malaysia condemns in the strongest terms
those unprovoked and unjustified attacks. Indeed, such
assaults are contemptuous of all humanity. We reaffirm
our support for the custodianship of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan over Muslim and Christian holy
sites in Jerusalem.
Malaysia believes that all conflicts must be resolved
peacefully and in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. Yet we have
witnessed that the same strength of attention and action
has not been accorded to Palestine’s decades-long
struggle in resisting Israel’s occupation and aggression.
The principles of the United Nations Charter and
international law must be consistently applied to all
conflicts. One cannot advocate to respect human rights,
a rules-based order and the United Nations Charter,
while, at the same time, ignoring Israeli atrocities
towards the Palestinians. We call on all Member States
to respect and implement the relevant United Nations
resolutions to ensure that Israel is accountable for its
crimes and grave human rights violations.
Malaysia also reiterates its call for the Security
Council to revisit the recommendation contained in the
Secretary-General’s 2018 report A/ES-10/794 for the
deployment of United Nations-mandated armed forces
or unarmed observers to improve the protection of
Palestinians. We also call on the Security Council and
the Middle East Quartet to intensify efforts towards

22-329747/23

S/PV.9021 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

25/04/2022

creating the necessary conditions for peace talks
between the relevant parties.

Council today and for his tireless efforts as Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process.

Every Palestinian is entitled to live in dignity,
security and freedom. But the fact remains that
Palestinians continue to live under brutal occupation
and within a repressive blockade. Their fundamental
rights are denied, while illegal settlements are being
expanded. The systematic oppression of Palestinians
and the discriminatory policies are equivalent to the
crimes of apartheid. In his recent report last month, the
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
the Palestinian territories also concluded:

Our meeting takes place today as the Israeli
Government persists in its strict colonial settlement
policy, which is in blatant violation of the international
will and Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 2334 (2016). Against the backdrop of the
lack of international accountability, Israel also persists
in its racist escalatory policies. It continues its severe
attacks against the Palestinian people and its flagrant
violations of the sanctity of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, as well
as its support for the extremist settlers, their attacks on
worshippers at the Al-Aqsa Mosque and their physical
abuse of them while they pray during the holy month
of Ramadan, the holiest month in the Islamic religion.
That represents blatant defiance of the followers of
the Abrahamic religions, in particular at the holy sites
in the occupied Palestinian territories, particularly in
occupied East Jerusalem, the capital of the independent
Palestinian State, without the slightest respect for
international law, international humanitarian law or
international human rights law, as well as the letter and
spirit of the recent Abraham Accords.

“With the eyes of the international community
wide open, Israel has imposed upon Palestine
an apartheid reality in a post-apartheid world.”
(A/HRC/49/87, para. 59)
Various international human rights organizations
also shared that conclusion.
Malaysia will not waver in its commitment to,
and support for, the Palestinian people in realizing
their inalienable rights to self-determination and
independence. Our position is clear: only a negotiated
political settlement of a two-State solution can create
sustainable peace, based on the internationally agreed
parameters, international law and the relevant United
Nations resolutions. Malaysia will also continue to
support the humanitarian efforts to ease the conditions
of the Palestinian people, including through the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.
Tensions during the holy month of Ramadan take
us back to the painful memories of the war in Gaza last
year, which killed many innocent civilians, including
women and children. We once again urge the Security
Council to fulfil its duties, as enshrined in the United
Nations Charter, take immediate and necessary actions
to avoid another flood of bloodshed at this critical time
and work towards ending the occupation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer for the League of Arab States to
the United Nations.
Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
presiding over of the Security Council for the month
of April. We also express our appreciation to Mr. Tor
Wennesland for his comprehensive briefing to the
8/23

The Arab League and its Member States reject all
Israeli illegal practices seeking to change the historic
and legal status quo of the Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram
Al-Sharif, which Israel aims at partitioning in time and
in space. The Arab League condemns such practices,
which constitute a blatant violation of international law
and Israel’s legal responsibilities as an occupying Power.
The Arab League also strongly condemns the recent
Israeli attacks and dangerous escalation, as well as the
hundreds of injuries and arrests and the infliction of
severe damage on the facilities of Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
At the same time, the League of Arab States
emphasizes the need for Israel to respect the historical
and legal status quo of the Al-Haram Al-Sharif as a
place of worship for Muslims. We reiterate that the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan is the sole, legally
responsible entity entrusted with administering access
to the Al-Aqsa Mosque for non-Muslims. We also stress
the principal responsibility of the Security Council in
implementing its resolutions relating to East Jerusalem,
as well as its responsibilities to support institutional and
Islamic work and intensify its support for Jerusalem
and its residents, including the roles of the Al-Quds
Committee and the Arab Ministerial Committee of the
Arab League, entrusted with international coordination
22-32974

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.9021 (Resumption 1)

to counter the illegal Israeli policies and procedures in
occupied Jerusalem.

the current contradictions in international relations,
including those within the Council.

The League of Arab States also warns against the
catastrophic consequences of the lack of a political
horizon for a peaceful settlement, as per the international
and regional agreements based on the principle of land
for peace, the two-State solution and the Arab Peace
Initiative. We would also warn against the escalation
of economic pressure on the Palestinian people and the
State of Palestine and on Palestinian refugees under the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.

The League of Arab States calls on the Security
Council to seek justice in dealing with the Arab issues
on its agenda and to accord them greater attention, in
line with the approach adopted by the Council with
perseverance and determination to other international
issues. We also ask the Council to immediately
intervene to stop any foreign interference by regional
and international Powers in the internal affairs of
Arab States, allowing those States to settle their issues
through joint Arab efforts and cooperation among
the United Nations, the Security Council and the
Arab League.

We call for an intensification of regional and
international efforts to restore comprehensive calm
and for the relaunching of serious, direct and effective
negotiations aimed at restoring confidence in the
international multilateral system, the United Nations
and the peace process itself. The goal is a peaceful
settlement that would put an end to the occupation
and establish an independent Palestinian State along
the borders of 1967, as an alternative to the violence
and counter-violence resulting from the anger and
frustration of the Palestinian people owing to Israeli
increased violations and the lack of any political horizon
for the peace process. That requires the international
community to pay the necessary attention to the
deteriorating situation in the Middle East, especially to
the Palestinian question, which is central and primary
cause for the Arab people.
The international community, and the Security
Council in particular, should take into account the
anger and frustration of the Arab peoples at the policy
of double standards, especially given the contrast
between how the international community is effectively
dealing with recent European developments and their
political, humanitarian and economic consequences on
the one hand, and the dealing of the same international
committee hesitantly with protracted Arab issues
and their economic, humanitarian and political
consequences, on the other, in particular the Palestinian
question. That is also true concerning issues related
to Syria, Yemen, Lebanon, Libya, Iraq, the Sudan
and Somalia, as well as other crises and conflicts that
have been escalating owing to the intervention in the
affairs of Arab States by well-known regional and
international Powers aimed at achieving their own
national interests at the expense of those of the Arab
States. The same Powers have also been exploiting

In that framework, the League of Arab States
reiterates the importance of the outcome adopted by
the fourth meeting of the Arab Ministerial Committee
for International Action against Illegal Israeli Policies
and Measures in Al-Quds, held on 21 April, concerning
the Israeli violations and measures against Al-Haram
Al-Sharif, and we call on the Security Council to take
the following urgent measures to restore its credibility
in the eyes of Arab peoples, especially in terms of the
way in which it deals with the Palestinian question.
First, the Security Council must decisively and
immediately provide maximum protection for the
unarmed Palestinian people from the brutality of the
occupation forces and armed settlers, especially in
the Al-Aqsa Mosque, and prevent the partition of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque in time and in space. The Council
should also support the historical and legal status quo
of East Jerusalem, as one of the five final-status issues
that can be settled only through direct negotiations.
Secondly, the Council should organize an urgent
field visit to the occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem, to witness the deteriorating
situation and contribute to enhancing regional and
international efforts towards calm and seeking the best
means to return to direct negotiations between Palestine
and Israel, under international observation.
Thirdly, the Council should intensify efforts to
reinvigorate the peace process in the Middle East
and assist the Quartet at the ministerial level to start
preparing for direct negotiations between Israel and
Palestine, leading to the convening of the international
peace conference that President Abu Mazen requested
from the Secretary-General Guterres in his repeated

22-329749/23

S/PV.9021 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

25/04/2022

calls to the Council since 2018 and during recent
sessions of the General Assembly.

Palestinian State along the lines of 1967, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

Fourthly, the Council should provide maximum
support for Palestinian refugees by continuously
supporting the activities of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) and guaranteeing access for Palestinian
refugees to the Agency’s services in host countries, as
well as guaranteeing sustainable funding to UNRWA
and its projects and programmes. The League of Arab
States commends the internal reforms taking place
within UNRWA and thanks the countries that have
been voluntarily contributing to bridging the funding
gaps resulting from global inflation, the coronavirus
disease pandemic and the Ukrainian crisis. We
particularly commend the contributions made by the
Arab States that have been contributing on the basis of
their Arab nationalistic sense of responsibility towards
Arab refugees, although they are not responsible for the
disasters and conflicts that have caused those refugees
to flee their homeland and settle in refugee camps. The
League of Arab States calls on the donor countries and
international funding institutions to support UNRWA
and its efforts.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.

Fifthly, the Council should help the Palestinian
people complete the process of national reconciliation
and organize the deferred national elections as soon as
possible, so as to pave the way for bilateral negotiations
with Palestine based on the two-State solution and
the principle of land for peace, and also to support
the unification of the Palestinian people in order to
guarantee the success of the negotiating process.
Sixthly, and finally, the Security Council should
invest seriously in the progress that has been achieved
through the various negotiation mechanisms within and
outside the United Nations and should build on what
has been achieved, including by the Munich group and
the six-party meeting of Foreign Ministers and the
heads of intelligence services as well as other highlevel meetings between the Arab and Israeli leaderships
in order to relaunch the peace process.
The Security Council should coordinate and
consult with international and regional stakeholders
in order to revive direct negotiations between the two
parties, based on the two-State solution, international
agreements and terms of reference, including the Arab
Peace Initiative, in order to establish an independent
10/23

Mr. Rodríguez Cuadros (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
The briefing by the Special Coordinator for the Peace
Process in the Middle East, Mr. Tor Wennesland,
confirms the fact that the Security Council is meeting
at a critical juncture of increasing tensions, violence
and human rights violations in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in East Jerusalem.
As has been stated, over recent weeks acts of violence
have been committed, illegitimate restrictions imposed
and the systematic, indiscriminate and unnecessary use
of force employed in the Haram Al-Sharif Temple Mount
complex by the Israeli authorities. The illegitimate and
indiscriminate use of force and violence have extended
to the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
We condemn all such acts, which contravene Security
Council resolutions and the historical and legal status
quo of Jerusalem and its holy sites.
The Government of Peru echoes the demand made
by the international community for full respect for the
historical and legal status quo of Christian and Muslim
holy sites in Jerusalem, particularly the Haram Al-Sharif
complex, which has been the target of unacceptable acts
of violence by the Israeli authorities. It is imperative
that those activities cease, and we must ensure full
respect for the custodianship and access rights to holy
sites conferred upon the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
by the international community.
Jerusalem is the centre of spiritual convergence
of the three monotheistic religions and its status as
a universal meeting point of religious freedom and
inter-religiosity must be respected. Holy sites must
not be desecrated by violence and the indiscriminate,
illegitimate use of force.
Peru expresses its concern about the increasing
tension, systematic violence and deteriorating situation
in East Jerusalem and in various West Bank cities. It
calls for an urgent halt to the escalation of violence that
in recent weeks has cost the lives of numerous innocent
human beings, including children. In that connection,
we demand an effective and independent investigation
to provide redress for the victims and to ensure that
those responsible for violations are held accountable.
22-32974

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

There are also ethical and legal mandates to end the
illegal settlement policy, to guarantee the security and
human rights of the civilian population and to remove
the illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip. All settlement
processes in the occupied territories must stop. At the
same time, we condemn all acts of violence in Israeli
territory, such as the firing of rockets from Gaza.
In 1947, Peru was a member and Vice Chairman of
the Special Committee on Palestine, which proposed the
creation of two States — Palestine and Israel. Consistent
with that position, it has systematically condemned the
illegal occupation of Palestinian territories by Israel,
which continues to violate the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, as it has now done for
55 years.
As part of our foreign policy, in 2011 the
Government of Peru recognized the independence of the
Palestinian State and established diplomatic relations
with its Government. Our goal is to develop relations of
friendship and cooperation with both States, within the
framework of our obligations under international law.
In that context, Peru supports the full
implementation of resolutions 242 (1967), which
mandates the withdrawal of all occupying forces from
Palestinian territory, and resolution 2334 (2016), which
establishes the elements for a just and lasting two-State
solution, on the basis of the 1967 border lines, with
peace and secure borders for both States.
The current situation must be prevented from
escalating and worsening. It is essential to make decisive
efforts to defuse the current situation and, above all, to
relaunch the peace process through direct negotiations
between Israel and Palestine, with the participation of
the Quartet and international mediators. Time and the
cycles of escalation and de-escalation of violence and
tension must not detract from the essential mandate to
negotiate a just, firm and lasting peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Sithole (South Africa): South Africa expresses
appreciation to the United Kingdom for convening this
meeting on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. We are also grateful for the
detailed briefing by Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process.
South Africa is appalled by the increased violence
and heightened tensions in Jerusalem, particularly at the

S/PV.9021 (Resumption 1)

Al-Aqsa Mosque, as well as by the restrictions placed
on religious sites. We strongly condemn the attacks
against Palestinians, especially at a time of religious
significance for all faiths in the region.
As Palestinians observe the holy month of Ramadan
and Orthodox Easter, we appeal to the Government
of Israel to allow Palestinians their right to worship
and gather for prayers in peace. In that regard, we
emphasize that the status quo of the holy sites must
be fully respected. It is reprehensible that Palestinians
are denied all sovereign and human rights over their
sacred sites.
South Africa reiterates its view that the systemic
subjugation that Palestinian men, women, children and
the elderly endure under Israeli occupation is inhumane
and in stark violation of fundamental human rights and
internationally adopted norms and principles.
The scenes of Israeli brutality aimed at innocent,
unarmed Palestinian civilians is a stark reminder to
the world that, in Israeli society, some are more equal
than others. We are particularly concerned about the
Palestinian youth that languish in prisons and detention
centres. The recent commemoration of Palestinian
Prisoner’s Day reminds us of the shackles that chain
Palestinian youth to a destiny they did not choose.
The youth, including women and minors, are held in
administrative detention, without charges or trial, for
an indefinite period, subjected to indiscriminate acts of
torture and violence and denied access to due process.
We shudder at the thought of the impact that this
detention will have on the youth who are custodians
of the future of this sacred land. We recall the youth of
South Africa who were held in detention fighting for
their fundamental rights.
These blatant violations of human rights and
international law, which have been taking place for
over 70 years, should no longer be condoned, and
the international community, including the Security
Council that is tasked with maintaining international
peace and security, must act to ensure that States are
held accountable for their actions. A solution must be
found that is premised on a just settlement — with just,
rights-based laws — that facilitates equality and equity
for all who have a right to live in the territories of Israel
and Palestine.
The Council has convened and discussed the
situation in Palestine repeatedly over 70 years. The
continued disregard of Council decisions by the

22-3297411/23

S/PV.9021 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

State of Israel is reflective of a blatant disregard for
multilateralism and international law-based order, as
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. For us
to maintain credibility, there must be consistency from
the international community and institutions of global
governance in upholding the international rule of law.
The Security Council must also display consistency in
its attention, vigour and decisive responses to matters
on its agenda. It is concerning to raise alarms only
when conflict and humanitarian law violations occur in
one region, but then hesitate to act on others.
In conclusion, I wish to stress that South Africa
is committed to being part of international efforts
aimed at reviving a much-needed political process that
will lead to the establishment of a viable Palestinian
State existing side by side in peace with Israel and
within internationally recognized borders that include
sovereign equality between States.
In finding such a solution, all people on both
sides of the Green Line — in Israel and the Occupied
Palestinian Territories — must be able to live under
conditions free from racism, discrimination of any kind
and violence.
The President: One hour has elapsed since our
resumption, and we have managed to complete eight
statements. We should be able to hear 15 statements
per hour, ideally. We thank South Africa for its brevity.
I would like to encourage everyone to try to fit their
statements into the four minutes allotted. That will
enable our interpreters to get home on time.
I now give the floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to stress Japan’s commitment to supporting a twoState solution based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions and internationally agreed parameters.
I have to start by expressing concern about the
violence between Israelis and Palestinians, which has
been escalating for weeks and could be a significant
hindrance to the achievement of a two-State solution.
Recent violent clashes at holy sites, in particular,
are worrisome. Japan expresses its deep concern
over the recent negative developments, stressing that
the sanctity of the holy sites should be respected.
Japan calls for restraint and reiterates that a solution
cannot be achieved through violence, but only through
negotiations and mutual trust.
12/23

25/04/2022

The economic situation in Palestine is another
concern. The negative impact of the Russian aggression
against Ukraine on global food security has added to
the economic difficulties from which Palestine has
already been suffering. According to the World Food
Programme, a significant rise in food prices has been
recorded throughout the Middle East region, including
in Palestine. Japan will address the global food-security
crisis through a joint Group of Seven effort in close
cooperation with relevant international bodies.
Considering the new context in Palestine, Japan
decided on 1 April to contribute $3.35 million to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to provide
humanitarian aid, including food support. Japan’s total
support for UNRWA in 2021, $50.5 million, was our
largest contribution in the past five years. Japan will
remain committed to supporting the people of Palestine
so long as humanitarian and socioeconomic challenges
remain there. Japan also calls for further international
efforts, including those by countries in the region, to
implement pledges and make fresh contributions to
UNRWA, as the Agency continues to face chronic
financial difficulties.
In addition humanitarian aid, Japan will continue
to provide assistance for Palestinian State-building
efforts. We will continue to promote our own initiatives
toward this end. The Jericho Agro Industrial Park is
the flagship project of Japan’s Corridor for Peace and
Prosperity initiative. The Conference on Cooperation
among East Asian Countries for Palestinian
Development is also in Japan’s portfolio of support for
the people of Palestine.
Let me conclude by expressing Japan’s determination
to spare no effort to achieve a two-State solution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Alateek (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like at the outset to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and the delegation of the United Kingdom
on assuming the presidency of the Council this month,
and I wish you every success.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia reiterates its
adherence to the constants of the Palestinian question,
namely, ending the occupation, establishing an
independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital and guaranteeing the right of return of the
22-32974

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian refugees. We also emphasize the need for
a comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East
as a strategic choice to end the conflict, based on the
two-State solution, as provided for by international
parameters and the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative, as
well as the return of refugees and the end of the Israeli
occupation of all Arab territories.
In this sacred month of Ramadan, we witnessed an
incursion by the Israeli occupation forces into Al-Aqsa
Mosque, closing its gates and attacking unarmed
worshippers inside and outside of the Mosque. This
aggression took place during the holiest month of the
year for the Muslims. My country strongly condemns
this act of aggression against holy sites and unarmed
Palestinians. We believe that this act of systemic
escalation is a flagrant violation of the Islamic Ummah
and relevant international resolutions and conventions.
The Kingdom calls on the international community,
especially the Security Council, to play their role in
holding the Israeli occupation forces fully accountable
for these crimes and continuous violations against
unarmed Palestinians, Palestinian territories and
their holy sites. Without that, there will only be more
violence and instability in the region.
Since the last century, the Palestinian crisis has been
one of the most complex and long-standing conflicts in
the world, and its settlement will lead to de-escalation
in the region and give its peoples an opportunity to
focus more on development and progress. Actions taken
by the occupying Power, including provocations and
hostilities against the Palestinians and their holy sites,
have negative consequences for reviving the peace
process in the Middle East and undermine the possibility
of reaching a just solution to the Palestinian question.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia underscores the
important role played by regional organizations, in
particular the League of Arab States, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and its committees, and the
Al-Quds Committee, chaired by His Majesty King
Mohammed VI. We would also like to underscore the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan’s guardianship of the
holy Muslim and Christian sites in Jerusalem.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia firmly condemns
the terrorist attacks against civilians and civilian
infrastructure in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
perpetrated last month by Houthi militias, with Iran’s
support. We reiterate that, in keeping with international
law, we have the sovereign right to take all measures

S/PV.9021 (Resumption 1)

to defend our territories, citizens and residents against
any terrorist threats.
With regard to our continued support for peace
and stability in Yemen and achieving a comprehensive
political solution involving all Yemeni parties to realize
peace, development and prosperity for Yemen and
its brotherly people, we welcome the announcement
made by the former President of the Republic, His
Excellency Mr. Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, of
the establishment of a Presidential Leadership Council,
pursuant to the Yemeni Constitution and the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative and its implementation
mechanism, for the purpose of completing the
transitional phase while entrusting it with all the
authorities of the President of the Republic. We also
welcome the swearing in of the oath in Aden. We
fully support the Presidential Leadership Council
in implementing its policies to restore stability and
security and put an end to the crisis in the Republic
of Yemen.
In addition to the role played by the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia in supporting our brotherly Yemeni
people, we recently announced a $2-billion initiative,
funded equally with the United Arab Emirates, to
support the Yemeni Central Bank. We have also
provided $1 billion, of which $600 million are
earmarked for buying oil products and $400 million for
supporting various development projects. We have also
provided $300 million for the humanitarian response
plan launched by the United Nations in 2022 to alleviate
the suffering of the Yemeni people and improve their
living conditions.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia values the efforts
made by the United Nations and its special envoys
to achieve a truce in Yemen and totally end military
operations in the country and at the borders. We express
the hope that through these efforts we will arrive at a
political settlement that supports the international
efforts to end the crisis in Yemen. My country also
reiterates the need to urgently find a permanent and
just solution to the FSO Safer oil tanker to avoid an
environmental catastrophe in the region.
The most recent developments are an opportunity
for the Houthis to reach the desired political solution,
in order to avoid Yemen and its brotherly people further
suffering and destruction. The Houthis must not be
used as a tool to serve the Iranian agenda, which seeks

22-3297413/23

S/PV.9021 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

only to cause turmoil and strife in the region and serve
Iran’s expansion goals.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Maldives.
Mr. Zuhuree (Maldives): I wish to thank the United
Kingdom for convening today’s debate. I would also like
to thank the United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process for his timely briefing on
this important issue.
The recent deterioration of the security situation
in the Middle East is a cause for grave concern. The
ongoing violence and hostilities have resulted in
immense suffering and loss of life. Despite numerous
debates and countless calls for action, the tension in
the region remains high, with a high probability of an
escalation into renewed conflict and unrest.
The people of Palestine have been suffering under
Israeli occupation for 55 years. Settler violence in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including forced
displacement of Palestinians and the demolition and
confiscation of their homes and properties, continues to
undermine the rights and dignity of Palestinian people.
The Maldives condemns the recent escalation
of religious tensions at the Al-Aqsa Mosque site and
supports the call for immediate de-escalation and the
maintenance of the historical status quo in the Old City
of Jerusalem. Such instances make abundantly clear
the urgent need for the Council to redouble its efforts
to support the relaunching of the peace process and
implement the Council’s resolutions.
In that regard, the Maldives recalls resolutions 476
(1980) and 478 (1980) of 1980, which declare null and
void the Israeli occupation of Palestine, the annexation
of the holy city of Jerusalem, the shifting of the Israeli
capital to Jerusalem and the decision by any country
to recognize Jerusalem as Israel’s capital and relocate
their Embassies. Resolution 2334 (2016) calls upon all
States to distinguish in their relevant dealings between
the territory of the State of Israel and the territories
occupied since 1967. It is imperative that the Council
ensure that those decisions be upheld and respected
by all countries. The very credibility of the Council
depends on it.
The Maldives reiterates its steadfast support for any
resolution that outlines the formation of an independent
and sovereign State of Palestine, established on the pre1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We
14/23

25/04/2022

firmly believe that that is the only viable solution to
ensure an end to the conflict so that the people of both
Palestine and Israel can enjoy meaningful and enduring
peace and live side by side with dignity.
This past March, the conflict in Syria entered its
eleventh year. Since the start of the conflict, hundreds
of thousands of people have been killed. Millions have
been displaced. Hospitals and basic infrastructure have
been reduced to rubble. And entire cities have been
destroyed, along with their cultural heritage. Currently,
an estimated 14.6 million people are in dire need of
humanitarian aid. The Maldives urges the international
community to undertake urgent efforts to ensure that
those people, especially women and children, receive the
required assistance and do not perish in refugee camps.
The Maldives reaffirms its commitment to working
with the Council and Member States to find long-term
solutions to improve stability across the region and lay
the foundation for lasting peace in the Middle East.
Through collective action, we can create a world that is
safer for us and all future generations to come.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I am pleased to congratulate you, Mr. President,
for your appreciated efforts as President of the Security
Council for this month. I thank you for holding today’s
important open debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.
I also thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
valuable briefing.
Regional and international developments currently
under way and their repercussions on security and
stability in the region constitute shared concerns,
which means that we must unite our efforts to address
those challenges. We must strengthen our collective
efforts to lay the foundation for peace, stability and
security, combating terrorism and terrorism financing
and enhancing joint cooperation in the area of
development, in order to meet peoples’ aspirations for
peace, development and prosperity, while adhering to
the principles of tolerance, coexistence and solidarity
for the well-being of the peoples of the region.
The Kingdom of Bahrain has always cooperated
with brotherly and friendly States to strengthen the
foundation of peace and stability in the region. Our
22-32974

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

approach is based on bolstering the values of peace,
dialogue and coexistence and mutual respect. Those are
the principles that make up the vision of His Majesty
King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa and the policies and
programmes implemented by the Government, led
by His Royal Highness Prince Salman bin Hamad
Al Khalifa, Crown Prince and Prime Minister. In
that regard, the Kingdom of Bahrain underscores the
importance of bolstering efforts to bring stability and
security to the region. We reiterate our principled
position rejecting all forms of violence and terrorism,
whatever their cause or justification.
With regard to the Palestinian question and current
developments in Jerusalem, the Kingdom of Bahrain
has reiterated its condemnation of incursions by
the Israeli police into the Al-Aqsa Mosque and their
repercussions, such as acts of violence and attacks on
dozens of worshipers. We emphasize once again the
importance of avoiding escalation and respecting the
holy sites of all religions, as well as the freedom of
religion. It is also essential to acknowledge and respect
the guardianship of the King of the sisterly Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn
Al Hussein, over holy sites and the Jerusalem Islamic
Waqf, as provided for under international law and the
historical status quo, as well as the importance of the
role of the Al-Quds Committee, led by His Majesty
King Mohammed VI of sisterly Kingdom of Morocco.
The Kingdom of Bahrain calls upon the international
community to assume its responsibilities with regard
to de-escalation and to open up serious prospects for
a just and comprehensive peace process, on the basis
of the two-State solution and the Arab Peace Initiative,
while reiterating our firm position of supporting the
rights of our brotherly Palestinian people in line with
the relevant resolutions of the international legitimacy.
The Kingdom of Bahrain welcomes the recent
important developments in Yemen, in particular the
announcement by the Special Envoy for Yemen of a
two-month truce, during which all military operations
in Yemen will cease, as well as those along the border
with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The Kingdom of
Bahrain reiterates its full support for the Presidential
Council in Yemen so that it can continue its efforts and
missions to manage the State, complete the transition
process and realize the aspirations of the Yemeni
people for security, stability and development. We
support putting an end to the crisis in Yemen through a
comprehensive political solution among Yemeni parties

S/PV.9021 (Resumption 1)

aimed at achieving peace, development and prosperity
for Yemen and its brotherly people.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain reiterates
our firm position based on good-neighbourly relations,
mutual respect, understanding, dialogue, cooperation,
peaceful coexistence, tolerance and rapprochement
among peoples so that peace, security and stability may
reign in the Middle East to ensure prosperity for its
peoples, countries and the entire world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan welcomes the
convening by the presidency of the United Kingdom of
today’s open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.
We express our grave concern about the most recent
developments in the occupied Palestinian territories.
In recent weeks, Israeli forces have killed dozens and
injured hundreds of Palestinians in occupied Jerusalem,
through raids and the use of tear gas by drones against
innocent worshippers in the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque.
Those assaults, coming as they do during the holy month
of Ramadan, are egregious violations of humanitarian
norms and human rights law.
On 15 April, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation group in New York, in its statement on
the situation, condemned the intrusions by Israeli
occupation forces and extremist settlers into the sacred
Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Al-Haram Al-Sharif, which
were marked by acts of aggression on worshippers and
in violation of the sanctity of the mosque and worship
rights therein. It warned of the dire implications of such
reckless aggravation of religious sensitivities, which
risk further destabilization of this fragile situation and
could have a grave impact on regional and international
peace and security. It demanded the immediate
withdrawal of all occupying forces from Al-Aqsa
Mosque and Al-Haram Al-Sharif, the immediate
release of all detained worshippers and an end to all of
those violations. It reiterated the absolute rejection of
any attempts to alter the historical and legal status quo
of the Islamic and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem,
including Al-Aqsa Mosque and Al-Haram Al-Sharif,
and it called on the international community — most
notably the Security Council — to ensure the protection
of Palestinian civilians.

22-3297415/23

S/PV.9021 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Those recent actions by Israeli forces are a
disturbing codicil to the Israeli aggression against
the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque in May last year, which
inflamed tensions and triggered the most serious
outbreak of hostilities between Palestinians and Israel
in several years.
Pakistan believes, first, that there is no question
in anyone’s mind that Israel’s actions in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including the seizure of land
and properties for Israeli settlements; the violence
against unarmed Palestinian children, women and
men; the blockade of Gaza; and the desecration of the
Holy Al-Aqsa Mosque all constitute grave violations
of Security Council resolutions and international law,
including humanitarian law.
Secondly, there is no moral, legal or political
equivalence between Israel, the occupying State, and
the occupied and oppressed Palestinian people. The
Palestinian struggle for self-determination and the
implementation of Security Council resolutions is
legitimate, while the Israeli repression of the occupied
Palestinian people is illegitimate.
Thirdly, the perpetuation of the Israeli occupation
will not bring peace to the holy land. If history is a
guide, even if they are dispossessed and disempowered
by Israel, every succeeding generation of Palestinians
will persist in seeking their freedoms and fundamental
rights, including their right to self-determination.
Finally, the two-State formula, involving the
establishment of a sovereign, contiguous and viable
Palestinian State, living side by side with Israel within
the recognized and accepted pre-1967 boundaries
and with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, offers
the only solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
A peace process to achieve that objective must be
revived forthwith.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President for convening this important
meeting and take this opportunity to congratulate you
on assuming the presidency of the Council. We would
also like to thank Mr. Wennesland, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing this
morning (see S/PV.9021) and his tireless efforts.
The incursions by the forces of the Israeli
occupation and extremist settlers into the holy Al-Aqsa
16/23

25/04/2022

Mosque and the acts of aggression against and arrests of
defenceless worshippers constitute a flagrant violation
of international law, international human rights law
and international legitimacy. Such events are in line
with the previous systematic and recurrent acts of
aggression against the people of Palestine and the holy
sites of Muslims.
The State of Qatar expresses its strong condemnation
of those practices, which are a provocation of the
religious sentiments of millions of Muslims, especially
during the holy month of Ramadan. Such events are
also a result of impunity and lack of accountability,
as the international community does not hold Israel
accountable when it comes to upholding the rights of
the Palestinian people and implementing international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions.
We reiterate that the attempts to alter the historical
and legal status of the holy Muslim and Christian sites
in occupied East Jerusalem, to Judaize the city and to
divide the Al-Aqsa Mosque spatially and temporally,
while restricting the prayers of Muslim in it, are
rejected, null and void, as they contradict international
law and United nations resolutions. We reiterate the
guardianship role of the sisterly Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan and King Abdullah II to protect the Muslim and
Christian holy sites in Jerusalem. We also reiterate the
importance of supporting Jerusalem and its inhabitants,
highlighting the role played by the Al-Quds Committee,
chaired by His Majesty King Mohammed VI of the
brotherly Kingdom of Morocco.
The international community, and the Security
Council in particular, must uphold their responsibility
to protect the Palestinian people and their holy sites
and put an end to such flagrant acts of aggression. The
continued escalation and the threat to peace, security and
stability are major obstacles to peace. Such practices,
including occupation and settlement activities in the
occupied territories, must come to an end, as must the
illegal annexation of Palestinian territories and the
deprivation of Palestinians of their natural resources,
as well as their eviction, the destruction of their homes
and the arbitrary arrest of families and even children.
The State of Qatar remains steadfast in its support
of the brotherly people of Palestine so that they can
fully enjoy their legitimate rights. We continue to
provide humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian
people in order to improve living conditions in the Gaza
Strip under the ongoing, unjust blockade. Our efforts
22-32974

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in that regard include a financial aid programme and
the provision of fuel and construction materials, as well
as assistance with electricity generation. We helped
funding hundreds of housing units that were destroyed
during last year’s escalation.
Moreover, we note that the State of Qatar has
recently signed an agreement to provide vital resources
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East to the amount
of $18 million for the period 2021-2022. We reiterate
the importance of the role played by the Agency and
supporting it to provide basic services.
We reiterate our firm position in support of
efforts aimed at resolving the Palestinian question
and achieving lasting peace in the Middle East. A
comprehensive, just and sustainable settlement requires
an end to the occupation of Arab territories and the
cessation of settlement activity. The issue of refugees
must also be resolved and Palestinians must be granted
their inalienable rights, including the right to selfdetermination and to create an independent State within
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in
the framework of a two-State solution.
The success of all efforts to reach that solution will
depend on the implementation of international law, the
relevant United Nations resolutions, the principle of
land for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative. That will
require both the Palestinians and the Israelis to return
to the negotiating table.

S/PV.9021 (Resumption 1)

also grateful for the briefing by the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process.
In recent weeks, we have observed with great concern
how the situation on the ground has been deteriorating
with each passing day. Tensions have further escalated,
marked by provocations and deplorable acts of violence,
with excessive, unnecessary and indiscriminate use
of force against the Palestinian civilian population,
including women and children. We have also witnessed
repudiatory acts of vandalism against the holy sites in
occupied East Jerusalem, such as the Al-Aqsa Mosque,
even in the midst of what should be a time of reflection
and peace for Christians, Jews and Muslims alike.
We reject this new onslaught by Israel, which is
using the attention that the international community
is devoting to other conflict situations in the world
today to its advantage as a distraction and opportunity
to step up its brutal aggression against Palestine. We
further condemn the fact that, in the face of the painful
and protracted Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the same
determination on the part of some Western countries,
including some members of the Security Council, is
lacking not only to uphold the Charter of the United
Nations and the norms of international law, but also to
hold Israel accountable for its crimes and demand that it
end its continued aggression against Palestine.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

Similarly, we regret that the work of this
organ continues to be paralysed by the obstruction
of one single country — the United States of
America — the Government of which refuses to allow
even the publication of certain press releases, that is to
say, the minimum possible step that the Security Council
can take to reject the violence and acts of collective
punishment against the heroic Palestinian people and
call for dialogue, de-escalation and upholding the status
quo. We are not surprised, however, for that is precisely
the double standard embodied by those adamantly
presenting themselves as champions of freedom, human
rights and a supposedly rules-based system. The harsh
reality is that, in their racist and supremacist view, the
degree of human suffering apparently depends on the
geographic location of the conflict.

Mr. Pérez Ayestarán (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the
convening of this quarterly open debate on a subject to
which our country attaches particular importance, given
its historic principled position and staunch support for
the noble cause of the heroic Palestinian people. We are

Faced with that reality, however, we are dutybound to continue urging the Security Council to play a
constructive role in the peaceful resolution of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, in line with the powers conferred
upon it under the Charter of the United Nations,
including by fostering an environment conducive to

In conclusion, despite the deplorable recent events
and escalation, there is still room to make progress
towards a solution and overcome the crisis in the Middle
East. The State of Qatar believes that only dialogue,
diplomacy, mediation and other peaceful means can
settle conflicts, in accordance with international law
and the Charter of the United Nations. The State of
Qatar will continue to honour its commitment and
support all efforts to that end.

22-3297417/23

S/PV.9021 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the resumption of the needed political dialogue and
credible, serious and direct negotiations to achieve a
just, comprehensive and lasting peace, based on the
two-State solution, with both States living side by side
in peace and security. To that end, we reiterate that it
will be imperative for this organ to end once and for all
the long-standing framework of international impunity
that has been permitted by the Government of one of
its permanent members and that ultimately results in
encouraging the crimes committed daily by Israel.
We also call on the occupying Power not only to
comply with its obligations under the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, cease
its systematic violations of international law, end its
policy of colonial occupation and apartheid and stop
committing crimes against humanity and war crimes
against the Palestinian people, but also and especially,
end all unilateral approaches and actions, including
the illegal expansion of settlements and the policy of
evictions and the demolition of homes.
However, given the current reality and the gravity of
the situation on the ground, while the Israeli aggression
continues to be carried out with total impunity, with
no accountability for the perpetrators of those heinous
crimes before international justice, we stress that
the time has come to adopt without further delay the
measures needed to provide international protection to
the Palestinian civilian population.
In conclusion, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela reaffirms its unwavering position in support
and defence of the independence and inalienable right
of the Palestinian people to self-determination and the
realization of their legitimate national aspirations. We
reiterate our commitment to continuing to work towards
the achievement of a free, independent and sovereign
State of Palestine, within the pre-1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital and as a full Member of
the Organization. In that regard, we reiterate that the
two-State solution, which is the most just, sustainable
and widely supported by the international community,
is the only way to end one of the most painful conflicts
that has faced humankind for more than 70 years.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, and
the Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom to the
United Nations on your successful presidency of the
18/23

25/04/2022

Security Council during the month of April. We wish
you every success for the remaining meetings this
month. We would also like to sincerely thank Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing. We renew our support
for him and for all endeavours and efforts to achieve
de-escalation and the restoration of stability in
the region.
The international community has followed with
deep concern the serious escalation in the Palestinian
territories, owing to the crimes and aggressions
perpetrated by Israel, the occupying Power, against the
Palestinian people. Unfortunately, we all witnessed the
incursion by Israeli occupation forces into the Al-Aqsa
Mosque and the aggression against worshippers few
days ago. Those hostilities have escalated dangerously
over the past several days, during the holy month of
Ramadan, and led to the injury and the detention
of hundreds of worshippers, including women and
children, in addition to incurring severe damage to
Al-Haram Al-Sharif. The State of Kuwait once again
strongly condemns the incursions of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque by the Israeli occupation forces, which attacked
the worshipers and all unarmed civilians.
Such hostilities constitute a provocation vis-à-vis
the feelings of Muslims and undermine the freedom of
worship at Al-Aqsa Mosque. They constitute serious
escalation and an egregious violation of all relevant
international conventions and resolutions, leading to
extremism and violence and undermining the stability
of the region. The aggressions and crimes perpetrated
by the Israeli occupation forces are part of the crimes
and violations perpetrated by Israel, the occupying
Power, against Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 476 (1980), 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016), which
reaffirm the inviolability of Jerusalem and seek to
prevent any change to the demography or status quo of
Al-Quds Al-Sharif. The occupying Power must respect
the historical and legal status of Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
We call on the international community, especially the
Security Council, to shoulder its responsibility and
hold Israeli occupation forces fully accountable for
the repercussions of the perpetration of such crimes
and illegal and provocative practices in Jerusalem and
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, as well as the violations against
unarmed Palestinian people, their land and holy sites. It
is imperative for all of us to pool international efforts to
restore comprehensive de-escalation and focus on the
prospects for peace in the Middle East.
22-32974

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Such Israeli policies and practices reaffirm yet
again that Israel seeks only to continue its occupation
and that it does not aspire to a comprehensive and
just peace. As United Nations reports unfortunately
underscore, the continued violations perpetrated by
Israel and the increased settlement activities in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, have led to
the displacement of many Palestinian families after
dispossessing them of their property. All of that is
happening without accountability and with impunity.
Undoubtedly, impunity and the lack of accountability
anywhere and anytime will lead to further crimes. That
is currently taking place in the occupied Palestinian
territories, where people are suffering from daily crimes.
We call on the international community to subject the
perpetrators of those crimes to accountability and to
compel Israel to uphold all its legal commitments.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait reiterates
the importance of upholding the Arab, Islamic and
international position, which stresses that peace is a
strategic option and that a lasting, comprehensive and
just solution must be based on the two-State solution,
in accordance the agreed terms of reference — namely,
relevant Security Council resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative — leading to the Palestinian people’s
recovery of all their legitimate political rights and
establishing their independent State on their land, with
East Jerusalem, as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Bae (Republic of Korea): My delegation
would first like to thank the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland,
for his briefing, and to reaffirm my Government’s full
support for his efforts and dedication.
It has been nearly one year since the May conflict
between Israel and Palestine, which resulted in
hundreds of civilian casualties. Today the Government
of the Republic of Korea is again deeply concerned, as
we have been witnessing numerous acts of violence this
year in Israel and Palestine, especially at Al-Haram
Al-Sharif, also known as the Temple Mount. As the
Secretary-General appealed recently, we call on all
sides to refrain from actions and incitement that
escalate tensions, particularly at this time of heightened
sensitivity. My Government reiterates its position that
the status quo of the holy sites in Jerusalem must be
respected and supports the active engagement of the

S/PV.9021 (Resumption 1)

international community and neighbouring countries
to prevent further deterioration of the situation.
My delegation condemns all terrorist attacks in
the strongest terms and highlights that nothing can be
achieved by terrorism. Any violence against civilians,
by either terrorists or authorities, cannot be justified. It
must stop immediately. And those who are responsible
for such acts must be held accountable.
Despite that grim context, my delegation welcomes
the confidence-building measures between Israel and
Palestine, including the issuance of identity documents
for Palestinian reunions. We strongly encourage such
measures for building trust and confidence to be
continued and expanded. Furthermore, we take note of
the second round of the municipal elections in Palestine.
My delegation believes that reconciliation,
unity and consensus among Palestinians are crucial
to achieve a peaceful, independent, sovereign and
democratic State. We remain concerned about the
possibility of further deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip due to
the hikes in food and energy prices. The Republic of
Korea expresses its strong support for ongoing efforts
by the international community to meet the Palestinian
people’s humanitarian and development needs and
reaffirms its continued support and contributions, both
bilaterally and multilaterally.
The Republic of Korea reaffirms its support for a
two-State solution, in accordance with relevant Security
Council resolutions, international law and bilateral
agreements. We strongly urge all sides to resume peace
talks and reiterate our support for the mediation efforts
of the Quartet and the international community.
Taking this opportunity, my delegation would like
to touch on the positive developments in Yemen. My
Government welcomes the agreement of a truce and the
establishment of the Yemeni Presidential Leadership
Council. We reiterate our support for Special Envoy
Hans Grundberg for a peaceful resolution of the Yemeni
crisis. My Government will provide $20 million in
humanitarian assistance this year for Yemen.
The Republic of Korea, as a staunch supporter of
diplomatic efforts by the international community,
including the Security Council, to establish lasting
peace in the region, reaffirms its commitment to
continue its constructive role to that end.

22-3297419/23

S/PV.9021 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

25/04/2022

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.

to send a clear message that such acts will not be left
unchecked without accountability.

Mr. Koba (Indonesia): Indonesia is alarmed by the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, which continues to deteriorate. We
strongly condemn the excessive violence perpetrated
by Israeli security forces, particularly during this
holy month of Ramadan. We call on Israel to uphold
international law and respect the status quo of the holy
sites. We recall the call by Pope Francis and the Chair
of the Al-Quds Committee on the important role of
Al-Quds/Jerusalem as a city of tolerance and mutual
respect and the need to preserve its future as a city of
peaceful coexistence.

Thirdly, the Security Council must not lose sight
of the plight of the Palestinian people. The current
situation and crises elsewhere must no prevent the
Council from taking decisive action in ending the
Israeli occupation, which has been going on for more
than five decades. We must show the same resolve and
conviction in addressing the Palestinian issue as we
have in addressing the issue in Ukraine. We concur with
the Secretary-General that there must not be a double
standard when it comes to peace and ending human
suffering. As the cycle of violence has continued for
so long, it is necessary to pursue a just, comprehensive
and lasting solution to the question of Palestine. The
Security Council must assume an effective role to
revive the peace process to end Israeli occupation and
realize a two-State solution based on internationally
agreed parameters.

We are extremely concerned about the continued
human rights violations by the occupying Power,
including illegal settlement expansion, oppression,
violence and forced displacement. Despite the repeated
calls by the international community, Israel’s acts of
aggression continue unabated, in violation of national
law and numerous relevant United Nations resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016). Those actions have
added to the root of the violence in the region.
In that regard, allow me to emphasize three points.
First, it is crucial to immediately defuse tensions
and prevent the worsening of the situation. We
call on all parties to exercise restraint and prevent
further escalation. The Special Coordinator must
take urgent action to de-escalate the situation and to
ensure protection for Palestinian civilians. We also
call on the international community to exert pressure
on Israel to stop its use of excessive force against
Palestinian civilians.
Secondly, we must put an end to the illegal
occupation and illegal actions by Israel. Illegal
occupation and territorial expansion by a State Member
of the United Nations is a violation of international
law, whether in the Middle East or another part of the
world. The response of the international community
must therefore be consistent. Moreover, violence and
the seizure and demolition of Palestinian property, as
well as human rights violations based on ethnicity,
which many have referred to as amounting to apartheid
against the Palestinian people, must stop. Those illegal
acts constitute a serious challenge to the realization of a
two-State solution based on United Nations resolutions
and internationally agreed parameters. It is important
20/23

Lastly, I would like to reiterate that Indonesia
remains steadfast in its commitment to the people and the
State of Palestine. In that vein, earlier today, Indonesia
initiated an open-ended extraordinary meeting of the
OIC Executive Committee at the headquarters of the
OIC in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, to discuss the ongoing
Israeli aggression against the Al-Aqsa Mosque. We
stand ready to mobilize in support of the Palestinian
people and efforts towards achieving lasting peace
in Palestine.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Vice-Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
Mr. Gertze: On behalf of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, I would like to congratulate the United
Kingdom for its able presidency of the Security Council
this month. We also thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for
his briefing.
As we gather at this quarterly Council debate on
the question of Palestine, the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory is deteriorating, with particular
intensity in occupied East Jerusalem, where tensions
are dangerously heightened.
The core problem is well known. Israel’s ongoing
occupation of Palestinian territory and its continuous
human rights violations and use of excessive force
22-32974

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

against Palestinian civilians fuel desolation among a
population already despairing from 55 years of military
occupation. The 15-year land, air and sea blockade of
Gaza continues to create additional immense suffering
for over 2 million Palestinians in the Gaza Strip, despite
recent easing of access and trade, affecting all aspects
of life, and is at the root of the dire humanitarian crisis
afflicting the population.
On 15 and 17 April, during a sacred time when
religious holidays for Muslims, Jews and Christians
overlapped, the world witnessed unconscious scenes
inside the Al-Aqsa Mosque when Israeli police forcibly
removed worshippers and used excessive force against
Palestinians, causing injury to more than 150 people,
among them women and children, and causing damage
to the mosque. The Committee shares the SecretaryGeneral’s deep concern over the situation in Jerusalem.
The Committee also appeals to political, religious and
community leaders to help to restore calm.
The Committee further calls on Israel to uphold
and respect the historic status quo of the holy sites
and its obligations under international humanitarian
law, particularly the Fourth Geneva Convention. The
Committee recalls that Israel is the occupying Power in
East Jerusalem and the rest of the Palestinian territory it
has occupied since 1967 and bears no sovereignty rights
therein and that all measures to alter the demography,
character and status of that territory, including East
Jerusalem, are illegal, null and void. In that regard,
the Committee recalls the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolutions 476 (1980), 478
(1980) and 2334 (2016), and calls for their full respect
and implementation.
The Committee reiterates its calls for calm and
restraint and calls on the Israeli and Palestinian
authorities, as well as armed groups, to avoid violence,
de-escalate tensions and prevent inflaming the already
tense situation of the past few weeks.

S/PV.9021 (Resumption 1)

carried out with passive acquiescence and even
the support of Israeli security forces. In its report
(A/HRC/49/85) to the forty-ninth session of the Human
Rights Council, held between 28 February and 1 April,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights noted a total of 502 such incidents. The
Committee calls for the protection of civilians, in line
with the Council’s relevant resolutions on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, and specifically calls for
the protection of the Palestinian civilian population, in
accordance with international humanitarian law.
The Committee reiterates that the Israeli occupation
is the main driver of human rights violations and
conflict in the occupied Palestinian territories. Faithful
to its mandate to raise awareness about such issues,
on 27 April the Committee will host a discussion with
civil society organizations on the impact of the Israeli
occupation and settlements on Palestinian rights.
As repeatedly stated by the overwhelming majority
of the international community and in the Security
Council, Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, are illegal under
international law. The expansion of illegal Israeli
settlements, especially in and around East Jerusalem,
adversely affects the contiguity of a future Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and is the
source of countless other human rights violations
against the Palestinian people.
In that regard, the Palestinian people also continue to
face forced displacement, evictions and the destruction
of their property and structures. The negative effects
of those violations, especially on Palestinian women,
was echoed at the Committee’s event on the margins of
the sixty-sixth session of the Commission on the Status
of Women.

Indeed, on 19 April and 22 March (see S/PV.9000),
the United Nations Special Coordinator expressed
concern over the situation and reported that, between
10 December 2021 and 18 March 2022, a total of 24
Palestinians were killed, four of whom were children,
and 2,966 injured. The Committee is equally concerned
about the killing of Israeli civilians.

Speakers gave testimony on the plight of Palestinian
women in the East Jerusalem neighbourhoods of
Sheikh Jarrah and Silwan, where Palestinian families
also face relentless settler violence. Such acts of
infringement and violence disintegrate families and
heighten tensions on the ground. They run counter to
resolution 2334 (2016), which, in paragraph 6, calls for
“immediate steps to prevent all acts of violence against
civilians, including all acts of terror, as well as all acts
of provocation and destruction”.

We strongly condemn any violent act against
civilians, including recurring settler attacks against
Palestinians in the occupied Palestinian territories,

The Committee stresses the decisive role and
responsibility of the international community, and
the Security Council in particular, in resolving this

22-3297421/23

S/PV.9021 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

conflict. To that effect, the Committee continues to
engage with Member States to garner support for the
resumption of peace negotiations. Also, the Committee
Chair, Ambassador Cheikh Niang of Senegal, addressed
the 48th session of the Council of Foreign Ministers
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC),
which took place in Islamabad, Pakistan, on 22 March.
There, he called on the OIC to help encourage broader
international engagement for the realization of a just
and peaceful solution to the question of Palestine.
New global crises and conflicts should not divert
the United Nations and the international community’s
attention from the grave situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, where Israel, the occupying
Power, promotes policies and practices that are
turning into a de facto annexation with different and
discriminatory rights and legal systems applying to the
population under its control.
On 30 March, the Bureau of the Committee met
the President of the General Assembly and explored
alternative ways to revive the Middle East peace
process and international efforts to address this
injustice, which in May will mark 74 years since the
Nakba that befell the Palestinian people. The Bureau
issued a statement after the meeting, warning against
diverting international attention from the question of
Palestine and also appealing for assistance to ensure
that Palestine meets its 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development targets.
In conclusion, the Committee reiterates its
commitment to work towards the end of Israel’s
occupation and the realization of the rights of the
Palestinian people, including self-determination and
independence, in accordance with international law
and all relevant United Nations resolutions and past
agreements. Resolving the question of Palestine is long
overdue. That question has at its core our unfulfilled
promise to the Palestinian people. It remains an ongoing
source of injustice, fuelling instability and violence and
endangering human lives. At a time when new conflicts
shake the international community, we must not ignore
this open sore. Peace and stability in the Middle East
depend on the international community, all of us,
taking decisive action to support a just and peaceful
solution to the question of Palestine.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Oman.
Mr. Al Hassan (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
22/23

25/04/2022

and your friendly country, the United Kingdom, on
presiding over the Security Council for this month.
We thank you for convening this meeting during
the critical circumstances facing the occupied
Palestinian territories.
In its statement, my delegation will focus on the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories. We
would first like to welcome the briefing by the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process. We also welcome the statement just made by
the Vice-Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. My country
hopes that the various parties will engage positively
with the mandate entrusted to the Special Coordinator
and show the cooperation required to restore calm,
security and stability to all the occupied Palestinian
territories, particularly Al-Quds Al-Sharif. We look
forward to a more effective international role so as to
put an end to the Israeli occupation of the occupied
Palestinian territories, in line with the resolutions of
international legitimacy, in particular resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).
Various reports, including those of international
organizations, have emphasized that the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories is not reassuring and
is heading towards further escalation. That is due to
the unjustified and repeated Israeli acts of aggression
against the Palestinian people and violations of
international law, resolutions of the Security Council
and other relevant United Nations resolutions. My
country, the Sultanate of Oman, denounces and
condemns Israel’s illegitimate, provocative practices
and the incursion by the Israeli occupying forces into
the Al-Aqsa Mosque and Al-Haram Al-Sharif. We also
denounce and condemn the aggression against unarmed
worshippers, which is a blatant violation of international
law, humanitarian values and human rights.
My country expresses its condolences to the
families of the victims and the injured, and calls on
the international community once again to assume its
responsibilities to ensure that justice is done, enforce
the law, put an end to the occupation and achieve peace
by restoring the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people, including their right to establish an independent
State on all the territories occupied since 4 June 1967,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The situation in the occupied Palestinian territories
is grave and concerning. The fact that the Security
Council has not been able to adopt practical and tangible
22-32974

25/04/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

measures to protect the Palestinian people encourages
the Israeli occupying authorities to engage in further
acts of aggression and violations. We hope that the
Council will live up to its commitments and implement
the resolutions of international legitimacy.
In conclusion, I would like to say that it is high time
to put an end to the occupation and to impose peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Romero Puentes (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We endorse the statement made by the representative
of Namibia in his capacity as Vice-Chair of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.
Day after day, we receive with indignation news
confirming the intensification of Israel’s policies of
annexation of the occupied Palestinian territories and
the continued increase in its illegal settlement practices.
The construction and expansion of settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territory continue, as do punitive
demolitions, the forced displacement of hundreds of
civilians, the blockade of the Gaza Strip and plans to
annex the Palestinian territories of the Jordan Valley
and other parts of the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
We condemn the assault by Israeli forces on the
Al-Aqsa Mosque when hundreds of worshipers were
at prayer. It is regrettable that the Security Council
remains unable to adopt measures to put an end to the
Israeli military aggression and occupation of Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, pursuant to its
resolution 2334 (2016).
The United States continues to hinder a just,
lasting and comprehensive solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, ignoring the historical claims of
the United Nations, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, the League of Arab States, the Organization
for Islamic Cooperation and other international
actors. It has repeatedly obstructed the efforts of the
Security Council, thus granting impunity to Israel and
preventing this body from fulfilling the responsibility
entrusted to it under the Charter of the United Nations
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Moreover, the proposed so-called deal of the
century, which rejected the two-State solution, thus
threatening the future of the State of Palestine pursuant

S/PV.9021 (Resumption 1)

to the pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
The unilateral decision of the Government of the
United States to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of
Israel and to establish its diplomatic representation in
that city, with no respect for its historical status, and
to recognize Israel’s sovereignty over the Syrian Golan
constitute serious violations of the Charter of the United
Nations, international law and the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council.
The current Government of the United States has
not reversed those decisions, which reduce still further
the likelihood of a negotiated solution. Its aggressive,
unilateral and unjustified actions in the Middle East
continue to severely jeopardize the legitimate interests
of Arab nations and lead to a dangerous escalation in
the region.
We reiterate our call to put an immediate and
unconditional end to the arbitrary and illegal unilateral
coercive measures imposed against sovereign nations.
Cuba maintains its steadfast position in defence
of and solidarity with the just cause of the Palestinian
people. We reaffirm our unrestricted support for a
just, lasting and comprehensive solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. The Palestinian people must
exercise their right to self-determination and enjoy
an independent and sovereign State within pre-1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and that
guarantees the right of return for refugees.
We support full membership of the State of Palestine
in the United Nations and the call by its President to
hold an international peace conference. We call also for
the full and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from the
Syrian Golan and from all occupied Arab territories.
We call for a cessation of external interference in
Syria and full respect for its sovereignty and territorial
integrity, while supporting the quest for a peaceful and
negotiated solution to the situation imposed on that
sisterly nation.
We reiterate our support for the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action with Iran and for the inalienable right of
States to the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Cuba will always defend multilateralism, peace,
the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

22-3297423/23
