S/2011/283

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 May 2011
English
Original: French

Letter dated 3 May 2011 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995), I have the honour to
transmit herewith a letter dated 20 April 2011 from the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina enclosing the thirty-ninth report on the implementation of
the Peace Agreement for the period 16 October 2010 to 20 April 2011 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this document to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

11-30721 (E) 040511 040511

*1130721*

S/2011/283

Annex
Letter dated 20 April 2011 from the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina addressed to the Secretary-General
[Original: English]
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995), by which the Council
requested the Secretary-General to submit to it reports from the High Representative
in accordance with annex 10 of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Conclusions of the London Peace Implementation
Conference of 8 and 9 December 1995, I herewith present to you the thirty-ninth
report (see enclosure). I would ask for this report to be circulated to the members of
the Security Council for their consideration.
This is my fifth report to the Secretary-General since assuming the post of
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina and European Union Special
Representative on 26 March 2009. The present report covers the period from
16 October 2010 to 20 April 2011.
Should you or any Council member require any information beyond what is
provided in the attached report or have any questions regarding its contents, I should
be pleased to provide you with it.
(Signed) Valentin Inzko

2

11-30721

S/2011/283

Enclosure
Thirty-ninth report of the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina
16 October 2010-20 April 2011

Summary
This report covers the period from 16 October 2010 to 15 April 2011. Apart
from visa liberalization, which came into effect on 15 December 2010, the
authorities have failed to address any long-needed reforms. As a result there has been
no progress towards either European Union or NATO integration. In particular, no
progress has been achieved in addressing key reforms which are required for further
progress towards European Union integration, such as implementing the ruling of the
European Court of Human Rights in the “Sejdic and Finci” case, and adopting and
implementing state-level laws on a population census and state aid. Equally,
completion of the five objectives and two conditions necessary for the closure of the
Office of the High Representative has been stalled.
During the reporting period, legal and political actions from Republika Srpska
challenging the State-level institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina, their
competencies and laws, the authority of the High Representative and the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council, have intensified. In April 2011, the
Republika Srpska National Assembly adopted parliamentary conclusions and a
decision to hold a referendum which would potentially reject the authority of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Court and Prosecutor’s Office within that entity, as well as
the High Representative’s authorities, in particular laws enacted by the High
Representative. These actions are in conflict with the General Framework Agreement
for Peace — annexes 4 and 10. In addition, during the reporting period, there have
been further challenges from the Republika Srpska related to annexes 2, 4 and 10 of
the General Framework Agreement for Peace.
Since the general elections held in October 2010, the use of nationalistic and
divisive rhetoric has increased substantially within both entities, at times rising to the
level of hate speech. Republika Srpska authorities have openly called for state
dissolution, questioning the integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
refuting the legitimacy of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court and other
State-level institutions. Other Republika Srpska political leaders have frequently
questioned the sustainability of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The same leaders also
continued to challenge the rulings of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the International Court of Justice that qualified as genocide
the massacre of Bosniaks who had sought refuge in the United Nations-protected
area of Srebrenica in July 1995.
Political leaders in the Federation have also increased their inflammatory
rhetoric, and following the general elections, there were calls for the establishment
of a third [Croat] entity. In April 2011, two Bosnian Croat parties, the Croat
Democratic Union (HDZ BiH) and HDZ 1990 led the organization of a Croat
National Assembly in Mostar to highlight their dissatisfaction with the position of
Bosnian Croats within Bosnia and Herzegovina. They complained about the way the

11-30721

3

S/2011/283

Federation authorities were formed and called for a Croat majority federal unit to be
formed through constitutional changes.
Following the general elections in October 2010, relations within the
Federation became tense owing to a political impasse over government formation.
The two HDZ parties, in breach of the Federation Constitution, prevented the
formation of the Federation House of Peoples by blocking the elections of the
delegates from Croat majority cantonal assemblies to that body. This in turn
prevented the timely formation of the Federation authorities, which were elected
only in March 2011. At the time of writing, more than six months after elections, still
not all delegates had been appointed to the Federation House of Peoples. Equally,
numerous vital positions in the Federation remain unfilled because of disputes over
ethnic representation in these institutions.
The negative political atmosphere has led to the failure of the parties to form a
State-level government since the October 2010 general elections. A caretaker
government has been in place at the State level since the elections. In addition, the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly has also not been functioning in
the past six months, and no delegates to the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of
Peoples have been appointed from the House of Peoples of the Federation
Parliament. Consequently, no legislation has been adopted at the State-level in the
past six months. Equally, a regular State-level budget has not been adopted. On a
more positive note, the new Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency, which is elected
directly, is operational, and cooperation among the three members has improved in
comparison to the previous mandate.
None of the outstanding objectives and conditions necessary for the closure of
the Office of the High Representative was met during this reporting period. To the
contrary, there was regression in relation to State and defence property, and there
have also been difficulties in implementing the objectives to fiscal sustainability and
the rule of law. The Republika Srpska government has taken unilateral steps to
regulate State property by adopting its own State Property Law. If implemented, this
law would make completion of two of the objectives set as prerequisites for the
Office of the High Representative closure — specifically those dealing with the
apportionment of State and apportionment of defence property — far more difficult
if not impossible. In relation to Brcko District, Republika Srpska has complied with
the High Representative’s 18 September 2009 Decisions on the Brcko District’s
electricity supply. However, the Republika Srpska continues to send signals that raise
questions about its commitment to fundamental provisions of the Brcko Final Award.
Through its continued presence, the European Union military mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (EUFOR) has continued to reassure citizens that the environment in
the country remains safe and secure despite the tense political situation. The High
Representative continues to support the extension of the executive mandate for
EUFOR.

4

11-30721

S/2011/283

I. Introduction
1.
This is my fifth report to the Secretary-General since assuming the post of
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina — as well as the post of European
Union Special Representative — on 26 March 2009. The present report provides a
narrative description of progress made towards attaining the goals outlined in
previous reports, registers factual developments, notes relevant statements made
during the reporting period, and provides my assessment of mandate implementation
in key areas, not least the minimum objectives and conditions which must be met
before the Office of the High Representative can close. I have focused my efforts on
facilitating progress in these areas, in line with my primary responsibility to uphold
the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, while also
facilitating progress towards Euro-Atlantic integration. Regrettably, a substantial
part of my efforts has been dedicated to redressing negative developments, in
particular divisive actions taken against Bosnia and Herzegovina state institutions.

II. Political update
General political environment
2.
On 8 November 2010, the European Union member States adopted a Decision
to abolish short-term visa requirements for Bosnia and Herzegovina citizens holding
biometric passports. This decision entered into force on 15 December and has been
widely welcomed and celebrated in the country. Bosnia and Herzegovina also served
a successful term as president of the Security Council during January 2011. These
were the main positive developments during the reporting period.
3.
At the same time, and despite international efforts to improve relations in the
region, the overall political climate inside Bosnia and Herzegovina continued to
deteriorate. As a result, there has been no progress on the Euro-Atlantic integration
agenda or in addressing the outstanding objectives and conditions for the closure of
the Office of the High Representative.
General elections aftermath
4.
The general elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina were held on 3 October
2010. In its preliminary assessment, the Office for Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights and other international election monitoring missions considered that
the elections were free and fair and generally held in line with international
standards. However, they noted that the general elections — based on the Election
Law and the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution — violate the European
Convention of Human Rights and its Protocols. The Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights and other international election observers reiterated
that Bosnia and Herzegovina urgently needs to amend its Constitution and Election
Law in this regard. Although the elections were conducted professionally by the
Bosnia and Herzegovina election authority, cases of electoral fraud surfaced in both
entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Bosnia and Herzegovina election

11-30721

5

S/2011/283

authority sanctioned officials responsible for electoral fraud and reported those
cases to the State Prosecutor’s Office.1
5.
Following the confirmation of the election results on 2 November 2010,
Republika Srpska had formed a government by 1 February 2011. Government
formation in the Federation was far more complicated, and the government which
was established in late March has been challenged on political and legal grounds, in
particular by the HDZ BiH and HDZ 1990. A State-level government has yet to be
formed, more than six months after the elections. Mayoral elections were held on
16 January in eight municipalities across Bosnia and Herzegovina. In six
municipalities (Bihac, Vogosca, Srebrenik, Srbac, Orasje/Donji Zabar,
Odzak/Vukosavlje) elections were necessitated by the election of the incumbent
mayors to legislative posts in the October General Elections. In two other
municipalities (Kalesija/Osmaci and Sekovici), the mayors had been recalled under
the relevant laws.
Challenges to the General Framework Agreement for Peace
6.
During the reporting period, anti-Dayton activities have continued
(specifically in relation to annexes 2, 4 and 10 of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace), and the use of nationalistic and provocative rhetoric has
increased substantially.
7.
In September 2010, the Republika Srpska Government tasked the responsible
Republika Srpska authorities to draw up an action plan to make a precise description
of the Inter-Entity Boundary Line and to mark it. It threatened unilateral action in
the future should attempts to demarcate the Boundary Line as prescribed in the
Dayton Peace Agreement not proceed quickly. Worryingly, Republika Srpska
authorities have adopted legal acts and still use official maps which define the
Republika Srpska “border” as running along the wartime Inter-Entity Boundary Line
through Brcko District (the Inter-Entity Boundary Line in the Brcko District was
abolished under the Final Award). To date, the Republika Srpska authorities have
declined to provide assurances that Republika Srpska will honour annex 2 of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace and all aspects of the Brcko Final Award.
The Federation provided such assurances early in 2011.
8.
Political leaders from Republika Srpska have continued to question the
sovereignty and sustainability of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and they have openly
called for the dissolution of Bosnia and Herzegovina.2 They have also rejected the
authority of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court, and the competences
of other state-level judicial institutions.3 In particular, on 13 April the Republika
Srpska National Assembly adopted a set of conclusions rejecting the authority and
the competences of State-level judicial institutions as well as directly challenging
the High Representative and his powers and in particular the laws enacted by the
__________________
1 The Central Election Commission initiated disciplinary proceedings against polling station

committee members in polling stations where election fraud occurred. To date the Central
Election Commission has sanctioned more than 40 polling station members, and referred the
cases to the Bosnia and Herzegovina State Prosecutor. More cases are currently under review.
2 “BiH is still an experiment by foreigners and in order for people here to live better this country
must be divided.” Republika Srpska President Milorad Dodik, 10 March 2011.
3 “Any decision made by the BiH Constitutional Court contrary to our own will not be accepted
by the RS.” Republika Srpska President Milorad Dodik, 15 January 2011.

6

11-30721

S/2011/283

High Representative. The Conclusions undermine the entire constitutional system of
division of responsibilities between the State and the Entities as established by
Annex 4 of the General Framework Agreement for Peace, the Constitution of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and as further interpreted by the Constitutional Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina through its rulings. The Republika Srpska authorities also adopted
a decision on a referendum in that entity on the Bosnia and Herzegovina judicial
institutions, the legislation creating them, and the powers of the High
Representative. The holding of a referendum on the High Representative’s powers
and Bosnia and Herzegovina legislation are in breach of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitutional Framework and the international obligations of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
9.
In response to language in the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board
1 December 2010 communiqué condemning genocide denial in relation to
Srebrenica, the Republika Srpska authorities issued a statement describing the
position of the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board as “arbitrary”,
“unnecessary” and “unacceptable”. They have also continued to challenge the
rulings of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Court of Justice that qualified as genocide the massacre by Serbs of
Bosniaks who had sought refuge in the United Nations-protected area of Srebrenica
in July 1995. These remarks have exasperated representatives of the other
nationalities in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
10. Since the election campaign, the leaders of the Bosnian Croat HDZ BiH and
HDZ 1990 parties have continued to call occasionally for a third [Croat] entity. In a
December 2010 interview, then Federation President (Bosnian Croat) also referred
to the “realistic possibility” of the dissolution of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
High Representative decisions during the reporting period
11. On 5 January, the High Representative issued the Order Suspending the
Application of the Law on the Status of State Property Situated in the Territory of
Republika Srpska and Under the Disposal Ban. Under the High Representative’s
Order, the application of the Republika Srpska State Property Law remains
suspended until a final decision of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court
on the Law enters into force, taking into consideration that there is a need to
preserve ownership interests of the State and other levels of government.
12. On 26 January, the High Representative issued a Decision enacting the
Decision on Temporary Financing of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina for
the Period January-March 2011 as a substitute for the not-yet-constituted Federation
House of Peoples and to avoid the possibility of a halt to all budget payments in the
Federation entity.
13. On 28 March, the High Representative suspended two decisions issued by the
Central Election Commission pending review by the Federation Constitutional
Court. Recalling the Office of the High Representative Legal Opinion of 2001 and
subsequent interpretation from 2007, the High Representative issued a Decision
suspending the Central Election Commission decisions in order to avoid legal
uncertainty. That decision remains in force for the time being.
14. In February, a Decision by the High Representative was prepared in order to
annul the decision by the then Federation President and the two Vice-Presidents

11-30721

7

S/2011/283

seeking to appoint three judges to the Federation Constitutional Court. The Decision
of the Federation authorities would have violated the Federation Constitution and
the State-level Law on the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council (HJPC Law), as
it ignored the respective roles of the Federation House of Peoples and the High
Judicial and Prosecutorial Council in the selection process, as provided for in the
HJPC Law and the Federation Constitution. Following strong pressure from the
international community, the then Federation President finally annulled her own
decision.
Five objectives and two conditions for closure of the Office of the
High Representative
15. Backsliding occurred on some of the remaining objectives necessary for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative during the reporting period.
Following the adoption of the Law on the Status of State Property Situated in the
Territory of Republika Srpska and Under the Disposal Ban (Republika Srpska State
Property Law) on 14 September 2010, and the respective request submitted by the
Caucus of delegates of the Bosniak people in the Republika Srpska Council of
Peoples, on 10 December 2010 the Council for Protection of Vital National Interests
of the Republika Srpska Constitutional Court ruled that the Law did not violate the
vital interest of the Bosniak people. The Council ruled that the Republika Srpska
National Assembly is competent under the Republika Srpska Constitution to
regulate, inter alia, the status of State property situated in the territory of Republika
Srpska. The ruling also emphasized that the Council is not authorized to assess
whether the contested law is in harmony with the provisions of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitution or with international agreements.
16. In response to the ruling, and to prevent Republika Srpska from disposing of
State property prior to the resolution of planned legal challenges before the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Constitutional Court, on 5 January 2011 the High Representative
issued his Order Suspending the Application of the Law on the Status of State
Property Situated in the Territory of Republika Srpska and Under the Disposal Ban.
Under the Order, the application of the Republika Srpska State Property Law is
suspended until a final decision of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court
on that Law enters into force, during which any change of ownership rights over
State property in the territory of Republika Srpska is prohibited. On 6 January 2011,
the Republika Srpska State Property Law was challenged at the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitutional Court.
17. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Commission for State Property held only one
session during the reporting period, on 21 December 2010. The Commission
reviewed over 50 requests for exemptions from the High Representative’s temporary
ban on transfers of State Property, 7 of which were approved. Given the pending
legal challenge to the Republika Srpska State Property Law and the High
Representative’s 5 January order, the Commission members suspended work on a
State-level draft State property law.
18. Chances are diminishing for Bosnia and Herzegovina to make the reforms
necessary for the start of its NATO Membership Action Plan-related Annual
National Program by September 2011. The parties maintain diametrically opposed
views on the right of the State to own prospective immovable defence properties. At
the same time, administrative and political hurdles still hinder the destruction of

8

11-30721

S/2011/283

larger quantities of unsafe ammunition, weapons and explosives. In mid-March
2011, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency requested the immediate suspension
of the issuance of licences for weapons and military equipment export from Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The mission of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) to Bosnia and Herzegovina and the United Nations Development
Programme welcomed the decision in the light of the recent weapons exports by
Bosnia and Herzegovina to Armenia and Azerbaijan in breach of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina commitments to the OSCE Principles Governing Conventional Arms
Transfers, and in conflict with the European Union Council Common Position
2008/944/CFSP.
19. The resolution of the Brcko electricity issue marked an important step forward
in terms of the Entities meeting the conditions for closing the Brcko Arbitral
Tribunal and Supervision (although a number of Entity obligations to the Brcko
District have not yet been met — including debts owed to the Brcko District, Entity
citizenship, voting rights, and parliamentary ratification of legislation related to
allocation of indirect tax revenues). Given the progress made, the Supervisor
conducted consultations with all concerned parties regarding the future of
international engagement in the Brcko District. Unfortunately, questions remain
regarding the commitment of the Entities — particularly the Republika Srspka — to
honouring fully all previously undertaken obligations under the Brcko Final Award.
Strong, unambiguous assurances from the Republika Srspka regarding its
commitment to fulfilling those obligations in the future would facilitate a discussion
about the possible closure of the Tribunal and Supervision.
20. There has been only limited or no progress in implementation of the two
objectives for the closure of the Office of the High Representative already declared
completed. They relate to the rule of law and fiscal sustainability.
Bosnia and Herzegovina state-level institutions
Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency
21. Two of the three members of the former Bosnia and Herzegovina State
Presidency — Serb member Nebojsa Radmanovic and Croat member Zeljko
Komsic — won re-election in the October 2010 General Elections. The Party of
Democratic Action (SDA) candidate Bakir Izetbegovic won an unanticipated victory
over incumbent Haris Silajdzic as the Bosniak Presidency member. The new Bosnia
and Herzegovina Presidency was sworn in on 10 November 2010. During the
reporting period, the new Presidency held seven regular and five extraordinary
sessions.
22. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency has placed strong emphasis on
regional cooperation. On 31 January/1 February, the Presidency visited Croatia. This
was the first visit of the tripartite Presidency to Croatia in four years and the first
trip by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency outside Bosnia and Herzegovina
since the October 2010 elections. Although the two sides emphasized good relations
and offered verbal commitments to European Union integration, they made little
concrete progress in resolving the numerous open issues between the two countries.
The Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency also visited Slovenia on 28 February, and
Slovenian authorities expressed their full support for the Bosnia and Herzegovina
European Union perspective. Following his election, Bosniak Presidency member

11-30721

9

S/2011/283

Bakir Izetbegovic — while visiting Serbia — apologized for every innocent victim
killed by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Army during the war.
Council of Ministers
23. The performance of the Council of Ministers deteriorated further during the
reporting period. Although it has continued to meet regularly in a caretaker capacity
since the General Elections of 3 October 2010, there has been little of substance
achieved.4 The Council of Ministers approved the Annual Platform on IntelligenceSecurity Policy and the Communications Strategy, together with an action plan for
its implementation for the period 2010-2011 to improve transparency in institutional
decision-making. The Council of Ministers also acted on a number of
appointments.5
Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly
24. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly has been non-operational
in the past six months owing to the political stalemate, and the delegates to one of
the chambers, the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Peoples, have not yet been
appointed. Although the political parties represented in the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliamentary Assembly have met on numerous occasions since the general
elections, they have failed to agree on appointing leadership positions in the
Parliament. These disagreements delayed the inauguration of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina House of Representatives until 30 November. As a result of the political
stalemate, no legislation has been passed in the reporting period.
25. As the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly was unable to appoint
a new delegation to the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe after the
October elections 2010, the members of the Bosnia and Herzegovina national
delegation to the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe lost their rights
to be present in the Assembly on 11 April 2011. As a consequence Bosnia and
Herzegovina will not be allowed to participate in the work of the Council of Europe
Parliamentary Assembly and its committees until a new delegation is sent.
Bosnia and Herzegovina suspended from the International Federation of Association
Football and the Union of European Football Associations
26. Bosnia and Herzegovina was suspended from the International and European
Football Federations on 1 April. On 5 March, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Football
Federation rejected changes to its statute, which were demanded by the International
Federation of Association Football and the Union of European Football Associations
and which would have streamlined the Bosnia and Herzegovina Football Federation
__________________
4 It adopted two new laws and five amendments to existing legislation. One of the laws was

previously imposed by the High Representative.
5 The Director and Deputy Director of the Plant Health Administration, Director and two Deputy

Directors of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Institutions Common Services and President of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Competition Council. The Council of Ministers finally removed the
Acting Director of the Indirect Taxation Administration and appointed a new Acting Director for
90 days, tasking the Indirect Taxation Administration Governing Board to conduct and complete
the recruitment procedure for the nomination of a Director within 90 days. The appointment of
the Acting Director violated the Law on Ministerial, Council of Ministers’ and Other
Appointments that states that short-term appointments cannot exceed two months and cannot be
renewed.

10

11-30721

S/2011/283

so that it would have one President instead of a three-member Presidency.
Representatives from Republika Srpska voted against these required changes.
Republika Srpska
Government formation
27. While the Republika Srpska Government had been approved by the Republika
Srpska National Assembly on 29 December 2010, its formal approval came only on
1 February 2011, after the Vital National Interest Panel of the Republika Srpska
Constitutional Court ruled that the appointment of the Republika Srpska Prime
Minister did not violate Bosniak vital national interest. The Bosniak Caucus of the
Republika Srpska Council of Peoples had argued that appointment of the Prime
Minister (Serb) contravened the ethnic distribution of six high offices in Republika
Srpska mandated by the Republika Srpska Constitution.
28. The Bosniak Caucus of the Republika Srpska Council of Peoples has also put
two additional matters to the Republika Srpska Constitutional Court, one relating to
that institution’s decision-making processes, the other as to whether or not the
Republika Srpska Council of Peoples has been legally formed. These appeals are
pending. The Bosniak Caucus has also sought the opinion of the High Judicial and
Prosecutorial Council of Bosnia and Herzegovina on alleged violations of age limits
by Republika Srpska Constitutional Court judges.
Political developments
29. The Republika Srpska Government has continued to criticize the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Missing Persons Institute and Serbs working in that institution.
Pressure against them was especially intense during the reporting period. That led to
the resignation of Serb members of the Missing Persons Institute Managing Board.
The campaign included picketing their offices and was amplified by media close to
the Republika Srpska Government.
30. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Journalists’ Association, which had been founded
in 2004 as a country-wide association, disintegrated after Republika Srpska-based
journalists left to form their own separate association, the Independent Association
of Republika Srpska Journalists, on 10 January.
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Government formation crisis
31. There were significant delays in forming the Federation Government, which
was established only on 17 March. The government formation was prevented by
political disputes between two political blocks and by significant delays by some
Cantons to appoint their delegates to the Federation House of Peoples. The Cantons
in question (all of them majority Croat Cantons) acted in violation of the Federation
Constitution and the Bosnia and Herzegovina Election Law. At the time of writing,
one of these Cantons had still not elected its delegates to the Federation House of
Peoples.
32. Following a months-long deadlock, on 17 March, the Social Democratic Party
of Bosnia and Herzegovina (SDP), SDA, Croatian Party of Right (HSP) and People’s
Party Work for Betterment (NSRzB) parties convened a session of the Federation

11-30721

11

S/2011/283

House of Peoples and formed the Federation Government, despite the fact that not all
delegates had been elected from the cantons to the Federation House of Peoples. That
led to legal and political challenges from the main Croat parties — HDZ BiH and
HDZ 1990, which brought the appointment of the Federation President and
Vice-Presidents before the Bosnia and Herzegovina Central Election Commission
and the Federation Constitutional Court. On 24 March, the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Central Election Commission issued two decisions concluding that: first, the
elections of the Federation President and the Vice-Presidents should be annulled; and
second, that the conditions for the formation of the Federation House of Peoples had
not been met.
33. As the issue of constitution of the Federation House of Peoples and subsequent
formation of caucuses, election of the President and Vice-Presidents as well as the
nomination of the Government are matters also arising under the Federation
Constitution, the HDZ parties also submitted appeals to the Federation
Constitutional Court. To avoid competing claims and in order to prevent legal
ambiguity, the High Representative issued a decision temporarily suspending the
decisions of the Central Election Commission. This Decision provoked strong
reactions from the HDZ BiH and HDZ 1990, as well as from Republika Srpska. In the
meantime, the requests to the Federation Constitutional Court have been withdrawn.
The Decision of the High Representative remains in force for the time being.
Federation budget
34. Following its adoption by the Federation Government on 24 March and the
Federation House of Representatives on 25 March, the Federation Budget for 2011
was adopted by the Federation House of Peoples on 26 March. Although the budget
will probably be rebalanced within 90 days, its adoption prior to the expiry of the
temporary financing period on 31 March has allowed for undisturbed budget
payments and has prevented new elections in the Federation.
Appointments in the Federation
35. Due to strained relations in the Federation, numerous vital positions have
remained vacant for over two years. They include three seats on the Federation
Constitutional Court bench. Moreover, the Federation has failed to meet obligations
under its Constitution for an equal distribution among the three constituent peoples
of six key positions in the entity’s executive, legislative and judicial institutions.
36. On 3 February, the then Federation President and the two Vice-Presidents
signed a decision seeking to appoint three judges to the Federation Constitutional
Court. This decision violated the Federation Constitution and the State-level Law on
the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council, ignoring the prescribed role of the
Federation House of Peoples and the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council in the
selection process. However, following strong pressure from the international
community, the then Federation President annulled her decision appointing the
judges, citing the withdrawal of the Croat candidate’s application as the reason.

III. European partnership priorities and visa liberalization
37. There has been no progress addressing the European Partnership priorities
during the reporting period. Key European Union conditions, such as the adoption
12

11-30721

S/2011/283

of a State-level census law, a State-level State aid law and necessary amendments to
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution and the Bosnia and Herzegovina Election
Law, were not met. Reforms designed to create a single economic space, including
the adoption of a single law on obligations and the establishment of a single system
of banking supervision, also remain blocked.
38. Following the recommendation of the European Commission and its approval
by the European Parliament, the Council of the European Union adopted a decision
on 8 November 2010 to abolish visa requirements for Bosnia and Herzegovina
citizens. The Decision came into force on 15 December 2010. The new visa-regime
allows Bosnia and Herzegovina citizens who are in possession of a valid Bosnia and
Herzegovina biometric passport entry into the Schengen area, Bulgaria and Romania
without a visa. Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities have issued more than 630,000
biometric passports.
39. With regard to the implementation of the April 2008 laws on police reform, the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers, in February 2011, amended an earlier
decision on the handover of tasks, facilities, equipment and employees between the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of Security, the State Investigation and Protection
Agency (SIPA) and the Directorate for Police Coordination allowing for a special
pay increment for police officials employed in the Directorate for Police
Coordination. In October 2010, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers
adopted a conclusion approving the information on construction of a new facility for
the Agency for Education and Advanced Training of Personnel, which included a
financial projection for the construction of the new facility for that Agency.

IV. Public administration
40. Numerous senior service appointments remain long overdue at the State level,
including the appointment of a new Head of the Communications Regulatory
Agency (more than three years overdue), the Head of the Indirect Tax Authority,
members of the Communications Regulatory Agency Council (a year and a half
overdue), and the General Manager of the Company for the Transmission of Electric
Power in Bosnia and Herzegovina (one year overdue), all of which affect the
efficiency of decision-making in those institutions.
41. In October 2010, the Federation Constitutional Court adopted another decision
that weakened Federation institutions and opened the door to further Constitutional
Court challenges to Federation and cantonal legislation. In the ruling, the Court
determined that certain articles of the Law on Federation Ministries were not in
accordance with provisions of the Federation Constitution, and that education and
cultural policy belonged to the competency of the cantons. The Court gave the
Federation Parliament six months to harmonize inconsistent provisions with the
Federation Constitution, during which time the provisions shall remain in force on
an interim basis. This judgement was the second successful initiative by the former
Federation President to challenge legislation related to the distribution of entity and
cantonal responsibilities. The implementation of this decision will impact future
Croat-Bosniak coalitions at the Federation level, as Croats are expected to seek
decentralization and broader local autonomy for the cantons. During the reporting
period, the majority of the Cantons took steps towards establishing their own civil
service administrations.

11-30721

13

S/2011/283

42. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Public Administration Reform Strategy and its
various action plans remain only partially implemented.

V. Constitutional reform
43. No concrete progress was made on constitutional reform during the reporting
period. However, under a German initiative the main political parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina continued their discussions about constitutional reform issues, such as
the implementation of the 2009 ruling by the European Court for Human Rights in
the “Sejdic-Finci” case. Those discussions did not lead to concrete results owing to
the general political impasse in the country.

VI. Entrenching the rule of law
National Justice Sector Reform Strategy
44. The 22 December 2010 fifth Ministerial Conference saw numerous messages
of support for the judiciary from both entities and the international community. The
President of the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council called for improved
judicial coordination.
45. In 2010, the Justice Sector Reform Strategy 2009-2013 saw 52 per cent of its
activities fully and 29 per cent partially implemented. However, these numbers are
misleading as most of the alleged successes were either of less importance or
actually achieved by the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council. Activities
requiring legislative amendments to ensure a higher degree of coordination, such as
the Federation Law on Prosecutor’s Offices, remain pending.
46. The five functional working groups met twice during the reporting period (in
November 2010 and April 2011). The 9 December 2010 session of the Technical
Secretariat — not attended by the Entities’ Ministries of Justice — was exclusively
dedicated to preparing the fifth Ministerial Conference, but also concluded that the
approach to implementation must be changed. That is also the position of the
international partners monitoring the implementation process, who have decided to
move from a simple monitoring of the process into a more proactive support to the
implementation of the Strategy’s identified key projects, by engaging directly all
new Ministers of Justice. This approach is also favoured by representatives of
institutions responsible for implementing the strategy.
War Crimes Prosecution Strategy
47. There has been some progress in implementing the National Strategy for
Processing of War Crimes. A database of outstanding war crimes cases has been
established and the categorization of these cases has started. This has enabled an
estimate about how many cases will be dealt with by the State-level judicial
institutions and how many by lower levels. Importantly, the number of indictments
in war crimes cases in 2010 has significantly increased in comparison to previous
years. Also, the transfer of cases from the State to the entity level has started, with
45 cases transferred so far.

14

11-30721

S/2011/283

Regional judicial cooperation
48. Regional judicial cooperation in enforcement of court decisions6 has continued
to improve. By mid-February 2011, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of Justice
had received 38 requests for enforcement of criminal sanctions from Croatia,
enforcing 5, and 11 requests from Serbia, enforcing 2 to date. Bosnia and
Herzegovina sent 44 requests to Croatia (3 enforced), and 44 to Serbia (4 enforced).
In December 2010, the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina Appellate Division
confirmed the eight-year sentence rendered in Croatia in the high profile case
against a former member of the Croatian Parliament for war crimes against
civilians, who is now serving his sentence in a penitentiary facility in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
49. Following controversies regarding two cases of arrest of Bosnia and
Herzegovina citizens pursuant to warrants issued by the Serbian prosecutor’s office
for alleged war crimes (Jurisic case in Serbia and Ganic case in the United
Kingdom), the situation seemed to have stabilized with the adoption of a resolution
at the INTERPOL General Assembly meeting in November 20107 in relation to
cooperation with new requests concerning genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes. This resolution concluded a process initiated by INTERPOL in June
2009 in relation to the issuance of an international red notice arrest warrants by
Serbian authorities in relation to the Ganic case.
50. However, on 5 January 2011 a citizen of Croatia was arrested in Bosnia and
Herzegovina at the border crossing in Orasje on the basis of an arrest warrant for
war crimes issued by Serbia. Following hearings in Bosnia and Herzegovina, on
3 March 2011 the War Crimes Prosecutor’s Office of Serbia dropped the charges for
lack of evidence. The case emerged in spite of the Agreement on Cooperation in the
Prosecution of Perpetrators of War Crimes, Crimes against Humanity and Genocide,
signed by the Chief State Attorney of the Republic of Croatia and the War Crimes
Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia in October 2006. Similarly, Jovan Divjak, a
Bosnia and Herzegovina citizen and former general, was arrested in Austria on a
Serbian warrant in relation to the so-called “Dobrovoljacka Street” case.8 The same
incident had led the London’s City of Westminster Magistrates’ Court to reject in
__________________
6 Amendments to bilateral agreements on mutual enforcement of court decisions in criminal

matters between Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia, and on legal aid in civil and
criminal matters between Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia are in force. The Bosnia and
Herzegovina Ministry of Justice also reached agreements on the mutual enforcement of court
decisions in criminal matters and on legal aid with Montenegro in July 2010 (to be ratified), and
is currently negotiating similar amendments to the existing agreement with the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. These agreements were signed to prevent convicted persons from
fleeing to neighbouring countries to avoid serving their sentence.
7 INTERPOL, General Assembly, seventy-ninth session, Doha, 8-11 November, Resolution
AG-2010-RES-10. By this Resolution, INTERPOL closed the process initiated in June 2009
with the purpose of avoiding possible misuse of INTERPOL. It decided that requests concerning
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, when submitted by a member country
concerning a national of another member country, shall not be processed via INTERPOL
channels if that other member country protests against the request within thirty days.
8 The case carries the then-name of the Sarajevo Street where the event took place on 3 May 1992
when a JNA (Yugoslav People’s Army) convoy retreating from Sarajevo was attacked by the
Republic Bosnia and Herzegovina territorial defence, police forces and paramilitary units,
resulting in a number of casualties. Retired Republic Bosnia and Herzegovina General Jovan
Divjak was a senior officer present at the location of the incident when it occurred.

11-30721

15

S/2011/283

July 2010 Serbia’s request for extradition of Ejup Ganic, stating in its ruling that
“these proceedings are brought and are being used for political purposes and as such
amount to an abuse of process of this court”.
Other rule of law issues
51. In accordance with the plans of the Registries of the Court and the
Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the total number of international
judges has dropped from six to four all working on war crimes cases. They are
supported by six international legal officers (three in the Court and three in the
Prosecutor’s Office), four international investigators, and one international adviser
in the Prosecutor’s Office Department for Organized Crime, Economic Crime and
Corruption. All positions are fully financed. After positions of international
prosecutors in the Prosecutor’s Office Department for Organized Crime, Economic
Crime and Corruption were cut at the end of 2009, it appears there has been no
progress in organized crime and corruption cases previously dealt with by the
international prosecutors. In particular, this tendency appears to hold true for cases
involving certain high-level political figures.
52. Long-term international support to the Court and Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia
and Herzegovina should be ensured by the adoption of a Medium-Term Institutional
Development Plan to help identify future priority projects at a time of decreased
funds available for State judicial institutions. However, growing problems have
appeared in relation to the activities of the Transition Council, the coordination
body that supervises the implementation of the Registry agreement. The process of
integration of the Registry into Bosnia and Herzegovina institutions is experiencing
delays, owing primarily to the lack of support from the competent authorities,
respectively the Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of Justice and Ministry of
Finance. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of Justice has not yet completed
integration of the Court’s Criminal Defence Service. The 2004 IT system used by
the Court and the Prosecutor’s Office requires immediate upgrading to avoid
collapse. The lack of space to accommodate the two institutions creates additional
problems. While some international donors expressed interest in financing solutions,
delays are encountered in fulfilling technical obligations.
53. The Federation Constitutional Court lacks three out of nine judges, which
means that the Court is still unable to rule on cases of vital national interest.
High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council Working Group
54. The High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council (HJPC) Working Group tasked to
draft amendments to the Law on the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, has met regularly over the past months. This working
group, comprised mostly of representatives of the judiciary (from HJPC, the State,
the Entities and the Brcko District) and one representative of the international
community, has concentrated its work on the composition of the Council, election of
its members, appointment and discipline of judges and prosecutors. Once the HJPC
proposal is finalized, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of Justice intends to
appoint a new, more restricted working group to prepare the final text of the
amendments to be submitted to the Council of Ministers.

16

11-30721

S/2011/283

State Prison
55. The building of the State Prison, which is now estimated to cost 39.6 million
euros, has been increasingly criticized as being too expensive and not adapted to the
needs of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular by representatives from Republika
Srpska. Overall prison capacity was increased in both Entities, and authorities from
both Entities have indicated that their newly created prison space complies with all
European standards while costing less than the State Prison. The project of
introducing electronic bracelets for house imprisonment of persons sentenced to
short terms (up to one year) or for conditional release is on stand-by, since the
amendments planned by the Federation Government to Federation criminal
legislation and to the special law on execution of criminal sanctions are pending.
Fight against corruption
56. There has been little progress in the fight against corruption. Recently, the
High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council repeatedly called for the judiciary to
dedicate more time and means to the fight against corruption. Looking more
concretely at the work of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Prosecutor’s Office Special
Department for Organized Crime, Economic Crime and Corruption, five indictments
for abuse of office were filed and confirmed by the Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in 2010, and none so far in 2011. The Bosnia and Herzegovina
Prosecutor’s Office, however, indicated at the beginning of 2011 that a number of
important corruption-related indictments would be filed shortly.
57. There was little progress on the appointment of a permanent director (and two
deputies) of the Agency for the Prevention of Corruption and Coordination of the
Fight against Corruption. The special committee appointed by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly, responsible for initiating the selection
procedure for the Director of the Agency, established a ranking list of the candidates
in December 2010. However, the final appointment of the Director and two deputies
by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliament cannot be completed because the Bosnia
and Herzegovina House of Peoples has yet to be constituted. Since June 2010, an
Acting Director has headed the Agency, even though this temporary appointment is
not in compliance with the law. The establishment and functioning of the Agency for
the Prevention of Corruption and Coordination of the Fight against Corruption was a
requirement for the 2010 decision on visa liberalization by the European Union.
Public security and law enforcement
58. There have been increased efforts by the Federation and cantonal authorities to
update internal affairs legislation to increase the operational and budgetary
independence of police commissioners from their respective Ministries of Interior.
The process of reviewing the laws on police officials currently in force has
continued.
59. In November 2010, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of Security set up a
working group for drafting amendments to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Law on
Police Officials to permit the Directorate for Police Coordination to employ active
police officials directly from other police bodies in Bosnia and Herzegovina until
31 December 2012. This temporary exemption from normal employment procedures
could result in accelerated recruitment of new staff in the Directorate. The working
group concluded its work in January 2011 and forwarded its proposal to the

11-30721

17

S/2011/283

Ministry of Security. In November 2010, the caretaker Federation Government
appointed a new Director of the Federation Police Administration for a four-year
mandate.

VII. International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia cooperation
60. During the reporting period, the cooperation of Bosnia and Herzegovina with
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia remained satisfactory,
the priority still being the arrest of Ratko Mladic. This was confirmed during the
visit of the Tribunal Chief Prosecutor to Bosnia and Herzegovina in April 2011.
61. On 22 December 2010, the Security Council adopted a resolution establishing
a residual mechanism to finish the remaining tasks of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. That body will have the authority to prosecute
the most senior persons indicted by the Tribunal who are arrested after the
completion of the Tribunal mandate, as well as those persons who interfere with the
administration of justice. The body will not be able to raise new indictments but will
be able to conduct review proceedings, supervise the enforcement of sentences and
decide on pardons or commutations of sentences. For budgetary and logistical
reasons, it has been recommended that the Tribunal archives and the seat of the
residual mechanism be placed at the same location. The International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia is expected to complete its work by
31 December 2014.
War criminals escape
62. Four individuals, sentenced for crimes against humanity by the Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina remain at large. Radovan Stankovic, sentenced to 20 years’
imprisonment, escaped from prison in Foca in May 2007 with the assistance of local
authorities. His case was the first to be transferred by the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia to the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Two
other indictees, sentenced to 13 years and 17 years, respectively, escaped in May
2009 and May 2010 while under prohibitive measures awaiting delivery of their
final verdicts. In December 2010 a fourth accused escaped immediately before the
pronouncement of a first instance sentence of 27 years’ imprisonment for crimes
against humanity.

VIII. Reforming the economy
63. Economic data for 20109 showed signs of improvement in selected areas. The
exports of Bosnia and Herzegovina increased by 29.45 per cent over 2009, while
imports increased by 10.78 per cent. As a result, the total foreign trade deficit
shrunk by 5.66 per cent. Total industrial production also rose by 4.2 per cent in the
Federation and 5 per cent in Republika Srpska. The average net salary in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in 2010 amounted to 408 euros, an increase of 1 per cent, while the
average pension amounted to 170 euros, a 1 per cent decrease. Annual inflation was
__________________
9 Source of information: BiH Economic Planning Directorate, BiH Statistics Agency, BiH Foreign

Trade Chamber.

18

11-30721

S/2011/283

2.1 per cent. Unemployment and investment data are worrisome: registered
unemployment at the end of December was estimated at 522,080 people, or 43 per
cent, while foreign direct investments in 2010 decreased by 71.4 per cent from
2009.
Indirect taxation authority difficulties
64. The Indirect Taxation Authority Governing Board has still not agreed on any
long-standing issue within its competence. Since 24 June 2008, there has been no
agreement on new indirect tax revenue allocation coefficients, despite the obligation
under the Rulebook on Coefficient Calculation and Payments to the Entities10 that
they be decided on a quarterly basis. There has been no rebalancing of the collected
and distributed indirect tax revenues, which is also contrary to the obligation to
rebalance provided for in the Rulebook. No action has been taken to set up the ITA
Governing Board Final Consumption Unit, although it was agreed by the Board on
24 June 2008. Finally, the ITA Governing Board has not yet agreed on a permanent
methodology for reallocation of road toll revenue foreseen by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Law on Excise Tax. This blocks 10 per cent of all road toll revenue
collected since 1 July 2009, which currently amounts to over 10 million euros.
65. Republika Srpska authorities have threatened to block all fiscal decisions in
Bosnia and Herzegovina because of an alleged debt of 35 million euros between the
ITA and Republika Srpska. They have threatened with new measures to preserve the
revenues belonging to the Republika Srpska, stressing that those do not exclude
returning indirect taxation competences transferred to the State in 2003. Those
claims can be read in the context of the continued challenges of the Republika
Srpska to the indirect taxation system and the competence of the State for it.
Fiscal Council
66. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Fiscal Council made no progress towards
adopting a Global Framework of Fiscal Balance and Policies in Bosnia and
Herzegovina for the period 2011-2013.11 The absence of a Global Framework and
consequently of a 2011 State budget,12 poses the risk that the State will remain on
austere temporary financing.13 As a consequence, all payments at the State level are
__________________
10 The Rulebook on Coefficient Calculation and Payments to the Entities was adopted by the ITA

Governing Board on 24 June 2008.
11 Based on the budget calendar, the Framework should have been adopted by the end of May 2010

to allow for the preparation of 2011 budgets at all levels. Disagreement between the Entities and
the State on the State share of 2011 indirect tax revenue is the reason for delays.
12 On 31 March 2011, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers adopted the Draft State
Budget for 2011 and forwarded it to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency as the official
budget proponent. However, in the absence of a Global Framework, the chances of having the
Draft Budget adopted are minimal. Moreover, adoption of the budget would require approval by
both parliamentary houses at the State level and the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Peoples
has not yet been constituted.
13 The Decision on Temporary Financing of State Institutions and International Obligations for the
Period January-March 2011 was adopted by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers
on 28 December 2010. On 12 January 2011, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers
adopted Operational Measures for the Implementation of the Decision on Temporary Financing
of State Institutions and International Obligations. On 31 March 2011, the BiH Council of
Ministers extended the Decision on Temporary Financing of State Institutions and International
Obligations until the end of June 2011.

11-30721

19

S/2011/283

now limited to salaries and utilities only. All other payments are either fully
suspended or can be approved only in exceptional circumstances. No budget user
can initiate any new or expand any current programme activity. The temporary
financing regime directly affects the ability of the State Institutions to meet their
legislative and Euro-Atlantic integration obligations.
67. The failure to adopt a Global Framework affects the State and the Entities, as it
blocks disbursement under the International Monetary Fund Stand-By Arrangement
and European Union Macro-Financial Assistance, without which neither Entity can
meet its 2011 financial commitments. The Federation already faced suspension of
all budget payments twice this year, and the Office of the High Representative had
to intervene on both occasions. On 26 January 2011, the High Representative
enacted the Decision on Temporary Financing of the Federation for the Period
January-March 2011, which allowed for undisturbed budget transactions in the first
quarter of 2011. The High Representative’s 27 March 2011 Order Temporarily
Suspending Certain Decisions of the BiH Central Election Commission allowed for
the parliamentary adoption of the 2011 Federation budget on 26 March 2011.14
Republika Srpska is in a difficult situation as well and — as noted above — is
seeking to fill the budget. The situation will worsen if IMF and European Union
disbursement criteria are not met.
Electricity Transmission Company
68. There has been little progress in addressing the problems related to the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Transmission Company (Transco). Due to the political situation,
the company’s management and most of its Management Board are in technical
mandates. This includes the Audit Board, which plays a key role in the selection of
an independent auditor. The General Manager’s refusal to permit an independent
audit follows his refusal to permit the State Auditor to conduct an audit in Transco
in September 2009. Moreover, all major investments in the electricity transmission
infrastructure remain blocked, despite deposited investment funds that have grown
to over 100 million euros. The electricity transmission grid has not been upgraded
for almost three years and its capacity to sustain all the grid users is at risk. In a
3 February 2011 assessment, these problems were noted by the three trade unions
representing Transco workers from Banja Luka, Mostar and Sarajevo. All share
identical views, even though their ethnic composition is different.

IX. Return of refugees and displaced persons
69. On 24 June 2010, the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Peoples adopted a
revised Strategy for the Implementation of Annex 7 of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace. Due to the absence of a new government, there has been no
progress made in implementation. There are still approximately 113,000 persons
registered as internally displaced, more than 7,000 of whom live in poor conditions
in collective centres.
70. A new UNHCR envoy working on the protracted displacement situation in the
Western Balkans, visited the region in February to work with the Governments to
__________________
14 The 2011 Federation Budget was published in the Official Gazette of the Federation of Bosnia

and Herzegovina, number 14/11 of 30 March 2011.

20

11-30721

S/2011/283

devise regional refugee return projects. The revised Annex 7 Strategy will be part of
regional discussions, and presents a good opportunity to further the aim of the
Strategy to close the chapter of displacement in Bosnia and Herzegovina by 2014.
With the Office of the UNHCR in Bosnia and Herzegovina acting as the lead
international agency in this field, the Office of the High Representative will
continue to support its efforts.

X. Mostar
71. On 26 November 2010, the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina
ruled on a case submitted by the HDZ BiH that a number of provisions of the
Mostar City Statute were unconstitutional. The provisions in question are primarily
related to the electoral system for the City Council. While Croat-dominated parties
expressed discontent that the ruling did not go far enough, Bosniak-dominated
parties expressed concern that it will impact negatively on power-sharing in the city.
72. On 4 April 2011, the Mostar City Council unanimously adopted the City
budget for 2011. Given the delays and disputes that have surrounded the adoption of
the budget in previous years, the decision offers a ray of hope that the Mayor and
the City Council can press ahead and address a wide range of long-standing
challenges facing the city on its path to full reintegration.

XI. Brcko District15
73. The Brcko District Supervisor, the European Commission and the Energy
Community Secretariat continued to work on the Brcko electricity issue. By late
January 2011 steps had been taken that effectively closed the Brcko electricity
issue.16
Tax revenue distribution
74. This issue is important to Brcko because 65-70 per cent of the District
revenues come from indirect taxes. To date, however, there is no permanent
__________________
15 See also paragraph 7 of this report with reference to the importance of the Inter-Entity Boundary

Line for Brcko.
16 On 21 December 2010, the Republika Srpska National Assembly adopted amendments to the

Republika Srpska Electricity Law that are in line with the State Law as amended in September
2009. On 28 December 2010, the State Electricity Regulatory Commission launched internal
procedures required to assume regulatory oversight over Brcko, and on 29 December, the Brcko
District Assembly harmonized its Law on Electricity with the State Law related to SERC’s
responsibilities in Brcko. All these developments created conditions for the Public Utility
Company to conclude a 12-month renewable contract for electricity supply to Brcko with
Elektroprivreda Republika Srpska on 30 December 2010. The contract allows Brcko residents to
be supplied under transparent conditions and regulated prices. On 12 January 2011, SERC
adopted a set of Brcko-related by-laws, namely, the Rulebook on Issuance of Temporary
Licences for the Performance of Activities of Electricity Distribution and Supply in Brcko
District and the Rulebook on the Method for Determining Temporary Tariffs for Non-Eligible
Customers in Brcko District. At its 18 January session, SERC adopted the Decision on issuance
of temporary licence to the Public Utility Company for activities of electricity distribution and
supply in Brcko District. The Decision was issued for the period from 19 January 2011 to
18 January 2013. On 27 January 2011, SERC determined temporary tariff rate electricity prices
for non-eligible (tariff) customers in Brcko District.

11-30721

21

S/2011/283

solution. The protection of Brcko’s interests rest on a decision imposed by the High
Representative in 2007. Given the Republika Srpska formal rejection of the High
Representative’s authority to legislate, given prior collusion by the Entities to shortchange the District, and given the District’s lack of a vote on the ITA Governing
Board, there are questions as to the sustainability of this arrangement following the
eventual departure of the Office of the High Representative. Brcko District
Institutions have been encouraged by the Brcko District Supervisor to develop their
own proposals as a viable basis for negotiations with the Entities, but have so far
failed to do so.
Voter rights
75. Approximately 25 per cent of Brcko’s residents (28,000 persons) could not
cast their votes in the recent General Elections, as Brcko residents without entity
citizenship are unable to vote. This prompted a decision by the Central Election
Commission allowing Brcko residents to declare an Entity voting option in cases
where they had neither Entity citizenship nor a declared Entity voting option.
Approximately 3,000 Brcko residents used this opportunity and expressed their
preference. The number of people without entity citizenship continues to increase as
new identity cards are issued. In order to resolve the issue, the Federation will need
to enact relevant regulations. Only after all these conditions are met and Brcko
District residents are fully able to declare or change their citizenship will this issue
be resolved.

XII. Defence reform
76. In January 2011, the President of the Republika Srpska stated publicly that
Republika Srpska would insist on a referendum on NATO membership. Rhetoric
aside, Bosnia and Herzegovina made no progress on resolving defence property, a
condition for starting the NATO Membership Action Plan and Objective 2 in the socalled “5+2 agenda” of objectives and conditions for the closure of the Office of the
High Representative.
77. Due to paralysis in forming a State-level government, the Bosnia and
Herzegovina State budget for 2011 has not been approved. The Bosnia and
Herzegovina Ministry of Defence and the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina
personnel are therefore faced with limited possibilities to engage in training and
other activities during the first months of 2011.
78. Between January 2010 and April 2011, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Armed
Forces released close to 2,000 military personnel from duty. About half of those
registered for a follow-on NATO Trust Fund — the so-called NATO Perspektiva
Program — to assist military personnel to transition into civilian jobs. Fewer than a
hundred have received assistance to date. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of
Defence met with the Entity Pension Funds and the Entity Ministries for Veterans to
discuss the Amended Law on Service in the Armed Forces of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The law was amended just before the October 2010 elections to
provide more generous retirement benefits for the soon-to-be-released personnel.
Under the legislation, approximately 80 per cent of NATO Perspektiva Program
beneficiaries are able to exercise the option for earlier retirement, provided funds
are found in the Bosnia and Herzegovina State budget. Due to the lack of a state
budget, no such funding was made available. Numerous retired soldiers threatened to
disrupt the Military World Ski Championships, taking place in Bosnia and

22

11-30721

S/2011/283

Herzegovina from 21 to 25 February 2011, unless benefits were paid under the
amended provisions of the law. Although protests were held in front of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Parliament, no major disruptions to the sports competition were reported.

XIII. Intelligence reform
79. At its regular session, held on 9 March 2011, the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Presidency approved the 2011 Intelligence-Security Policy Platform, which contains
the general work guidelines for the Bosnia and Herzegovina Intelligence-Security
Agency, OSA. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly has yet to
adopt any of OSA Annual Intelligence-Security Policy Platforms.
80. On 1 February 2011, the Secretariat of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Joint
Parliamentary Assembly Committee for Oversight of OSA Work was again fully
staffed, as the posts of the Committee’s Secretary and Expert Adviser were filled,
following personnel changes late in 2010. The new Committee members are still to
be appointed, owing to the failure of the Federation to elect delegates to the Bosnia
and Herzegovina House of Peoples.

XIV. European Union Military Force
81. EUFOR troop strength was reduced to some 1,400 personnel after October
2010, but it retains the capacity to bring in over-the-horizon reserves. Its
headquarters and peace enforcement capability are based in the Sarajevo area, with
liaison and observation teams present throughout the country. EUFOR has also
continued to work closely with the Bosnia and Herzegovina Armed Forces, and the
introduction of capacity-building and training mandates were welcomed by the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Armed Forces as a step towards further strengthening
Bosnia and Herzegovina capacities. Contributing to a safe and secure environment
continued to be the key EUFOR role — one widely welcomed by Bosnia and
Herzegovina citizens. EUFOR also helped the Office of the High Representative and
other international organizations to fulfil their respective mandates. In so doing,
EUFOR has continued to serve as an important factor of stability in the country.
82. Preparations are under way to continue the EUFOR executive presence beyond
2011. It is important for EUFOR to retain an executive mandate for at least some
months after the closure of the Office of the High Representative. The European
Union Special Representative has continued to offer political guidance and support
to the EUFOR mission.

XV. European Union Police Mission
83. The European Union Police Mission has continued to support the development
of the law-enforcement agencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the fight against
organized crime and corruption, enhancing cooperation between police and
prosecutors, police and the prison structure, as well as in promoting accountability
within police bodies. The mission has continued its work on the harmonization of
the legal framework for police officers and police bodies and supported further
implementation of the police reform laws of April 2008, through its mentoring of
the Directorate for Police Coordination. All bodies and agencies foreseen by the
April 2008 police reform laws are now formally established and possess the

11-30721

23

S/2011/283

necessary conditions to begin to function. In view of the expiry of its mandate at the
end of 2011, the mission will continue to focus on developing the operational and
coordination role of the Directorate for Police Coordination, strengthening the State
Investigation and Protection Agency as the lead investigative agency, promoting
cooperation among law enforcement agencies and fostering cooperation between
police officials and Ministers of Interior.

XVI. European Union Special Representative
84. The European Union Special Representative mandate has been extended until
31 August 2011. The European Union Special Representative has continued to
coordinate the various European Union missions on the ground. In line with his
mandate, the European Union Special Representative has offered local political
guidance to EUFOR and the European Union Police Mission. Cooperation with the
European Union delegation and the European Union member States has also been
intense.
85. The European Union is finalizing preparations to establish a reinforced, single
European Union representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina who will take the lead in
supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina on European Union-related matters. The High
Representative will thus no longer serve the European Union Special Representative.
The single European Union Representative, and head of the European Union
delegation, will have a broad and balanced set of instruments to maximize the
incentives provided by the European Union, in line with established procedures. The
European Union is also determined to support the General Framework Agreement for
Peace and has adopted a set of restrictive measures in this regard.

XVII. Future of the Office of the High Representative
86. The Peace Implementation Council Steering Board met at the level of Political
Directors twice during the reporting period, on 30 November and 1 December 2010
and on 29 and 30 March 2011. The Peace Implementation Council Steering Board
has continued to express its concern over the political situation in the country, as
well as the ongoing failure to address the remaining objectives and conditions for
the closure of the Office of the High Representative. As a result of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities’ failure to meet these objectives and conditions, the
Steering Board has thus far been unable to take a decision on the closure of the
Office of the High Representative. The next meeting of the Steering Board of the
Peace Implementation Council is scheduled to take place on 6 and 7 July 2011.

XVIII. Reporting schedule
87. In keeping with the proposals of my predecessor to submit regular reports for
onward transmission to the Security Council, as required under Security Council
resolution 1031 (1995), I herewith present my fifth regular report. Should the
Secretary-General or any Security Council member require information at any other
time, I would be pleased to provide an additional written update. My next regular
report to the Secretary-General is scheduled for November 2011.

24

11-30721

S/2011/283

11-30721

25
