S/PV.7007

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7007th meeting

Tuesday, 23 July 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. DiCarlo/Mr. DeLaurentis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United States of America)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Mr. M’Beou
Sir Mark Lyall Grant

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

13-40298 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1340298*

S/PV.7007

Mr. Serry: Let me begin by expressing my best
wishes to our Muslim colleagues on the occasion of the
holy month of Ramadan.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bangladesh, Brazil, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Peru, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with the provisional rules of
procedure and previous practice in this regard, I
propose that the Council invite the Permanent Observer
of the Observer State of Palestine in the United Nations
to participate in this meeting.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Robert Serry, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, to
participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the observer of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations to participate in
this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Abdou Salam
Diallo, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Serry.

2

begin

its

As the Middle East continues to go through
a deepening crisis, with an ever-deteriorating
humanitarian catastrophe in Syria and significant
political developments in Egypt, the Middle East peace
process remains critical to the fate of the region. Progress
in the peace process and a more constructive dynamic
between the parties would have important, positive
regional political implications. Conversely, continued
deadlock will further erode hope for an agreed twoState solution. In the effort to renew a serious dialogue
between the parties, time is of the essence.
It is against that compelling background that
the Secretary-General has welcomed United States
Secretary of State Kerry’s intense diplomatic efforts
in recent months and his announcement in Amman
that a basis had been established for resuming direct
final status negotiations between the Israelis and
Palestinians. We understand that the agreement is
still being finalized, and that Palestinian and Israeli
negotiators will join Mr. Kerry in Washington, D.C.,
in the near future to begin initial talks. We also note
that some very tough choices will be required from
both sides in the period ahead. Both leaders will have
to win the support of their domestic constituencies
for renewed negotiations. The meetings that President
Abbas has held with the Executive Committee of the
Palestine Liberation Organization and the Al-Fatah
Central Committee serve as an indication thereof.
The Secretary-General, encouraged by the positive
developments towards negotiations, has called on both
sides to show leadership, courage and responsibility in
order to sustain this effort towards achieving a twoState solution.
While United States engagement is central, we
are convinced of the need for a broader regional and
international role in support of any political initiative,
as well as continued efforts to ensure that the Palestinian
Authority remains a viable interlocutor and partner. In
that regard, we appreciate the ministerial meetings of
the Arab League Committee with Secretary Kerry and
President Abbas in Amman; the Committee made a
significant difference with its statement of support. We
particularly commend Jordan’s important contribution
to the current efforts. It is crucial to build on the opening
offered by the Arab League ministerial committee’s
recent reaffirmation of the Arab Peace Initiative and

13-40298

S/PV.7007

the prospect of ending the Arab-Israeli conflict and
achieving regional peace. We continue to hope that
Israel will find a constructive way to respond to it.
As for the United Nations, the Council may rest
assured that the Secretary-General and I on the ground
will continue our engagement in support of the vital
ongoing effort to revive meaningful negotiations.
The Foreign Ministers of the European Union in their
Council conclusions of 22 July also reaffirmed that
they would give active and concrete support to help
ensure that negotiations between the parties were
successful. The envoys of the Quartet were recently
briefed on the efforts under way and intend to meet
soon to review the situation and assess how the wider
international community can effectively support
resumed negotiations.
The efforts to bridge the gaps between the parties
are commendable, but more hard work lies ahead of us.
As Secretary Kerry noted, it is important that tangible
progress be made before the new General Assembly
session in September. The United Nations has been clear
that progress this year can be expected only if a credible
political horizon for achieving a negotiated two-State
solution emerges. Similarly, plans to shore up the
Palestinian economy with a major boost to private-sector
development are welcome, and indeed necessary, but
must now be complemented by progress on the political
track. In this near-to-last chance to preserve the
viability of the two-State solution, we remain hopeful
that renewed negotiations will be substantive and set
a clear path towards that solution, namely, the end of
conflict and lasting peace and security for both Israelis
and Palestinians. Nobody but the parties themselves
can make the hard choices required to achieve peace,
but the international community and the region should
cooperate in a concerted and committed manner to
drive the peace process forward.
We should further stress that any negotiations
must be accompanied by a renewed focus on visibly
and tangibly improving the situation on the ground.
Both parties must take every possible step to promote
conditions conducive to the resumption of the political
process and refrain from actions that undermine trust.
In doing so, we must not forget the situation in Gaza,
where practical steps to improve the humanitarian
and security situation in the wake of transformations
in Egypt can be an important enabler for peace and
stability. We feel that this is also the time for bold steps

to enhance the understanding on the ceasefire reached
in November 2012 through Egyptian good offices.
Turning to events on the ground, the situation in the
reporting period can be summarized as relatively quiet,
but tense and volatile at the same time. The potential
risk of increased instability and violence in the West
Bank was illustrated on 11 July, when Israeli security
forces reported seizing a rifle, ammunition and two
pipe bombs during a raid in Nablus. Palestinian security
forces continued working to maintain law and order in
the West Bank, in coordination with Israeli security
forces. On 12 July, a Palestinian explosive engineering
unit safely disposed of an unexploded ordinance near
Qalqiliya.
We are concerned about continued prisoner
protests, including of a number of hunger strikes that
have already lasted more than two months. On 14 July,
Jordanian detainee Abdallah Barghouti was transferred
from prison to an Israeli hospital in critical condition
after 76 days of continuous hunger strike. We note that
President Abbas has consistently called on Israel to
address the legitimate concerns of Palestinian prisoners
and, as a confidence-building step, to consider
releasing prisoners, including those convicted in times
predating the Oslo agreement. With the parties having
now agreed to resume negotiations, I have little doubt
that a meaningful prisoners release would help to build
confidence and improve the situation on the ground.
Israeli security forces conducted a total of 360
search-and-arrest operations in the occupied West
Bank, including in Area A, resulting in one Palestinian
being shot and killed on 2 July and 134 Palestinians
injured, including 24 children and six women. Three
members of Israeli security forces were also injured.
Four hundred and nineteen Palestinians were arrested
by Israeli security forces. This includes Hamas
Palestinian Legislative Council member Mohammed
Abu Tair on 2 July in Ramallah, after he had previously
been deported from Jerusalem.
Against the background of a UNICEF report, issued
in March, on the treatment of Palestinian children
by the Israeli security forces, we are also troubled by
the detention in Hebron on 9 July of a five-year old
Palestinian boy for several hours in a stone-throwing
incident. The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) are reportedly
checking this incident and reviewing its policies
regarding the detention of children.

13-402983

S/PV.7007

Israeli security forces announced a crackdown on
Israelis suspected of carrying out so-called price tag
attacks, with a number of reported arrests, including
of one suspect in connection to the desecration of
the Latrun monastery in September 2012. Tensions
continued on the ground as a result of settler attacks that
injured 13 Palestinians and caused extensive damage
to Palestinian property. Palestinian attacks on settlers
also resulted in two injuries and some material damage.
Following last month’s reported slow-down,
demolitions of Palestinian property in Area C and in
East Jerusalem increased again during the reporting
period. A total of 83 structures were demolished,
leading to the displacement of 129 Palestinians,
including 45 children.
I regret to inform the Council that, despite earlier
reports of Israeli restraint on settlement activity, the
reporting period witnessed some renewed steps in
settlement planning both in the West Bank and, to a
lesser extent, in East Jerusalem. Steps towards the
approval and advancement of settlements involve
70 housing units in Har Homa, between Bethlehem
and Jerusalem, 84 units in Nokdim, in the southern
West Bank, and 700 units in Modiin Illit. A report of
the Israeli State Comptroller issued on 17 July noted
that there was little to no criminal law enforcement in
the settlements regarding violations of planning and
construction law, and that administrative procedures
for demolitions are rarely implemented.
Of note, on 19 July the European Commission,
drawing from earlier Council conclusions, issued
guidelines that stipulate that it would provide grants
and maintain relations only with Israeli institutions
within the 1967 line. The guidelines, to come into force
on 1 January 2014, prescribe that any Israeli legal entity
receiving funding from the European Union will have
to state that it has no links to the West Bank, including
in East Jerusalem, or the Golan Heights. Israeli officials
have voiced their strong objection to these guidelines.
The position of the United Nations regarding
settlements is unequivocal. They are contrary to
international law and Israel’s commitments under the
road map. Continuing settlement activity would not
be conducive to creating a favourable environment for
negotiations.
In a positive development, Israel is providing a
considerable number of permits for Palestinian residents
of the West Bank to visit Jerusalem and Israel during

4

Ramadan, and applying more flexible regulations at
checkpoints and points of passage during the holiday.
Nevertheless, visits between 10 and 17 July of Israeli
groups, including senior officials, to the Temple Mount/
Haram Al-Sharif resulted in some clashes between
Palestinians and the Israeli police accompanying these
groups. We urge all parties to show extreme restraint
and to keep the calm around this holy site.
In Gaza, the relative calm observed in June was
largely maintained during the reporting period. A
total of three rockets were fired from Gaza into Israel,
without resulting in casualties or damage. There were
also no reports of Israeli airstrikes into Gaza. Israeli
forces conducted six limited incursions into Gaza and
in some instances the Israeli navy forced Palestinian
fishing boats ashore by shooting in their vicinity. No
casualties were reported on either side.
The situation on the ground in Gaza has been
affected by political developments in Egypt. For
security reasons, the Rafah crossing was closed for
nearly a week, and since 11 July it has been partially
reopened to allow limited categories of people and those
stranded on either side of the crossing to return home.
Egypt also deployed two additional battalions in the
Sinai to address security concerns. However, on 4 July
two explosions were heard in the Israeli southern city
of Eilat, without any casualty or damage, reportedly
resulting from rockets fired from the Sinai. A Salafist
group, Ansar Beit Al-Maqdis, took responsibility for
the shooting. We strongly condemn any such shootings.
The Egyptian authorities also took robust measures
against the tunnels into Gaza. As a result of these
actions against illegal activity, 80 per cent of the
tunnels are now no longer functioning, according to
some estimates. Gaza is beginning to experience some
serious shortages of fuel and basic building materials
for which the tunnels had become the primary entry
points due to severe restrictions on imports via the
official crossings and the higher cost of fuel available
from the West Bank and Israel.
While the only Israeli crossing for goods, Kerem
Shalom, has remained open and is handling increased
quantities of consumer goods, we are concerned that
already difficult economic and humanitarian conditions
in Gaza will further deteriorate if access into Gaza
through legal crossings of such basic commodities as
building materials is not liberalized. We are aware that
the Palestinian Authority has approached the Israeli

13-40298

S/PV.7007

Government on the matter, requesting that remaining
restrictions on the entry of building materials via
Kerem Shalom be lifted.
We encourage all parties not to forget the precarious
situation in Gaza and to take advantage of the improved
context between the parties to further lift the remaining
closures. We call on Israel to liberalize the entry of key
construction materials into Gaza so that the private
sector will be able to legally procure these materials to
satisfy Gaza’s infrastructural needs.
The opening of Gaza and the lifting of remaining
closures are part of the November 2012 understanding
on the ceasefire. The other part is adherence to full
calm. We therefore call on the de facto authorities in
Gaza to heed their commitments. Any violation of
the ceasefire by rocket fire at this politically delicate
juncture is not only unacceptable but also completely
irresponsible. We also call on Egypt to maintain the
Rafah crossing open for people, with due consideration
for Egypt’s security requirements.
Let me briefly mention a few other developments.
The United Nations Mine Action Service reported the
removal over the past six months of most unexploded
ordnance that had been dangerously stored in Gaza city,
thereby greatly improving the protection of civilians
there. Over 2,000 items of unexploded ordnance have
been safely destroyed since January.
We continue to be concerned about death sentences
in Gaza, outside of the Palestinian legal framework.
Further to the four such sentences and two executions
carried out during the last reporting period, a man was
sentenced to death in Gaza on 14 July. We call on de
facto authorities in Gaza to refrain from carrying out
further executions.
All here heard the reports of the grim situation in
Syria last week from Emergency Relief Coordinator
Amos, High Commissioner for Refugees Guterres
and Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights
Šimonović. The bloodshed in Syria continues unabated.
The Government continues to use its military might
against civilian areas, while increasingly attracting
foreign fighters and using paramilitary forces. Parties
to the conflict continue to fail in their obligation to
protect civilians. Humanitarian needs are outpacing our
efforts to increase the delivery of assistance throughout
Syria. The surge in sectarian threats and violence in
Syria and across the region is deeply worrisome. Syria

is increasingly turning into a regional, if not global,
battleground.
Unfortunately, the warring parties have not
responded to appeals for a cessation of violence during
Ramadan. All fighters in Syria should be reminded
that those responsible for violations of international
humanitarian law will be held accountable. Recent
reports of military victories by the Government should
not create false confidence that the conflict can be won
militarily. The legitimate demands of the people in
Syria cannot be met with arms, but only through vision
and leadership by all Syrians, the Government and the
opposition alike.
In that regard, we continue to do our best to ensure
that the Geneva conference takes place as soon as
possible. Joint Special Representative Brahimi has
pursued his consultations and convened in Geneva
two rounds of tripartite meetings with the Russian
Federation and the United States to prepare for the
Geneva conference on Syria. While progress has been
made and convergence found between the two initiating
States of the conference, a number of parameters are
still under discussion.
On 6 July, the Syrian National Coalition of Syrian
Revolutionary and Opposition Forces elected a new
leadership. The general assembly of the Coalition also
increased its membership from 63 to 114 to include,
inter alia, representatives of the Syrian Democratic
Platform led by veteran opposition figures. It is hoped
that the laudable enlargement of the Coalition proves
to be an expression of Syria’s political spectrum, rather
than a mere response to exogenous factors.
The Secretary-General remains gravely concerned
at the reports of the alleged use of chemical weapons in
Syria. The United Nations has received 13 such reports
so far. In addition, on 9 July, the Russian Federation
presented to the Secretary-General its analysis of one
incident of alleged use. That and other information is
currently being studied by the investigation mission.
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs Angela
Kane and Mr. Åke Sellström will visit Damascus this
week to complete consultations on the modalities of
cooperation required for the proper, safe and efficient
conduct of the United Nations investigation mission.
The Secretary-General hopes that the meetings in
Damascus will result in a mutual understanding on
access for the mission to conduct its fact-finding

13-402985

S/PV.7007

activities and establish the facts pertaining to the
reports received by the Secretary-General.
The situation in the Golan remains volatile, with
heavy clashes between the Syrian armed forces and
armed members of the opposition occurring inside the
area of separation. The United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force reported that during intense clashes in
the vicinity of Al-Qataniya on 16 July, several artillery
rounds landed in close proximity to United Nations
positions, as well as across the Alpha line. Such military
activities in the area of separation have the potential
to escalate the situation between Israel and Syria, and
jeopardize the ceasefire between the two countries.
In its presidential statement of 10 July
(S/PRST/2013/9), the Council unambiguously stated
the need to redouble efforts to safeguard Lebanon from
the spillover of the conflict in Syria. The SecretaryGeneral welcomes the Council’s unity and continued
attention, and its support for the efforts of President
Sleiman and the Lebanese Armed Forces to preserve
national unity and stability.
Following the fighting in Sidon last month between
supporters of the Salafist Sheikh Assir and the Lebanese
Armed Forces, the security forces arrested dozens of
suspects. Twenty-seven have been charged, including
Assir. Related violence broke out in Tripoli on 29 June,
and again on 2 July, causing three fatalities. There is a
real danger of further escalation in violence extending
from the conflict in Syria. On 9 July, a bomb in Beirut’s
Shiite southern suburbs injured 53 people and caused
extensive material damage. On 7 July three people were
injured, including two soldiers, when a bomb exploded
near Hermel, and on 16 July at least two members
of Hizbullah were injured in a roadside bomb on the
Masnaa highway.
At the political level, two sessions of Parliament
scheduled for 1 and 16 July to vote on an extension
of the term of the army commander and other issues
were postponed due to a lack of quorum. Prime
Minister-designate Salam continued efforts to form a
Government. The delay in forming a Government is a
matter of concern. We reiterate our call on all sides to
engage constructively in that regard.
In a visit to Lebanon on 3 July, Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas stressed the need for
Palestinians in Lebanon to disassociate from the
conflict in Syria and from any internal tensions in
Lebanon.

6

On 14 July, the Lebanese security forces seized
a vehicle with arms and materiel reportedly en route
to Syria. On 16 July, President Sleiman reiterated his
call for the implementation of the Baabda Declaration.
He stated his intention to call a session of the national
dialogue to discuss a defence strategy for Lebanon and
consider solutions to the current crises.
The situation in the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) area of operations and along the
Blue Line remained generally quiet. UNIFIL protested
the violation of the Blue Line on 12 July by IDF soldiers
to secure the surroundings of the Sheikh Abbad tomb
during a visit by pilgrims on the Israeli side. Israeli
violations of Lebanese airspace continued on an almost
daily basis.
Last week witnessed a promising opening in the
efforts under way to develop a meaningful political
initiative on the Israeli-Palestinian issue. We have
now reached a decisive point. In recent years, we have
shared the frustration at the political deadlock. This is
the moment to translate our collective call for action
into a shared sense of urgency in supporting leaders on
both sides, as they must realize that this is an opening
they cannot afford to lose.
Progress indeed necessitates serious political
commitments if leaders on both sides are to achieve
the vision of the two-State solution they have both
agreed on. We do not underestimate the difficulty of
developing a substantial initiative that should provide
a credible horizon for achieving a two-State solution
at long last. But we cannot emphasize enough that
this is the moment for concerted action and continued
support to the parties. The risks of forgoing the present
opportunity should be clear for both sides. As the
United Nations, we remain convinced that achieving
the two-State solution, ending the occupation that
started in 1967 and ending the conflict as envisaged by
the relevant resolutions of the Council are in the best
interests of both Israelis and Palestinians.
The President: I thank Mr. Serry for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, I wish
to congratulate the United States of America on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I also wish to recognize your skilled
leadership, Madam President, including the current

13-40298

S/PV.7007

efforts being exerted to advance peace and ensure
a more stable and secure Middle East. We also
express our appreciation to the United Kingdom for
its efficient leadership of the Council in June. And I
thank Mr. Robert Serry, Personal Representative of
the Secretary-General and Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing and tireless
efforts on the ground.
We meet at a critical juncture in the long
history of the international community’s attempts to
peacefully and justly resolve the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. Despite decades of initiatives, processes
and legislation — including firm resolutions of the
Security Council based on clear tenets of international
law, primarily the inadmissibility of the acquisition
of territory by force and the right of peoples to selfdetermination — the Palestinian people continue to be
denied freedom and peace remains elusive.
Yet, we are now at a turning point. Thanks to the
current international and regional efforts, foremost
by United States Secretary of State John Kerry, in
coordination with the Arab partners of the ministerial
committee for the Arab Peace Initiative and with the
support of concerned States from every continent of
the globe, there is an opportunity before us to make
peace a reality. The decisions made at this time will
determine whether the solution of two States — the
State of Palestine and the State of Israel, living side by
side in peace and security on the basis of the pre-1967
borders will be achieved — or whether that solution
will be brought to an end by Israel’s illegal policies.
The consequences in that regard would be far-reaching,
including the onset of alternative efforts — political,
legal and popular — to end this injustice and to realize
the inalienable human rights and legitimate national
aspirations of the Palestinian people.
The Palestinian leadership is cognizant of the
significance of this moment and is ready to seize
this opportunity. Under the leadership of President
Mahmoud Abbas, it has responsibly cooperated with
Secretary Kerry’s initiative and the global efforts
to relaunch the peace process for the achievement of
the two-State solution, based on the parameters of
the process enshrined in the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map.
The international community has acknowledged,
on numerous occasions, that the Palestinian side has

fulfilled its obligations and consistently acted in good
faith, despite facing enormous challenges under Israeli
occupation. Moreover, the Palestinian leadership has
never placed conditions on the peace process. It has
only called, rightfully, for the respect of international
law and the United Nations resolutions that constitute
the foundation of the process.
The State of Palestine believes firmly in the rule of
law. All States, including Israel, the occupying Power,
have an obligation to respect the rule of law; no pretext
can justify a breach of the law. Such respect is vital to
overcoming the obstacles that have constantly caused
the peace process to fail, exacerbating conditions on the
ground. It will ensure that talks to resolve all remaining
status issues — on Jerusalem, refugees, settlements,
borders, security, prisoners and water — ultimately
result in the conclusion of the just and lasting peace
that we have sought for decades. Moreover, we would
like to stress — as has been repeatedly affirmed by
the international community — that it is imperative to
set clear parameters and a time frame for a successful
peace process.
Indeed, the consensus international position in
support of the two-State solution based, inter alia, on
the parameters of the 1967 borders as the basis for the
two States, with Jerusalem as the shared capital, and
a just agreed solution to the question of Palestinian
refugees, on the basis of the relevant resolutions, is
what the Palestinian people and their leadership have
been committed to for decades in word and deed. In
fact, on 15 November the Palestinian people will mark
25 years since they formally accepted the two-State
solution with the adoption of the Palestinian declaration
of independence, in 1988. That significant compromise
to establish our State on only 22 per cent of our historic
homeland, for the sake of restoring our rights and
ending the conflict, is among the boldest reflections of
our commitment to the path of peace and compromise in
spite of the historic injustice inflicted upon our people.
That commitment has been at the core of our
pragmatism, from the signing of the Oslo accords,
20 years ago in September, to our engagement in all
incarnations of the peace processes since the Madrid
Conference, and to our legitimate actions on the
international arena to safeguard and advance the rights
of the Palestinian people throughout the decades.
Remarkably, that commitment has prevailed in spite
of the many setbacks caused by Israel’s unlawful
policies in the occupied Palestinian territory, including

13-402987

S/PV.7007

East Jerusalem, the territory constituting the State of
Palestine. Those illegal actions and the international
community’s failure to hold Israel accountable have
continually undermined the peace process and the twoState solution, causing great hardship for our people.
Yet, the Palestinian leadership has patiently adhered
to the noble goals of peace and coexistence while
reaffirming its commitment at all junctures, including
today before the Council.
However, in order to sustain a truly meaningful
process, realities on the ground must be redressed.
Although we commend the initiative currently under
way, we must act responsibly to ensure that such an
environment is compatible with and supports the
goals of the process. How can we all succeed while
Israel persists with the illegal policies of its 46-year
military occupation, reaffirming daily to our people
its unwillingness to make peace? We cannot. Tensions,
mistrust and instability will consequently continue
to rise, popular belief in the possibility of peace will
continue to decline and this final opportunity to realize
the two-State solution will be lost.
As we emphasized in letters to the Council, since
the most recent open debate Israel has regrettably
continued its policy of aggression, colonization,
collective punishment and oppression, deepening the
occupation and the suffering of the Palestinian people,
in flagrant violation of the law and disregarding calls for
it to comply with attempts to revive the peace process.
That has included the construction of settlements
and the wall, particularly in and around occupied
East Jerusalem and Bethlehem, as well as the Jordan
Valley; the announcement of plans to build thousands
of settlement units; the confiscation of hundreds of
dunums of land; the forced displacement and transfer of
civilians, particularly Bedouin families; the demolition
of homes; violent military raids by the occupying forces
in Palestinian towns, villages and refugee camps;
the excessive use of force against civilian protesters;
daily arrests and the detention of civilians, including
a five year-old child; the continued imprisonment of
nearly 5,000 Palestinians, who are enduring horrific
conditions and abuse, with several prisoners on hunger
strike who are gravely ill; the obstruction of the
freedom of movement for most; the illegal blockade
of the Gaza Strip, which has entered its seventh year,
causing huge humanitarian suffering; and aggravating
religious sensitivities, with holy sites being threatened,
especially at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, the detention of

8

the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem, and the assaults and
harassment of worshippers, including during Christian
Easter observances and the holy month of Ramadan.
Meanwhile, extremist Israeli settlers continue their
criminal rampage throughout our country, terrorizing
civilians, attacking homes, destroying farmland
and thousands of trees, vandalizing churches and
mosques with vulgar displays of hatred and racism, and
threatening the sanctity of Al-Haram Al-Sharif. The
settlers act with sufficient support and encouragement
from Government officials, who continue to encourage
settler colonization and the unlawful annexation of
Palestinian land. Recent statements by Israel’s Deputy
Foreign, Housing and Economy Ministers and members
of the Knesset expose the extremist positions of parts of
the Government of Israel, revealing their rejection of the
two-State solution and of the rights of the Palestinian
people. That is cause for real concern, as we seek to
overcome this dangerous political impasse.
In that regard, we must reiterate that the two-State
solution and Israel’s settlement campaign are completely
irreconcilable. Settlement activities are illegal and
constitute the major obstacle to peace. Speaking
of peace while engaging in its destruction makes a
mockery of the international community’s support for
the two-State solution and sabotages all efforts towards
a peaceful solution. So does claiming a readiness to
negotiate without conditions, while imposing conditions
on the ground such as illegal measures that entrench
the occupation, diminish the viability of two States and
obstruct a peace agreement. Regrettably, that has been
Israel’s policy to date, with settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, having
increased by 355 per cent in the first quarter of 2013
alone.
We furthermore reiterate that the seizure of
other people’s land, their forced displacement and
colonization are war crimes under the Fourth Geneva
Convention, its Additional Protocol 1 and the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court. We also
recall that the consensus on the illegality of Israel’s
settlement activities goes back decades, from the first
Security Council resolution on settlements — resolution
252 (1968) — to the first General Assembly resolutions
on the subject, namely, resolutions 2252 (ES-V) and
2254 (ES-V), of 4 and 14 July 1967, respectively.
The international community must not waver and
must continue to demand an end to these illegal actions.

13-40298

S/PV.7007

There can be no excuse for continued settlement
activities, regardless of how they are manifested. This
message must be made clear to Israel, as was recently
reaffirmed by the important guidelines adopted by the
European Union, which are in line with international
law and the global position regarding Israeli settlement
activities in the lands occupied since June 1967,
including East Jerusalem. The Europeans are to be
highly commended for this step, because it can tangibly
contribute to promoting compliance with the law and
thus to advancing a peaceful solution.
The facts are sobering, yet we are hopeful. As
stated earlier, we recognize that we are at a crossroads.
We are ready to seriously engage in direct negotiations
in good faith. If the opportunity for peace before us
is lost, it will not be for lack of commitment by the
Palestinian side or for lack of effort by the international
community, including the Arab States, whose Peace
Initiative stands.
For a genuine process and real progress, it is
imperative that Israel affirm its proclaimed commitment
to peace and the two-State solution not just in words,
but in deeds. Settlements must be stopped, prisoners
must be released, all collective punishment and military
operations must be halted, and Israel must come to
the negotiating table in good faith. Israel must choose
peace, security and coexistence over the continued
occupation and domination of another people.
If Israel persists with its violations, the international
community must hold it accountable, acting responsibly
to uphold the law, avert further destabilization and
preserve the chance for peace. The Council must
fulfil its duties. Remaining on the sidelines while
peace, security and the two-State solution enshrined
in its own resolutions are endangered is unacceptable.
The Palestinian people thus continue to appeal to the
international community to take the steps necessary
to support the peace process towards fulfilment of the
decades-long promise to assist them to finally realize
their rights, justice and freedom in their independent
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living side by side with Israel in peace and security on
the basis of the 4 June 1967 borders — the foundation
of peace in the Middle East.
Before concluding, I must again convey to the
Council our grave concerns about the situation of
Palestinian refugees in Syria. As the conflict rages,
Palestinian refugees, like other civilians in the country,

continue to suffer loss of life and injury, destruction
of their homes and property and massive displacement.
Those developments reconfirm the need for a just
solution for the plight of the Palestinian refugees in the
context of a final peace agreement and of regional peace.
While recognizing the extraordinary efforts of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and other humanitarian
organizations to assist the Palestine refugees in
this time of crisis, including those who have fled to
Lebanon and Jordan, we appeal for the redoubling of
international efforts to ensure the protection of all
civilians in accordance with international law and to
find a political solution to this tragic conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): Let me begin by congratulating
the delegation of the United States, led by Ambassador
DiCarlo, for their leadership of the Security Council
this month. I also want to thank the United States
and especially Secretary of State John Kerry for their
leadership and dedication to the peace process and for
their efforts to resume the peace talks.
Israel is committed to peace and welcomes the
opportunity to resume direct negotiations. Israel
faces many strategic challenges, but it is nonetheless
willing to take risks to bring about an end to the
conflict. Abraham Lincoln said, “You cannot escape
the responsibility of tomorrow by evading it today”. In
2013, one simply cannot say that one did not see, one
did not hear, or one did not know.
As we speak, the Middle East is in flames. Millions
of people have taken to the streets demanding better
lives, better economies and greater opportunities. The
façade of the so-called Arab Spring has fallen away.
In its place, there remains the bloodshed, repression,
chaos and instability that have long defined the region.
The Council must not be divided in denouncing those
nations, groups and individuals that distance us from
peace by amassing dangerous weapons, using terror to
further their ideology, or murdering innocent people.
The world is watching and waiting to see what the
Council will do. The decisions — or, as is sometimes
the case, indecisions — made in this Chamber will
shape the world that we pass on to our children and
grandchildren. The Council’s responsibility is here and
now.

13-402989

S/PV.7007

I want to take this opportunity to thank the Council
for extending the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for another six months.
The United Nations troops deployed in the region have
faced daunting challenges. I also want to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ladsous and the States that
have stepped forward to maintain the United Nations’
strategic presence.
The stories that have emerged from Syria have
shocked the world. At this very moment, men, women
and children are being tortured and murdered by the
brutal Al-Assad regime. Under that regime, iron-fisted
repression has been the rule of thumb for the Syrian
people. It is time to hold Bashar Al-Al-Assad accountable
for his crimes. One hundred thousand people have been
slaughtered, and there is no end in sight.
The violence that has shaken Syria is sending
shock waves through our region. For two years, Israelis
have lived with a war that threatens to spill over into
their backyards. Mortar shells are raining down on our
communities, and Syrian tanks and armoured vehicles
have violated the buffer zone, in defiance of the 1974
Separation of Forces Agreement.
Israel has shown maximum restraint and has no
intention of interfering in the Syrian conflict, but we
will not allow our citizens to be the ongoing victims
of attacks. If provocations by the Syrian Government
continue, Israel will have no choice but to respond
accordingly.
The situation on Israel’s northern border is
precarious. I have said it before, and I will say it again:
Al-Assad has chemical weapons, and he has proven
that he is willing to do anything to cling to power. The
situation is made all the more dangerous by the fact that
Al-Assad has received advanced weapons systems that
Israel simply cannot allow. We cannot allow weapons
of that nature to fall into the hands of terrorist groups
like Hizbullah.
Al-Assad’s accomplice, Hizbullah leader Hassan
Nasrallah, has also literally been getting away with
murder in the Middle East. For years we have heard
members of the international community, including
members of this Council, argue that Hizbullah is a
stabilizing force in Lebanon. They have insisted that
Hizbullah is a political party representing the best
interests of the Lebanese people. And they accepted
the fact that Hizbullah has its own private army and is
using it to hold Lebanon hostage.

10

I suppose those same countries believe that
Nasrallah was simply thinking of the best interests of
the Lebanese people when he sent this army to kill his
Arab brothers and sisters in Syria. And I suppose that
the so-called stability that some States speak about
can be seen from the car bombs and rockets that are
exploding in the centre of Beirut. Nasrallah has been
clear about his intentions. Last month he said, “We will
bear any sacrifices and all the consequences” to keep
Al-Assad in power. These are the deliberate words of a
terrorist willing to drag Lebanon into the Sunni-Shiite
divide and the broader region into war.
Despite all that, some States continue to argue
that there is a difference between Hizbullah’s political
and military wings. This is like trying to distinguish
between your right hand and your left hand. Surprise,
surprise — no matter how you look at it, they are both
attached to the same body.
Yesterday, the European Union (EU) agreed to label
the military wing of Hizbullah a terrorist organization.
The EU’s decision is a welcome and important first step
in shutting down the European channels that Hizbullah
uses to launder money and fund its campaign of terror.
For decades, Hizbullah has murdered countless innocent
people from Africa to South America and from Asia to
Europe. At long last, having realized how dangerous
Hizbullah is and what it is capable of, the EU showed
up late to the party to condemn the “Party of God”.
It was only after Hizbullah was found guilty of
murdering Europeans in Bulgaria and attempting to
do the same in Cyprus that the EU agreed to consider
branding the military wing a terror organization. That
semi-designation allows the EU to semi join the ranks
of countries like the United States, Canada, Australia
and the Netherlands, which long ago branded all of
Hizbullah a terrorist group.
Hizbullah is a terrorist industry working around
the clock to expand into new markets. It has a business
development arm devoted to money-laundering and
fundraising. There is a human resources division that
recruits new members. There is a marketing arm that
uses the Internet to spread fundamental beliefs. And of
course, there is an operations division that carries out
its bloody campaigns.
The organization is as sophisticated as it is
interconnected. Any attempt to distinguish between
Hizbullah’s military wing and political wing, while
politically convenient, is entirely impractical. The

13-40298

S/PV.7007

political wing raises the money to fund the military
wing’s terror activities. Not even the great Houdini
could pull off the illusion that there is a difference
between those two groups.
Europe took a significant step in the right direction,
but it must go one step further and demonstrate its
unequivocal condemnation of terror. In doing so, it
will prevent more innocent people from dying, it will
bring justice to the victims of terror, and it will put a
murderous group completely out of business.
There are brave decisions that need to be made
but, as the saying goes, timing is everything. While the
United States has been working to bring the parties back
to the negotiation table, the EU prefers to table harmful
and divisive measures. Instead of setting a course
towards peace, the EU is steering the Palestinians in
the wrong direction. Direct negotiations and only direct
negotiations are the only way forward.
For years, the naysayers have said that the sanctions
imposed on Iran would have no effect. They said that
the sanctions were counterproductive and that they
would do nothing but foster anti-Western sentiment.
Surprise, surprise — after years of crippling sanctions,
when the people of Iran went to the polls last month
they wanted change. From the marketplaces of Tehran
to the mosques of Qom, millions of people demanded
the chance to have a better life.
Many in the international community had hoped
that the elections would bring about a new leader who
would draw Iran back from the brink of self-ruin. Yet,
for all the wishful thinking, the facts on the ground
tell a different story. Ayatollah Khamenei pre-screened
every presidential candidate and removed anyone that
he considered too anti-establishment, too free-thinking,
or too female. Mr. Rowhani may have been given a
starring role in the charade of Iranian democracy, but
Khamenei has remained its choreographer, director and
executive producer.
The international community must judge Rowhani
not by his words, but by his actions. And the reality on
the ground is that Rowhani plans to put thousands of
boots on the ground in Syria. And, I suppose, if one
considers that those troops may kill only a moderate
amount of people, then Rowhani could be considered
a moderate leader. If Rowhani has not changed Iran’s
policy towards Syria, why would we delude ourselves
into thinking that he would change his policy on
Iran’s nuclear weapons programme? Even with a

new conductor, Iran’s nuclear weapons programme
continues to advance at the speed of an express train.
In contrast, the international community’s efforts are
moving at the pace of a local train, pausing at every
stop for some nations to get off and some nations to
get on.
Iran’s nuclear programme remains the single
greatest threat not just to the Middle East, but to
the entire world. The Council and every member of
the international community must take action. The
sanctions are working, but they are not enough. The
Council must increase pressure on Iran until it stops
all enrichment, removes all enriched material, closes
its illegal nuclear facility in Qom, and ends its support
for terrorism.
The Middle East debates, are opened each month,
as today’s was, with a detailed report of all of Israel’s
alleged infractions. Without fail, there are two distinct
features to these accounts — they are very long and
they are mostly wrong. Month after month, the reports
provide every nuance and every detail about every
balcony in Judea and Samaria. It is no coincidence
that they fail to address the thousands of attacks by
Palestinians on Israeli men, women and children.
Apparently, Israeli security concerns are of little
concern to some in this Chamber.
The report that we have heard this morning is
one-sided and short-sighted. Listening to some of
these reports, one would get the impression that the
Palestinians arrested by the Israel Defense Forces are
saints. Let me be clear. They are not Mamma Theresa.
The Israel security forces are critical to ensuring
security and stability in the region.
With respect to the rule of law that my colleague just
mentioned, the only thing that the Palestinians should
be commended on are their innovations in architecture.
They seem to have a patent on the world’s first prison
with a revolving door. By divine intervention, everyone
they have arrested has escaped miraculously the next
day.
Why has the Council not heard that Palestinian
terror attacks doubled between 2011 and 2012? Why
has it not heard about the 34 attempted abductions
that were prevented by Israeli security forces in just
the first six months of the year 2013? We can imagine
the consequences if even one of the kidnappings had
been successful. Let me provide another number that
the Council has yet to hear in the Chamber: 2,736. Last

13-4029811

S/PV.7007

year, there were 2,736 attacks on Israelis, including
shootings, rockets, improvised explosive devices and
Molotov cocktails.
It does not take the investigative skills of Sherlock
Holmes to realize that those numbers are freely available
and easily accessible to anyone willing to look for them.
One would think that an open debate on the Middle East
would include sources that are open to the public. After
all, it is elementary; facts are stubborn things. But the
only thing more stubborn than the facts is the insistence
on presenting unbalanced reports every month. Instead
of receiving reports that cloud the situation, it is time
for the Council to hear reports that clarify the situation.
True friends of the Palestinians should remind them
that a Palestinian State will be built only through direct
negotiations and hard work.
Israel is committed to the peace process and looks
forward to resuming direct negotiations with the
Palestinian Authority. Our vision is of two States for
two peoples — one Arab and one Jewish — living side
by side in peace and security. Israel has made peace
with Egypt and we have made peace with Jordan.
Those treaties are evidence that, with honest effort
and committed leadership, peace is possible. But peace
requires leaders who will reject terror and embrace
partnership; leaders who oppose incitement and
promote tolerance; leaders who will raise their people
up, rather than tear Israel down.

The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.
Mr. M’Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Robert Serry, for his
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestine question. I also would like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine for their
statements.
We are holding this open debate at a time when
the region is seeing intensive diplomatic activities
conducted by the United States Administration. These
are intended once again to bring the Israelis and the
Palestinians to the negotiating table. My country
commends the efforts of United States Secretary of
State John Kerry and welcomes the agreement in
principle reached by both parties, following his six
visits to the region, for the swift resumption of direct
talks after three years of interruption. We welcome the
announcement of a preliminary meeting in Washington,
D.C., this week, during which the Palestinian negotiator,
Mr. Saëb Erakat, and his Israeli counterpart, Ms. Tzipi
Livni, will begin exchanges on preparations for the
forthcoming talks.

As we speak, an earthquake is shaking the Middle
East to its core. It is rattling the political structures
and institutions that have held the region stagnant for
decades. The aftershocks of that earthquake are being
felt throughout the world. The tremors of truth have
penetrated this Chamber. Winston Churchill said,
“Men occasionally stumble over the truth, but most of
them pick themselves up and hurry off as if nothing had
happened.”

Today’s debate therefore offers us a welcome
opportunity to call on the parties to engage in good
faith in these new negotiations, which my delegation
has consistently held are the only means to reach a
lasting settlement to the conflict, which requires the
establishment of a viable Palestinian State living side
by side with Israel in peace and security within secure
and internationally recognized borders. The two-State
solution should not be an empty promise. It must be
achieved because it embodies peace for the Middle
East.

We have seen the photographs, we have seen the
stories, and we have heard the millions of people who
are crying out for freedom, for opportunity and for the
chance to build a better life. It is the responsibility of
every member of the Council, of every nation and of
every leader to advance the cause of peace. There will
always be a reason to wait or to delay, but the time to
act is now. It is time to condemn terror, to denounce
tyranny, and to stand up for the millions of people
whose lives hang in the balance.

While we talk of the future, which we hope will
be bright and prosperous, we must also address the
present, which is hardly reassuring. Indeed, violence
continues to rage and rocket fire on the south of Israel
on 24 June and 11 July remind us that Islamist armed
groups, operating with full impunity in the Gaza
Strip, are far from interested in peace or negotiations.
However, choosing violence has not helped to settle
the conflict; on the contrary, it has made peace more
remote. That is why we ask the leaders of Hamas to take

12

13-40298

S/PV.7007

urgent steps to control extremist groups that refuse to
renounce violence.
On the other side, the Israeli Government must
end new settlement building in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem. It should also abandon its project to build
new housing in the northern West Bank. We also urge it
to do more by lifting the blockade on the Gaza Strip, for
merely softening measures is not enough to ultimately
remedy the situation of poverty and precariousness
experienced by Gazans.
My country is also concerned by the issue of
Palestinian prisoners, who undoubtedly are another
reason for the violence. While welcoming the
announcement made by the Israeli authorities of the
imminent increased release of some long-held prisoners,
we urge them to do far more in that regard, given the
large number of prisoners still in detention.
The question of Palestinian refugees remains an
issue of major concern to my country. That question
can be settled only as part of an overall solution to
the conflict, which we very much wish to see. In that
regard, we renew our congratulations to the United
Nations for all of its efforts, through the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, to help those living on the margins.
The long history of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
has taught us that the path to peace is strewn with
obstacles. We have also seen that every time positive
steps are taken, acts of violence are carried out by
extremists on both sides to undermine the efforts
that have been made. Both camps have those who
want peace and those fighting to maintain the status
quo. That is why Israeli and Palestinian leaders must
remain vigilant and show the world that they are firmly
resolved to find a lasting solution to the world’s oldest
conflict. The international community should support
them on the path to peace. The Quartet should also be
involved in ensuring that the forthcoming negotiations
can yield genuine results.
In the Syrian Arab Republic, the conflict has
caused more than 95,000 deaths and almost destroyed
the country’s foundations. The killings and massacres,
arrests and arbitrary detentions continue, and our
concerns are amplified by the flight of the country’s
population. A generation of youth has been sacrificed,
and the conflict has assumed sectarian dimensions,
characterized by a confessional divide that makes us
fear the worst for religious minorities. The killing on

23 June of a Catholic priest, François Murad, attributed
to jihadist groups, gives us a glimpse of Syria’s future
if the parties persevere in believing in victory through
arms.
The Council has failed to stop the carnage, but it
can at least pressure the parties to negotiate for peace.
To that end, it must work towards unity so as to speak
with one voice. Clearly, dialogue is the only way out of
the conflict, which is having negative and dangerous
repercussions for neighbouring countries, particularly
Lebanon, which is paying the heaviest price. Once
again, we would like to support the Russian-United
States initiative to hold the “Geneva II” conference,
which should lead to the establishment of a transitional
policy based on the Geneva communiqué dated 30 June
2012 (S/2012/523, annex). We call for its implementation
as soon as possible.
A political settlement undoubtedly remains the best
path to end the conflict and to create a new, peaceful
Syria, reconciled with itself.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): Allow me at the outset
to thank you, Madam, for convening this open debate on
the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. I also thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry, for his
briefing and the representatives of Palestine and Israel
for their statements.
On the Middle East peace process, Azerbaijan
commends and supports ongoing diplomatic efforts,
particularly those undertaken by the United States,
to revive the negotiations and to contribute to greater
stability in the region. We are encouraged by the recent
announcement of the establishment of a basis for the
resumption of talks and by the decision of the parties
to return to the negotiating table. We also note the
continued interest of the regional stakeholders and
underline the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative,
which provides the necessary regional support for
the achievement of a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution. The Secretary-General has also stated that
the United Nations will support any endeavour towards
meaningful negotiations and to the achievement of a
comprehensive peace in the region.
Needless to say, the situation of insecurity in the
region has never required progress in the peace process
as much as it does today. It is imperative that the parties
demonstrate responsibility to sustaining international
efforts towards achieving the two-State solution and

13-4029813

S/PV.7007

that they avoid actions that would risk undermining that
objective. The parties must uphold their commitments
to the 21 November 2012 ceasefire agreement and
refrain from any action that would undermine it.
Settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory remain one of the biggest obstacles and threats
to the peace process. As a matter of principle and law,
Azerbaijan has consistently condemned and rejected
settlement practices. Regardless of whether settlements
are new or old, they are illegal under international law
and must be ceased immediately and completely.
The economic, financial and humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory requires
continued international attention and assistance,
particularly in order to ensure the unimpeded provision
of humanitarian aid throughout the region.
On 11 June, Azerbaijan hosted a conference of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC) on the establishment of an
Islamic financial safety net in support of Palestine, and
the donors conference in support of the city of Al-Quds.
The States members of the OIC and international
organizations attending the conference pledged to
contribute to improving the Palestinian economy, health
care and education and to the infrastructure projects of
the city of Al-Quds.
Palestinian unity and reconciliation is another
important issue to which we regularly refer. We support
the ongoing efforts to that end under the leadership of
President Abbas and express our hope that the May
2013 agreement between Fatah and Hamas to form a
unity Government will be implemented within the
agreed time frame.
Azerbaijan is deeply concerned about the continued
destabilization, violence and widespread human rights
violations in Syria. The conflict in Syria has inflicted
extensive damage on the country and its people, as well
as on the entire region. The regional implications of the
crisis are evident not only in its humanitarian impact on
the neighbouring countries but also in the participation
of foreign elements in the conflict and in the increased
military presence of third States in the immediate
vicinity of military action.
Those factors and, above all, the deepening
humanitarian disaster in Syria and beyond require,
first and foremost, urgent action on the part of the
international community with a view to bringing about

14

a negotiated solution to the conflict. We fully support
the Secretary-General’s recent appeal to the parties
in Syria and their supporters to focus on the search
for a political solution, which remains the only way
out of the crisis. We very much hope that the second
Geneva conference on Syria will take place soon with
the best chances of success. There can be no doubt that
the failure of ongoing diplomatic efforts will further
exacerbate the situation and will have catastrophic
consequences, both inside and outside Syria.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like, first of all, to commend you, Madam
President, for having organizing this debate. I also thank
Special Coordinator Serry for his detailed presentation.
I express my respect to the Permanent Representative
of Israel and my gratitude to the Permanent Observer
of the Observer State of Palestine for their important
contributions.
This open debate is taking place at a moment
of great uncertainty and upheaval, not only in the
Middle East but for the entire world. A series of events
has led to the interruption of the incipient and longawaited democratic process in Egypt, and I would like
to express my solidarity with the Egyptian people,
especially with women and young people, who dream
of a society built on freedom, solidarity and peace.
Meanwhile, the violence in Syria is rapidly spreading
to the whole region and political and religious leaders
are increasingly employing sectarian rhetoric, with the
potential and power to exacerbate existing tensions and
generate further violence and atrocities on a large scale.
We have heard that in this climate of uncertainty
and upheaval in the Middle East it is very difficult to
open doors. Argentina believes otherwise. This very
climate of increased tension and instability does not so
much offer an favourable environment as it ethically
and politically demands a viable solution. We believe
today more than ever that it is both necessary and
possible to restart the conversations while preserving
existing gains towards the institutional construction
of Palestine, ensuring the Palestinian people’s right to
self-determination and contributing to the long-term
security of Israel. The solution to this conflict is, and
will be, an important factor in the peace and stability of
the region and the world.
We therefore commend the efforts of Secretary of
State Kerry and welcome the announcement that the
bases have been established for reopening dialogue

13-40298

S/PV.7007

between the parties. That announcement reflects
not only the intense work of the past four months
but political commitment and deep knowledge of the
parties and their leaders, who should now respond
constructively and in good faith, proving that they
are capable of guiding their Governments and people
towards a peace agreement.

Now, on the situation in Syria, I would like to
mention what a Latin American writer said a few days
ago, namely, that it is not a prisoner of necessity, but
a prisoner of fear. Some do not sleep because of their
anxiety that they do not have the things they do not
have, while others do not sleep because they dread
losing what they already have.

We also believe that this is not a matter of
individual proposals and efforts, although we certainly
value them as represented by Secretary of State Kerry.
The comprehensive efforts of a single, well-intentioned
individual are not enough to advance a peace process.
There has to be a collective project, a project shared
by the international community as a whole, that will
remove the obstacles that stand in the way of the
steps needed to reopen dialogue between the parties.
The central elements of such an agreement already
enjoy wide acceptance on the part of the international
community, which makes it hard to understand why we
continue to set traps for ourselves: two States, based on
the borders of 4 June 1967, with an agreed exchange of
land, Jerusalem as the future capital of both States, the
necessary security arrangements and a just solution to
the refugee question.

I would like to conclude by saying that there are
only five issues that Argentina continues to support on
the crisis in Syria.

We need to resolve the situation and not simply insist
that Israel should unconditionally and immediately
bring to a complete halt all settlement activities because
they constitute human rights violations and war crimes.
The High Commissioner for Human Rights said as
much earlier this year. In this case, time is not gold.
Time is lives, time is freedom, time is democracy, time
is peace. In reality, the truth — all truths — and law are
never counterproductive. Humankind has learned that
truth and respect for the law are the pathway to peace.
With regard to Syria, exactly one week ago (see
S/PV.7000) the Council heard yet again tragic accounts
of those in charge of the huge efforts to address the
terrible consequences of the tragedy unfolding in
that country, and a heart-rending description of the
contempt of the different parties to the conflict for the
most elementary tenets of international law, of human
rights and of international humanitarian law.
The Human Rights Council has recently called for
the status of the settlements to be clarified under the
rule of law and international law, not only according
to the International Court of Justice but also under the
Fourth Geneva Convention and the Rome Statute on the
International Criminal Court.

First, the deliberate obstacles to access for
humanitarian assistance that are still in place are
violations of international law. They are unacceptable
on both sides.
Secondly, war crimes, crimes against humanity
and serious violations of human rights cannot go
unpunished. We therefore reiterate that the Security
Council must consider referring the situation to the
International Criminal Court.
Thirdly, we insist that supplying weapons to the
parties must stop. There is no doubt that weapons in
Syria are being used to commit human rights violations
and violations of international humanitarian law. That
shows that some speak of trust and commitment in
connection with the second Geneva conference on Syria
while, on the other hand, showing that they only believe
in a militarized solution to the conflict. Brahimi said a
few days ago:
(spoke in English):
“Arms do not make peace.”
(spoke in Spanish):
That is not a revealed truth; it is a proven conviction.
Fourthly, the countries hosting Syrian refugees
cannot by themselves face the burden imposed on them
by the ongoing influx of individuals fleeing the conflict.
The entire international community, United Nations
agencies, must work for inclusion, for conditions for a
dignified life for refugees.
Fifthly, the Security Council has failed. It has failed
in its obligation to comply with the mandate entrusted
to us in the Charter. For that reason, it is urgent for us
to redouble our efforts to consolidate the understanding
between Russia and the United States to convene the
Geneva conference on Syria in order to find a way to

13-4029815

S/PV.7007

implement a political solution. We are what we do, but
we are also what we do not do.

an environment conducive to peace talks. Support for
the Palestinian economy will also remain fundamental.

Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I
Coordinator Serry for his briefing.

Syria continues to descend into ever more brutal and
widening conflict. Seven million Syrians — one-third
of the population — need help. There are approximately
five million internally displaced persons in the country.
Over a third of housing has been destroyed, a third
of the schools damaged. Thousands of civilians are
trapped under siege in Homs and Aleppo and elsewhere.
Almost 60 per cent of the hospitals are out of operation
or severely damaged, and medical supplies are being
systematically targeted to prevent their delivery. There
are approximately two million refugees, as United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees António
Guterres told us last week, having accumulated at a
rate not seen since the genocide in Rwanda in 1994.
Hundreds of thousands of other Syrians have informally
sought shelter in neighbouring countries. Human
rights abuses, including war crimes and crimes against
humanity, are rampant and have gone unpunished.

thank

Special

Obviously, the Middle East continues to experience
very dangerous conflict and instability. The intensifying
conflict in Syria and its destabilizing impact on countries
like Lebanon and Jordan are a direct threat to wider
peace and security. The political developments in Egypt
are also of serious concern, creating both uncertainty
for Egypt itself and wider implications for the region.
It is vital for Egypt’s stability and development that the
transition back to a democratically elected Government
is inclusive and transparent.
One very welcome and positive development is the
agreement the Palestinians and the Israelis have reached
on a basis for resuming direct final status negotiations.
We warmly congratulate the United States for its
leadership, in particular the perseverance and tireless
efforts of Secretary of State Kerry. We also commend
Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas. It is
important that all Israelis and Palestinians support this
effort. We congratulate the Arab League and encourage
its continuing role in support of the peace process.
We recognize that the resumption of negotiations
is a first step on what will be a difficult path towards
a two-State solution. Both Prime Minister Netanyahu
and President Abbas must now seize this historic
opportunity and commit to negotiating in good faith,
aiming to achieve a lasting peace, with a secure Israel
living alongside an independent and viable Palestinian
State. As we all know, there is no Plan B.
As a friend of the Palestinians, we encourage them
to engage fully in the negotiation process. The path to
Palestinian statehood lies in negotiations, not through
United Nations resolutions nor in pursuing membership
in international organizations. For negotiations to have
any chance of success, conditions on the ground must
remain stable and rocket attacks on Israel must cease.
Equally, Israel must stop creating and expanding new
settlements in the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
Settlement activity is illegal and undermines confidence
in the peace process.
As a friend of Israel, we can say that the only
way to ensure the durability of a democratic State is
through the creation of a viable Palestinian State. All
of us in the international community must help sustain

16

Syria’s neighbours — above all, Lebanon and
Jordan — are at the breaking point. The humanitarian
system itself is being stretched beyond its capacity.
We urge all countries that can do so to support the
humanitarian appeals for Syria and the region, which,
when combined with direct appeals from Lebanon and
Jordan, require $5.2 billion, making them the largest
appeals in history.
Both Lebanon and Jordan require strong support
politically from the international community. Lebanon
faces internal violence. Hizbullah’s overt involvement
in Syria threatens Lebanon’s policy of dissociation
and the stability of the State. We reiterate our support
for President Sleiman and the efforts of the Lebanese
Armed Forces to maintain stability.
We encourage the early formation of a Lebanese
Government to confront the challenges. We strongly
endorse the Council’s recent presidential statement
in support of Lebanon and its institutions of State
(S/PRST/2013/9).
Australia’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, Bob
Carr, visited Syrian refugees in the Beka’a Valley in
May and was struck by the scale of the suffering and
by the generosity of Lebanon in hosting so many
fleeing from Syria. He had earlier visited refugees in
Jordan. He announced a further $12 million increase
in Australia’s humanitarian response, bringing our

13-40298

S/PV.7007

current contribution to $80 million, with substantially
more to come shortly.
Lebanon and Jordan need strong support from the
international community, going beyond the immediate
humanitarian assistance to include broader recovery
assistance. The pressures from refugees and displaced
people on the essential services of the two countries
are becoming untenable, and the pressures can only
increase.
We are gravely concerned at the growing body of
evidence that the Al-Assad regime has used chemical
weapons. This week’s visit to Damascus by the United
Nations for talks on investigations is welcome, but talks
alone do not address the serious allegations. Syria must
grant full access for United Nations investigations into
all allegations.
Clearly, the need for a political solution in Syria
has never been greater, and Australia supports the
central role of the United Nations in convening a second
Geneva conference on political transition. We must not
lose momentum in ending what has become the single
biggest catastrophe of the new century.
We again repeat our call for the Council to live
up to its responsibilities under the Charter — our
responsibilities — and international expectations, and
work harder to end the conflict, in order to pre-empt
a broader regional threat to peace and security and to
alleviate the terrible humanitarian disaster we face.
Most immediately, the humanitarian crisis demands
that the Council consider what additional steps can be
taken to meet the crisis. Australia remains prepared to
work with others on this as a priority.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I thank
Special Coordinator Serry for his detailed briefing. I
also appreciate the statements made by the Permanent
Observer of Palestine and the Permanent Representative
of Israel.
The absence of direct negotiations between
Israel and Palestine has been one of the most
significant conditions defining Middle East politics
for the past three years. We therefore wholeheartedly
welcome last week’s announcement of the agreement
establishing the basis for resuming talks. We highly
commend the ongoing mediation efforts of the United
States Government, as personified by the relentless
engagement of Secretary of State John Kerry.

The international community has witnessed too
many past failures, however, to be overly exulted by
this news. In fact, there is no formula that has not
been proposed to resolve the long-standing IsraeliPalestinian situation. The goal is not to simply
resume the negotiation process, but to finish what has
been begun. Both parties must therefore bring to the
negotiating table their strongest commitments, along
with the awareness that failed negotiations can worsen
their common future.
Although the specific criteria of the upcoming
talks are still unknown, it is a good sign that both
Israel and Palestine are assuming serious and positive
attitudes. We hope that the engagement of the Quartet
and of regional organizations will be made in a
manner that reinforces the efforts of the United States
Government. That is undoubtedly a very difficult task,
but as a revered Israeli politician once said, when doing
business with extreme difficulty, if we do not believe in
miracles, we are not realistic.
We have called on Israel to cease its settlement
activities and its demolition of dwellings in Area C.
We are also concerned over the occurrence of violent
incidents between settlers and Palestinian residents in
the West Bank. We sincerely hope that the resumed
negotiations will eventually resolve those chronic
issues. During the past week, clashes in the West Bank
have noticeably diminished, and the restrictions on
access into East Jerusalem have eased. Whatever the
cause, we hope that this trend will lead to the successful
launching of direct negotiations well beyond Ramadan.
At the same time, we must be mindful of the
potential explosiveness of the underlying tensions. We
strongly condemn the rocket attacks from the Gaza
Strip. The leadership, along with the people of Israel
and Palestine, must prove that those who bet on the
failure of a lasting peace can never win.
Furthermore, we strongly condemn all firing
across and within the area of separation adjacent to the
Golan Heights. The Syrian crisis itself has already had
wide-ranging negative effects on the region, but attacks
that could spark full-scale clashes would give rise to
a new level of violence. There is a potential risk that
uncontrolled shelling may evolve into serious clashes
if left unchecked. The Syrian regime must understand
that it will be the first to suffer from an expanded
regional war.

13-4029817

S/PV.7007

Last week’s joint briefing (see S/PV.7000) by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights was yet another
grim reminder that the Syrian crisis remains headed
towards even more catastrophic results. Humanitarian
assistance cannot save Syria in the absence of a political
solution. Nevertheless, we must continue our efforts to
ensure humanitarian assistance to the Syrian people in
such desperate need of help, especially those trapped
amid the fighting or under siege.
The continuing systematic violence against women
and children must come to an end. The world must prove
that those who violate human rights and international
humanitarian law will be brought to justice, no matter
what it may take or how long. In that regard, my
delegation once again calls for the referral of the Syrian
situation to the International Criminal Court. We also
look forward to the report of the Commission of Inquiry
to the General Assembly.
Once again, we express our gratitude to the
neighbouring countries who share borders with Syria
and are hosting Syrian refugees. We understand the
difficulties faced by those States that have closed or
are tightly controlling their borders due to security
reasons, but we call on them to re-open the borders on
a humanitarian basis. The international community
should answer the appeals of the neighbouring
countries, implement its pledges and, together with the
relevant international organizations, establish longterm assistance plans in a coordinated manner.
It is also deeply troubling that another negative
impact of the Syrian crisis is an increase in hate speech,
which is arousing sectarian tension and violence
throughout the region. All regional leaders must exert
greater efforts and positive influence to prevent such
phenomena from growing.
With regard to the alleged use of chemical weapons
in Syria, we welcome the visit of Mr. Åke Sellström and
Ms. Angela Kane to Damascus. The Syrian Government
should accept the modalities by which transparent
investigations can be carried out according to the
guidelines and procedures approved by the General
Assembly. It is the position of the Republic of Korea
that independent and impartial investigations should
take place in all locations specified in allegations as
soon as possible.

18

As Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos stated
before the Council last week, “we are watching the
destruction of not only a country, but also its people”
(S/PV.7000, p. 2). We hope that the spirit of generosity
of Ramadan will lead to the cessation of violence.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): At the outset, I would like
to express my appreciation to the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process for his informative
and insightful briefing on the current situation in the
Middle East. I also thank the Permanent Representative
of Israel and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for
their statements.
It is disheartening to see the Middle East riddled
by raging armed conflicts, political impasse and dire
humanitarian crises, from the collapse of negotiations
on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict to the fully-fledged
Syrian armed conflict, with its effects on all of Syria’s
neighbours, in particular Lebanon, Jordan and Iraq.
With regard to the Israel-Palestine conflict, we
join in welcoming a new glimmer of hope in the peace
process. We commend the tireless efforts of the United
States Government through its Secretary of State, John
Kerry, in bringing the Israelis and Palestinians to an
agreement on the resumption of the peace talks.
We call on both parties to seize this unique
opportunity and to make history for generations to
come. We hope that those countries that may have
influence on both parties will redouble their efforts to
encourage Israel and Palestine to come to the negotiating
table with a sense of flexibility and open-mindedness.
In that context, however, it is important that both sides
refrain from any activities that may undermine a twoState solution.
In Gaza, the calm brokered by Egypt in November
2011 has largely held but remains fragile. We condemn
the recent rocket attacks into Israel during the month
of June. We express our appreciation to the Israeli
Government for allowing Palestinian fishermen to fish
within six nautical miles of the Gaza shore, extended
from the previous three-mile limit. We encourage
the Government of Israel to add further miles as a
confidence-building measure that could not only
improve the livelihood of Palestinians but also improve
the relationships between Palestine and the State of
Israel.
The situation in Syria remains deeply alarming, as
the violence escalates. The humanitarian crisis continues

13-40298

S/PV.7007

to worsen, with a third of the Syrian people now in need
of urgent assistance and a quarter of them displaced.
Syria’s neighbours, as generous and hospitable as they
are, have reached their limits in hosting the now over
1.8 million registered refugees. While we recognize
the impact on host countries, we stress the importance
of keeping borders open for refugees fleeing violence,
consistent with international humanitarian obligations.
We were alarmed by the recent report of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
to Syria (A/HRC/23/58), released last month, and we
express deep concern at the continued human rights
violations, mass destruction, sexual violence, arbitrary
detention and reported accounts of murder and torture,
in violation of international humanitarian law. We wish
to send a clear signal to all those who are involved in
committing crimes that they will be held accountable.
We regret to see that the Security Council, whose
primary responsibility is to maintain international
peace and security, has so far failed to take the
necessary action aimed at saving the Syrian people.
The militarization of the conflict in Syria will only
accelerate the killings and violence and the emergence
of Al-Qaida-linked groups. For Rwanda, the conflict
will be ended only through a comprehensive and
inclusive political process. We reiterate our support to
Lakhdar Brahimi, Joint Special Representative of the
United Nations and the League of Arab States for Syria,
and commend the work he has done for a peaceful
settlement of the Syrian crisis.
In the same spirit, we look forward to the
“Geneva II” conference, and we encourage both the
United States and the Russian Federation to agree on
the pending issues, so as to allow for the convening of
the conference as soon as possible.
Regarding Lebanon, it is clear that the war in Syria,
including the unprecedented refugee crisis, is putting
a growing strain on the Lebanese economy, political
dynamics and security. The current humanitarian crisis
and its long-term implications, as well as the continuing
political deadlock, requires close international attention
and support.
Lebanon has seen repeated incidents of shelling
from Syria into Lebanese territory, and Syrian armed
groups have carried out attacks against the Syrian armed
forces from Lebanese soil. In that regard, we are deeply
concerned at the increased involvement of foreign
fighters in Syria, notably the Lebanese Hizbullah. We

reiterate our call to the Lebanese parties to refrain from
taking part in the Syrian conflict, in accordance with
the disassociation policy and the Baabda Declaration.
In conclusion, Madam President, let me reiterate our
conviction that a stable and peaceful Middle East, with
nations living side by side in harmony, is an objective
that we can achieve should all parties commit to lay
down their arms and resolve to settle their differences
politically, with a view to exploring the tremendous
opportunities offered by the Middle East, a region with
huge economic potential. It is therefore imperative for
the countries of the region, the Security Council and
other stakeholders to work collectively to preserve
stability and contribute to laying peaceful foundations
for a better future in the Middle East, to which so many
of its peoples aspire.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank Special
Coordinator Robert Serry for his briefing. We have
attentively listened to the statements of Palestine and
Israel.
After three years of stalemate, we have heard good
news from the Middle East. Palestinians and Israelis
will return to direct peace talks. What is more, the talks
will start soon, and they will not be talks about talks
but about the issues hampering the peace process.
We congratulate United States Secretary of State
John Kerry for his resolute statesmanship. Despite
warnings of failure, Mr. Kerry persevered in his
diplomacy and persuaded the two sides to resume
negotiations. The parties cannot afford to procrastinate.
The window for a two-State solution is narrow, one to
two years. There is an urgency to press ahead with the
peace process. Palestine and Israel have welcomed the
resumption of talks. President Mahmoud Abbas has
said that agreement on certain principles has led to the
decision to resume talks. Prime Minister Netanyahu has
characterized the resumption of the peace process as
a vital strategic interest. The Middle East Quartet has
called this a huge achievement. Both sides are inclined
to take concrete steps and show some flexibility.
We welcome the announcement about the release of
Palestinian prisoners.
There are two other core concerns: a halt to the
construction of settlements in the occupied West
Bank and East Jerusalem, and Israel’s recognition of
the pre-1967 borders and using them as a baseline for
negotiations.

13-4029819

S/PV.7007

The best way to give those talks a chance is to keep
them away from the public glare to the extent possible.
Critics and cynics are already predicting the failure
of the renewed engagement. Rumours and refutations
continue to stalk the peace process. It is therefore
important to salvage this initiative.
But there is no cause for euphoria either. The road
ahead is rough and rugged, and there is no panacea or
shortcut. The agreement to resume talks is still being
finalized, yet this first step is better than a complete
hiatus. For success, the two sides should ensure a
measured pace for engagement.
Both sides should work towards an atmosphere
conducive to negotiations. Easing the blockade on Gaza
will be a huge confidence-building measure and also
provide relief to the population.
It became evident that without the intercession of
a third influential party, the deadlock on talks would
not have been broken. It is therefore imperative that the
Security Council, the Quartet and regional organizations
support the peace process to give it broader ownership.
We applaud the ambitious call made by Mr. Serry to
achieve tangible progress by the next session of the
General Assembly.
On the eve of these negotiations, we reiterate that
the only viable solution for the Palestine-Israel conflict
is the creation of an independent, sustainable and
contiguous State of Palestine based on the 1967 borders,
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, living side by
side with Israel in peace and security. Alternatives to
this proposed solution are not likely to work.
For peace in the region, Israel must vacate Lebanese
lands and the Syrian Golan. The sovereignty, territorial
integrity, unity and political independence of Lebanon
must be respected.
As we meet in this Chamber, Syria is burning. The
bloodshed continues. Guns are not going to win the war,
and, as Mr. Brahimi said, arms will not make peace.
The Council and the international community should
take steps to stop arms supplies to all sides and bring
the Syrian Government and opposition representatives
to Geneva for talks that will lead to a political solution
and national reconciliation.
The dates for the Geneva conference have been
slipping, from June to July and now to September, and
even beyond, because each side wants to demonstrate
military superiority before moving to the negotiating

20

table. More arms will lead only to more bloodshed, not
to peace. We believe that in this war there will be no
victors, because Syrian is killing Syrian. The whole
Syrian nation is suffering. A meltdown in Syria will
fracture the entire region. Pakistan believes that all
hurdles to the Geneva conference should be removed
as soon as possible. All countries with interest and
influence, including those in the region, should
participate in the talks for a viable and enduring peace.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s call for a
ceasefire during Ramadan. It has not been heeded, but
it still has a symbolic value. We also welcome the visit
to Damascus this week of the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Angela Kane, and the head
of the United Nations mission to investigate allegations
of the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab
Republic, Mr. Åke Sellström. We call on all sides to
provide the team will full access in order to enable it to
complete its task.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Special Coordinator, Mr. Robert
Serry, for his very relevant briefing and his continued
commitment to peace in the Middle East. I would also
like to thank the Permanent Observer of Palestine
and the Permanent Representative of Israel for their
statements.
Luxembourg associates itself fully with the
statement to be delivered later in this debate by the
observer of the European Union.
My remarks will focus on the Middle East peace
process and Syria.
For month after month we have reiterated the
urgent need to see the emergence of a contiguous
and viable Palestinian State, living in peace and
security side by side with Israel. The announcement,
on 19 July, of an agreement in principle to relaunch
direct negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians
is, at last, a significant step forward on that path. As
others have before me, I would like to commend the
commitment and determination of the United States
Secretary of State. My Minister had the opportunity
yesterday to congratulate Mr. John Kerry personally
during his exchange of views with the European
Ministers for Foreign Affairs. We also commend the
political courage and sense of responsibility shown by
the Israeli and Palestinian authorities in agreeing to
return to the negotiating table.

13-40298

S/PV.7007

We all know that this initiative may be the last
chance; we cannot let it go by. The consequences would
be tragic. The peace talks must now resume, and the way
to take the steps that will lead to the implementation
of a two-State solution must be determined on a basis
of clear parameters and a timetable that, we hope, will
enable conclusions to be reached within a reasonable
space of time. The time has come to take the necessary
difficult and historic decisions that coincide with a
vision of the long-term interests of the Israeli and
Palestinian peoples.
With its European Union partners, Luxembourg
is ready to continue to contribute actively to the
efforts under way, in close cooperation with the key
stakeholders, the Quartet and the countries of the
region. There can be no security in Israel without a
contiguous and viable Palestinian State, and no security
in the region without peace in every country in the
Middle East.
I now turn to Syria. The use of missiles and
cluster bombs, the possible use of chemical weapons,
the systematic imposition of states of siege, forced
displacements, torture, sexual violence, violations and
abuse against children, 100,000 deaths — perhaps by
now 150,000 — the toll after more than two years of
brutal repression makes the blood run cold. Human
rights in Syria are being trampled on. Violations
of international humanitarian law are multiplying.
The list of war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed daily continues to lengthen. In the face of
such horror, I will never tire of repeating here that the
Security Council should refer the situation in Syria to
the International Criminal Court.
Last week, at my delegation’s request, the Security
Council had the opportunity to hear harrowing
revelations of the humanitarian situation in Syria and
the countries of the region affected by the crisis there
(see S/PV.7000). What is there to say, other than that the
distress of the Syrian people has reached unimaginable
proportions? There are 6.8 million Syrians in need of aid
and 1.8 million who have fled their country. More than
half of those affected are children. Regardless of the
political efforts being made — specifically the RussianAmerican initiataive for the holding of the “Geneva II”
conference — which we support and which, we hope,
will enable an eventual political solution to the conflict
to be found, it is the Council’s duty to concern itself
with urgent needs and the humanitarian imperative. It
is high time to show solidarity with the Syrian people.

It is high time to consider the best way to respond to the
appeals of Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos. As
we see it, it is vital that the Security Council reinforce
the demands of the humanitarian actors on the parties
to the Syrian conflict by addressing issues related to
bureaucratic obstacles, transporting medical supplies,
opening routes for humanitarian access and trans-border
and front-line access for the affected populations.
The same applies to support for Syria’s neighbours,
which, as has been highlighted by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Antonio
Guterres, are dealing with a influx of refugees without
precedent since the genocide in Rwanda. We simply
cannot be content to thank those neighbouring countries
for their generosity and continue to approach this issue
as if it were one of a mere temporary humanitarian
emergency. Even if a political solution in Syria were
to emerge tomorrow, it would still be the case that the
Syrian crisis is going to have a long-term impact on
its neighbours, particularly Lebanon. The international
community must come up with an adequate response
to it.
I venture to hope that, if only on humanitarian
issues, the Council will be able to emerge from its
silence and take up its responsibilities.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank Mr. Robert Serry for his briefing on
the situation in the Middle East.
The frequency with which we address this topic
has often been questioned within the Security Council.
However, the current situation in the region is so volatile
and changeable, and has such enormous implications,
that it must be acknowledged that frequent monitoring is
justified. The first rapture with which the Arab Spring
was received in the Chamber only a little more than
a year ago is now seasoned with a dose of scepticism
about how easy or difficult we can expect the transition
to be from authoritarian Governments towards more
democratic, participative, pluralistic and open systems.
The recent events in Egypt are but one testimony to that
fact. At the same time, increasing sectarian tensions
and their frequent spillover into violence are matters of
growing concern, for obvious reasons.
But now is not the moment to discuss the overall
situation. I shall therefore focus on the two topics that
have been the principal object of our attention — first
the situation in Syria, and secondly the Middle East
peace process. They are radically different situations,

13-4029821

S/PV.7007

but at this point they have one thing in common, namely,
the recognition that the road towards reconciliation
begins by bringing the conflicting parties to the table
to talk to each other, and, eventually, to seek agreement
through direct negotiations. That is the logic behind
the initiative known as “Geneva II”, and underlies
the imperative that it must be the parties directly
affected — Israel and Palestine — that define the path
that will lead to the two-State solution, allowing them
to live in peace behind secure borders.
I turn now to the situation in Syria, which is a
human tragedy of immense proportions and a source
of ongoing frustration for my delegation. Clearly, the
Security Council has failed to meet its basic purpose,
first, to avoid and then to put an end to the spiral of
violence that has destroyed lives, communities and
the cultural legacy of millennia. The anxious search
for a negotiated and peaceful political solution has
not met with success. The danger that the crisis will
spread to neighbouring countries is growing, and the
humanitarian cost has reached unimaginable levels.
In the context of this sombre scenario, our only
hope, which is fading with time, lies in the attempts
of the United States, the Russian Federation and
the Secretariat to establish the basis for the holding
of a conference that could trigger a dialogue and
negotiation between the parties. We fervently want
such a conference to take place as soon as possible and,
above all, the parties to commit themselves to seeking
a definitive solution to the conflict, which would
require a transitional authority. We do not believe that
conditions should be set for the participation in such a
gathering or preclude any possible outcome.
We also reiterate our admiration and respect for the
Governments of Jordan and Lebanon, both of which,
despite the enormous pressure they are enduring, have
maintained their borders open to the refugees from the
Syrian conflict. They more than deserve the support of
the international community.
As regards the peace process in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine, steps have been
taken in recent months suggesting that it may still
be possible to reach a mutual agreement between the
parties and to salvage the two-State solution. The bases
that could lead to renewed talks have recently been
agreed to in the context of the diplomatic initiative of the
Secretary of State of the United States, and supported,
we trust, by the Quartet, the League of Arab States and

22

the European Union. The involvement of other actors
also demonstrates the sense of urgency with which a
search for a definitive solution to the conflict between
Israel and Palestine is being pursued. We hope that
both parties can show the leadership and responsibility
necessary to continue their commitment to the peace
process. We believe that the involvement of the Quartet
in this initiative is essential.
As we have done on previous occasions, we
maintain our position that both parties must avoid any
act that jeopardizes the prospects of a peaceful solution
to the conflict. Such acts only undermine any prospect
that both peoples can live in peace and security. We
believe that the construction of new or the expansion
of existing settlements falls within this category and
constitutes a violation of international law. Naturally,
the firing of rockets from the Gaza Strip into Israeli
territory must cease totally. At the same time, we hope
that in the short term the economic restrictions being
placed on the Gaza Strip will be reduced, since they
undercut any prospects of progress.
Finally, we believe that the international community,
through the United Nations, is duty-bound to condemn
all and any violation that may undermine the peace
process. The parties involved cannot be expected to act
responsibly when the international community ignores
flagrant violations committed by either.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Serry for his comprehensive briefing
on the peace process in the Middle East, including
Palestine.
Today’s debate takes place in critical circumstances,
given the efforts of Mr. Kerry, under the auspices of the
United States Administration, to revive negotiations
between the Palestinians and the Israelis. These efforts
have led to an agreement in principle to relaunch the
peace process, which has been frozen for more than
three years.
It is no secret that I attend this meeting in the
personal hope of hearing a new statement of optimism
concerning the prospects for resumed negotiations that
are focused on success and a refusal to blame others
for failure. Morocco has acknowledged and supported
the United States initiative, and today we place great
hope in it, in the light of the circumstances surrounding
a possible resumption of serious negotiations with a
view to reaching a comprehensive and just peace based
on a settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict that will

13-40298

S/PV.7007

guarantee Israel’s withdrawal from the Arab territories
it has occupied since 1967, and the establishment of a
Palestinian State with its capital in East Jerusalem.

reconciliation is a necessity that must be met, for it will
serve the interests of the Palestinian people as a whole
and strengthen their negotiating position.

Everyone here knows that the Arab and Palestinian
side has demonstrated staunch political resolve and
responsibility towards achieving peace in the Middle
East. They have contributed to crystallizing an
Arab initiative known to be open, courageous and
peaceful, as affirmed in Washington, D.C., by the Arab
ministerial committee. We hope that Israel will join this
dynamism, contribute to its progress, and reverse the
intensification of its occupation with a view towards
achieving the two-State solution.

Sixty-five years since the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 181 (II), whereby the United
Nations called for the establishment of two States, five
wars have taken place, from which all peoples have
suffered. The Palestinian people suffered and paid a
price: displacement and the denial of their fundamental
freedoms and human rights. Achieving the two-State
solution makes it necessary for both parties to find a
common vision. Such a vision must exclude narrow
interests and must take into consideration the shared
interests of both States, so as to achieve a genuine, just
and forward-looking peace in the region.

The United States initiative has opened a window
of change that may be the last. The two parties
must therefore embrace it with a view to resuming
negotiations, building on prior achievements to bring
the two sides closer together. We hope that both parties
will demonstrate strong and determined political will
to prepare for and resume the negotiations, and avoid
any actions that could impede them.
The ongoing occupation and its daily repercussions,
as well as the siege imposed on the Palestinian people,
generate violence and radicalism and fuel hatred, thereby
undermining any hope for peace. The construction and
expansion of settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, run counter
to the principle of negotiations and also serve to
undermine the peace process. That applies as well to
Israeli measures in the Holy City of Jerusalem and to
the repeated attempts to Judaize the city and change
its character as a city of coexistence among the three
divine religions. Given his responsibilities as Chairman
of the Al-Quds Committee, His Majesty the King of
Morocco has condemned those measures and called
upon the Council to ensure respect by Israel of the
status of Jerusalem and to avoid negatively impacting
Christian and Muslim holy sites.
The preparations for the negotiations must be
coupled with good-faith steps that are conducive to the
success of such negotiations. Most important among
them are the lifting the blockade of the Palestinians in
Gaza, who are part and parcel of the Palestinian people,
and the release of Palestinian prisoners. The unjust
blockade that has for years been imposed by Israel
against Gaza must be lifted. The siege serves to deny
Palestinians their dignity and basic human rights. In the
current circumstances, achieving Palestinian national

To that end, it is necessary that the international
community abide by its commitments towards Arabs
and Palestinians, so as to fulfil the promises made with
regard to the establishment of a viable Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and enabling Syria
and Lebanon regain their occupied territory. In that
way, all the countries of the region will be able to enjoy
stability and peace and be able to begin a new chapter of
cooperation. We are convinced that any progress in the
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations will serve the interests
of the Palestinian and Israeli peoples alike. That will
also contribute to restoring stability and security for all
States of the Middle East region.
That stability also requires that there be an
immediate halt to violence and finding a way out of
the political crisis for which the brotherly people of
Syria are paying the price. The increasing number of
victims of that tragedy, as well as the resulting painful
humanitarian situation, makes the Syrian parties
responsible for the unity of their country. At the same
time, it is unacceptable for the Council to remain silent
in the light of the worsening crisis in Syria. That silence
is counter to its important and historic responsibility
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. The
convening of the “Geneva II” conference is a moral,
political and human duty for all those with influence
on the Syrian parties. We sincerely hope that everyone
will assume their responsibilities.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation welcomes the update
provided by United States Secretary of State John Kerry
at the press conference held in Amman on 19 July as
to the agreement in principle to launch Palestinian-

13-4029823

S/PV.7007

Israeli negotiations on the final status of the Palestinian
territories. We welcome the planned contacts to be held
in Washington, D.C., between Israeli and Palestinian
negotiators to develop a formula for renewing the talks.
We hope that, in future, the parties will shoulder their
full responsibilities towards their peoples. Only they
can, and should, agree on the parameters of a future
Palestinian-Israeli settlement based on the well-known
legal basis, including the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, the Madrid principles, including the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative,
the decision of the Middle East Quartet of international
mediators and earlier agreements.
At this extremely important stage, both sides must
refrain from unilateral actions and take reciprocal steps
to establish a favourable atmosphere to reinvigorate the
talks. Confidence-building measures by both sides are
extremely important.
The arrangements that have been reached make
more relevant the convening of a meeting of the Quartet,
which continues to be the recognized international
mechanism agreed upon by the Security Council to
help achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting solution
to the Middle East situation. The Quartet should play a
leading role in supporting the peace process. The main
purpose of such a meeting should be to issue a message
of unified support in providing potential assistance to
Palestinians and Israelis in the extremely important
and responsible task of achieving a final settlement and
ending this protracted conflict.
We believe that Arab countries should be more
involved in peacekeeping efforts. In that context, we
would like to reiterate our recent proposal to invite a
delegation from the League of Arab States to the next
Quartet ministerial meeting to promote the Arab Peace
Initiative.
We continue to believe that overcoming the
internal Palestinian divide on the basis of the Palestine
Liberation Organization platform and the Arab
Peace Initiative will help to achieve peace between
Palestinians and Israelis.
Without achieving Palestinian national unity,
reaching a comprehensive Palestinian-Israeli settlement,
or even strengthening its outcome, will not be possible.
The relevance of inter-Palestinian reconciliation was
a particular point of focus during last week’s visit to
Moscow by Fatah member Nabil Shaath.

24

Efforts to overcome the deadlock in the Middle
East peace process were discussed in Moscow at the
beginning of July, including with Israeli Minister of
Justice Tzipi Livni, who is the Government Minister
responsible for talks with the Palestinians. The
commitment to the two-State solution was underscored,
which is the only way to meet the genuine aspirations
of the Israeli and Palestinian peoples. Any delay in that
regard is unacceptable.
We are convinced that progress towards a lasting
settlement to such a key regional issue as that of
Palestine will have a beneficial impact on the entire
situation in the region, whose countries continue to
undergo fundamental transformations.
The tragic events in Syria are of great concern
to all of us. Terrorism, humanitarian challenges,
aftershocks of the crisis in neighbouring countries,
violations of human rights and the worsening ethnic
and sectarian strife are all very dangerous threats
with regard to outbreaks of violence in the country.
They will only increase so long as a solution to the
Syrian crisis is put off. It is well known that such a
solution must be political and be achieved solely in the
framework of a comprehensive intra-Syrian dialogue
based on unconditional respect for the sovereignty,
independence, national unity and territorial integrity
of the Syrian Arab Republic, as stated in the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/523, annex) of 30 June 2012. All
of our efforts should support the main goals of swiftly
ending all violence and launching the transition process
in order to restore the country and eliminate hostilities
and blockades and meet the humanitarian needs of the
people.
The Russian Federation is convinced that a
genuine path to those objectives will be facilitated
by the early implementation of the Russian-American
initiative of 7 May on the convening of an international
conference on Syria without prior conditions and aimed
at the full and comprehensive implementation of the
Geneva communiqué. One of the main themes of that
event should be to consolidate the efforts of both the
Government and the opposition to expel terrorists and
extremists from the country. It is important that all
constructive opposition groups take part in the talks
and that the Syrian Government be willing to talk with
them, having already announced support for the ideas
of the conference.

13-40298

S/PV.7007

It is unfortunate, however, that a significant
number of opponents of the central authority, including
representatives of the Syrian National Coalition, are not
yet ready to participate in the conference. Nevertheless,
we trust that the collective efforts of the international
community to swiftly convene the second Geneva
conference will continue.
Like other members of the Council, we are
extremely concerned about the risk of internal
destabilization in Lebanon as a result of the Syrian
crisis and related to the Shiite-Sunni confrontation,
as well as social imbalances in the State’s ethnic and
religious structures — and all that against the backdrop
of the increasing flow of refugees. To safeguard the
country from those dangerous scenarios, all Lebanese
political forces must show full responsibility, ensure
a broad national dialogue and independently find a
common denominator on the parameters for a political
process, including by forming a Government and
holding elections.

The process calls also for a political environment
conducive to the negotiations. In particular, that
requires establishing trust in order to dispel the mindset
of mistrust between the parties.
In that context, we are concerned about the
construction of new settlements, carried out in violation
of international law, which will only complicate the
launch of negotiations. That is why the European Union
decided to align its laws with international law and to
recall that might does not make right.
A change with respect to the Gaza Strip and lifting
the blockade are also imperative to strengthen support
for peace among a population that today lives under
the exclusive yoke of Hamas. That must be done in
respect for Israel’s security. In that regard, France has
firmly condemned the rocket attacks and recalls its
commitment to strict observance of the truce.
As for the Palestinian Authority, we hope that it will
use its new status in the United Nations constructively.

Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, the Permanent Observer of the State
of Palestine, Mr. Riyad Mansour, and the Permanent
Representative of Israel, Mr. Ron Proser, for their
statements.

To conclude with respect to the peace process, I
would like to again emphasize my country’s readiness
to contribute to a final settlement, in particular with
its European partners, to facilitate negotiations and to
participate, when the time comes, in implementing a
peace agreement.

The Middle East is being rocked by two crises
that urgently require a resolute response from the
international community. First, on the IsraeliPalestinian peace process, my delegation has stated
on numerous occasions that the two-State solution
represents the only fair and lasting solution to the
conflict. In 2013, the only way to ensure sustainability is
to achieve it. In that context, we welcome the agreement
in principle — thanks to the efforts of the American
Secretary of State — to resume Israeli-Palestinian
talks. We also welcome the sense of responsibility
demonstrated by the authorities of both sides.

The year 2013 must also see the liberation of the
Syrian people. The situation is tragic. Last week,
Ms. Amos, Mr. Guterres and Mr. Šimonović again
described the suffering of the Syrian people to the
Council (see S/PV.7000). The statistics are horrific.
The human toll since the start of the crisis is nearly
100,000 victims, a majority of whom are civilians, as
well as tens of thousands of disappeared individuals.
There are 1.8 million refugees, and 6.8 million people
require humanitarian assistance. Attacks carried out
in Al-Qusayr, Aleppo and Homs show that the regime
has continued to ramp up its military attacks against its
own people and pursues massive shelling in residential
areas.

The process calls for the parties’ commitment
to resume direct, credible negotiations without
preconditions. The alternative is easy: either 2013 will
see the launch of meaningful negotiations leading to a
final agreement on all of the issues, or 2013 may well
see slip away this final opportunity to establish peace
through a viable, sovereign, independent, contiguous
Palestinian State, living in peace and security within
recognized borders, side by side with the State of Israel,
with Jerusalem as the capital of two States.

The regime knows no limits in its choice of
weapons. It is using cluster munitions and incendiary
bombs. A growing number of information sources have
indicated that the regime continues to use chemical
weapons, including sarin gas, which constitutes a war
crime.
We call on Syria to authorize unimpeded access
to the United Nations Independent International

13-4029825

S/PV.7007

Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic
to investigate the allegations and incidents of the use
of chemical weapons. We are awaiting the results of the
commission’s visit to Damascus this week.
It is high time for the Council to take the measures
necessary to put an end to the suffering of the Syrian
people, the primary and overwhelming responsibility
for which lies with the Al-Assad regime. Those
measures are familiar to all: first, a referral to the
International Criminal Court to prosecute war crimes
and crimes against humanity committed by all parties
in Syria; secondly, increased humanitarian action to
enable unimpeded access to all populations who need
it. Ms. Amos identified in the Council a list of measures
necessary to meet the needs of Syria. Based on that, the
Council should send a clear, unanimous message on the
application of international humanitarian law and the
need for the regime to authorize humanitarian access
throughout the country and to the Syrian population.
Thirdly, a political transition is necessary. We support
international efforts, particularly those led by Russia
and the United States, for a political solution in Syria
that embodies the principles of a political transition,
based on the first part of the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/523, annex), namely, the transfer of the
executive powers to a transitional Government.
For our part, we will continue to work on structuring
the opposition. The broadening of the Syrian National
Coalition and the election of a new president represent
important decisions. The Coalition is also strengthening
its status as the legitimate representative of the Syrian
people and is pursuing its steps to restructure and to
unite.
We call upon the international community to
support the only approach capable of leading to a
political transition. We have called for a credible
interlocutor, and we have one — who is recognized
by the League of Arab States and by the vast majority
of the international community — working to form a
Government and to effectively unite the various sectors
of Syrian society.
I will make a final comment on Lebanon, which
is caught in the middle of the storm. France welcomes
the unanimous support expressed by the Council
for Lebanon on 10 July. The presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/9), adopted on France’s initiative,
made clear the international community’s unanimous

26

commitment to the sovereignty, integrity, independence
and stability of Lebanon.
As the effects of the Syrian crisis are increasingly
felt in Lebanon, it is important to reiterate our collective
support for Lebanese State institutions, which are the
guarantors of stability in the country, and first and
foremost to President Sleiman and to the Lebanese
Armed Forces, which today courageously uphold the
dissociation policy. We must ensure that Lebanon is not
drawn into the Syrian conflict.
Today we are witnessing a region on the brink
of toppling because of the Syrian crisis, the burden
of refugees and the radical terrorism proliferating
throughout the Syrian charnel house. Doing nothing
to resolve the crisis in Syria would be to abandon that
strategic region for world peace and security to decades
of chaos that will not remain confined to the Middle
East.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank Robert Serry for his briefing this morning
and the Permanent Observer of the Observer State of
Palestine and the Permanent Representative of Israel
for their statements.
The Government of the United Kingdom warmly
welcomes United States Secretary of State Kerry’s
19 July announcement that Israel and the Palestinians
have reached an agreement that establishes the basis
for resuming direct final status negotiations. We pay
tribute to the efforts of Secretary Kerry and his team
and commend the leadership shown by both Prime
Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas. The United
Kingdom stands ready to do all that we can over the
coming months to support the parties and the United
States in their efforts to achieve a lasting peace for the
Israeli and Palestinian people.
The European Union set out clearly its full support
for United States efforts at yesterday’s Foreign Affairs
Council. There was also a vital role for Arab States to
build on the constructive steps taken so far to reiterate
the strategic importance of the Arab Peace Initiative.
Friday’s announcement is, of course, only a beginning,
not an end. We welcome the clear commitment of Prime
Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas to a two-State
solution and to working to achieve peace for the Israeli
and Palestinian peoples. Now more than ever it is vital
that both show bold and decisive leadership. With the
new momentum, the Israeli and Palestinian people must
be able to trust that progress is possible. That would

13-40298

S/PV.7007

be undermined by a repeat of recent events, such as
further settlement announcements, the use of live fire
and demonstrations by the Israeli Defense Forces, and
rockets shot from Gaza into Israel. We urge all sides to
exercise restraint and to look forward.
As talks resume, we should not forget Gaza. Gaza
must be an integral part of any two-State solution.
As our Minister for the Middle East saw last month,
for ordinary Gazans the Strip remains a desperately
difficult place in which to live. In the heat of summer,
Gazans face very poor living conditions, including
regular and sustained power cuts. It will be important
for Gaza to benefit fully from any economic package
that is being prepared to accompany the political
track, including the easing of Israeli restrictions on
movements of goods and people. The United Kingdom
believes that an improved economy is not only essential
for the people, including the children of Gaza, but
firmly in Israel’s own security interests.
Current United States efforts and the strong
commitment shown by the parties themselves reflect
the best chance in many years of securing peace. We
must all unite to reach our shared goal of a negotiated
two-State solution, where a safe and secure Israel can
live in peace with an independent and viable Palestinian
State.
Turning to Syria, it was with great dismay that
we heard Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs Valerie Amos’s briefing before the Council last
week. It is truly shocking that more than 6 million people
require humanitarian assistance and that 4 million
people are no longer able to meet their basic food needs.
Yet the Al-Assad regime continues to prevent the
United Nations from delivering aid effectively inside
Syria. With the death toll now well over 100,000, the
situation in Syria gets worse by the day. Since last July,
an average of nearly 200 people have been killed every
24 hours. What started off as peaceful protests over two
years ago has become a protracted conflict waged by
a murderous regime, aided and abetted by Hizbullah
and Iran. The Al-Assad regime has continued to ramp
up its brutal military offensive over recent months, as
witnessed today in Homs, where thousands of innocent
civilians are currently trapped in their homes with
limited access to food, water or electricity.
The countries of the region have already provided
sanctuary to 1.7 million Syrians. More will come. We
urge all neighbouring countries to keep their borders

open for Syrians to escape the tragic and dangerous
situation they are facing at home. In response,
the United Kingdom has doubled its support for
humanitarian assistance, bringing the total to over
$500 million, including support for Syrian refugees and
host communities in Jordan and Lebanon. The Group
of Eight (G-8) countries last month committed over
$1.5 billion, yet the United Nations $5.2 billion Syria
appeal for 2013 is only 35 per cent funded. The needs
for aid in Syria will, sadly, only grow. Without help,
Lebanon and Jordan risk being destabilized. Member
States need to contribute more and encourage others to
do more now and in the long term.
The continuing deterioration of the human rights
situation is also of grave concern. The independent
international commission of inquiry’s latest report
found that the conflict had reached new levels of
brutality. War crimes, crimes against humanity and
gross human rights violations continue at a frightening
rate. We remain at the forefront of the international
community in calling for full accountability for all
those responsible for human rights violations and
abuses. The Council should refer the situation in Syria
to the International Criminal Court without delay.
There is a growing body of limited but persuasive
information showing that the regime has used and
continues to use chemical weapons, including sarin gas.
The use of chemical weapons is a war crime. We call on
Syria to allow the United Nations unfettered access to
investigate incidents of chemical weapons use in Syria.
On 17 June, the G-8 reaffirmed support for a
second conference in Geneva, leading to the creation
of a transitional governing body with full executive
powers. Yet the regime’s offensive of recent weeks has
made it even harder for this conference to take place.
We continue to support the expanded Syrian National
Coalition and its new President Ahmed Assi Al-Jarba.
The coalition remains the most legitimate and credible
representative of the Syrian people. It has made clear its
commitment to a future democratic Syria in which the
rights of all Syrians are respected. We must not conflate
this moderate opposition with terrorist groups. We must
not accept what Al-Assad wants us to believe — that
the only alternative to his brutal regime is extremists
and terrorists. There are millions of Syrians who want
a peaceful and democratic future and legitimate forces
that are fighting for their interests. We should be on
their side.

13-4029827

S/PV.7007

Despite our differences, the Council shares some
fundamental aims: to end the conflict, to stop Syria
fragmenting, to let the people decide who governs
them, and to prevent the growth of violent extremism.
As a Council, we need to recommit to working with the
parties in a meaningful way towards a viable political
settlement, based on last year’s Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/523, annex).
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Mr. Robert Serry for his briefing. We have
also listened attentively to the statements made by the
observer of the Observer State of Palestine and the
representative of Israel.
At present, the situation in the Middle East
remains complex and fragile. The Palestinian-Israeli
issue is at the core of concerns in the Middle East,
bearing on the overall situation in the region, to which
dialogue and negotiation represent the only viable
solution. Recently, thanks to the efforts of all parties, a
significant opportunity exists for direct talks between
Palestine and Israel. China welcomes the prospects of a
resumption of peace talks and appreciates the parties’
efforts in that direction. It is our hope that Palestine and
Israel will overcome difficulties, move closer towards
each other and try to achieve substantive progress as
soon as possible.
China has consistently maintained that, through
peace talks between Palestine and Israel, an
independent State of Palestine can be established with
complete sovereignty, based on the pre-1967 borders
and with East Jerusalem as its capital, whereby the two
States, Palestine and Israel, living side by side in peace
and security, can facilitate peace and stability in the
Middle East. A step-by-step solution to the PalestinianIsraeli issue is needed. The immediate priority is to
take effective measures to halt all settlement activities,
stop acts of violence targeting innocent civilians, lift
the Gaza blockade and properly address the issue of
Palestinian detainees.
Meanwhile, the international community needs to
scale up its support for Palestine in order to facilitate its
economic development and job creation. That will help
ease the suffering of the Palestinian people and enhance
their confidence in the peace process. China supports
a greater role for the United Nations, especially the
Security Council, in facilitating the unanimous support
of the international community for the peace process in
the Middle East.

28

China firmly supports the Palestinian people in
their just cause for the restoration of their legitimate
national rights and has been actively promoting the
peace process. Last May, China invited leaders of both
Palestine and Israel to visit China with a focus on peace
facilitation. China put forward a four-point proposal on
the solution to the question of Palestine, emphasizing:
the need to maintain the right direction of independent
statehood for Palestine, living side by side in peace
with Israel; the need to regard peace negotiations as
the only viable way out for peace; the need to adhere
to the principle of land for peace; and the need for the
international community to provide guarantees for
taking the peace process forward.
To implement that four-point proposal, the Chinese
Government hosted the United Nations International
Meeting in Support of the Israeli-Palestinian Peace
Process last year in Beijing, whereby the efforts of
the international community to facilitate the peace
process gathered momentum. China stands ready to
continue to work with the international community to
play a constructive role for the early achievement of a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.
A political solution is the only way out of the
Syrian conflict. China welcomes all initiatives and
efforts that will help stop the violence in Syria and
facilitate a political solution to the Syrian conflict.
We call on the Syrian parties to implement the Geneva
communiqué of the Action Group, achieve a ceasefire
and halt violence without delay, actively respond to the
initiative for a Geneva conference on Syria and start a
political dialogue as soon as possible.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I thank Special Coordinator Serry for his briefing.
I will begin with Middle East peace before turning
to Syria and Lebanon.
The United States is deeply committed to a just and
lasting peace, with Israelis and Palestinians living side
by side in peace and security. That is why Secretary of
State Kerry has made repeated visits to the region and
has focused so heavily on that effort. Last week, after
his sixth trip to the region as Secretary, he was able
to announce that the parties had reached an agreement
that establishes a basis for resuming direct final status
negotiations. He also stressed that the agreement was

13-40298

S/PV.7007

in the process of being formalized and that in the
meantime none of the parties would be making public
comments about the negotiations, so as to improve the
likelihood that the talks could indeed succeed.
As Secretary Kerry noted, everyone is aware that
the process will not be easy, and no one believes that
the long-standing differences between the parties can
be resolved overnight or just wiped away. We know that
the challenges require some very tough choices in the
days ahead.
Today, however, we are hopeful, because the
representatives of two proud people have decided that
the difficult road ahead is worth traveling and that the
daunting challenges we face are worth tackling. So they
have courageously recognized that in order for Israelis
and Palestinians to live together side by side in peace
and security, they must begin by sitting at the table
together in direct talks.
It is important to note that that diplomatic
effort would not have been possible without strong
international support. The Arab Peace Initiative
follow-up committee, the Quartet envoys and many
others played a vital role in supporting the resumptions
of negotiations. The Secretary-General, European
partners and others around the world also weighed
in with strong statements of support. We should now
continue to urge all sides to avoid taking unilateral
actions, including steps at the United Nations. Our
shared objective at this critical moment must be to build
the trust and confidence necessary for a lasting peace.
In that regard, the United States position remains
that General Assembly resolution 67/19 did not establish
that Palestine is a State. The United States is committed
to helping bring about a viable Palestinian State through
bilateral negotiations with their Israeli counterparts.
That is the only real path to genuine statehood for the
Palestinian people, as repeatedly affirmed by both sides
and endorsed by the international community.
In the end, those most responsible for that process
are the parties themselves. We applaud the courageous
leadership shown by President Abbas and Prime
Minister Netanyahu in taking that step forward. As the
parties work through the complicated issues they face,
we should encourage them with all possible support.
Turning to Syria, the United States continues to
believe that the only sustainable outcome to the conflict
is through a political solution based on the Geneva

Action Group for Syria communiqué (S/2012/523,
annex), which clearly calls for a transitional governing
body with full executive powers chosen by mutual
consent. We continue to work towards that end. In that
regard, we welcome the election of Syrian opposition
coalition President Ahmed Assi Al-Jarba and look
forward to working with him. A united opposition
that represents all Syrians is essential to achieve a
negotiated political solution that will provide dignity,
freedom and hope to the Syrian people.
Despite professed support for negotiations, the
Al-Assad regime is in fact working to thwart any
possibility of a peaceful solution. In collusion with
Iran- and Hizbullah-backed fighters and advisors,
the Al-Assad regime has waged war against the
Syrian people. Further, the United States assesses
that the regime has used chemical weapons, including
the nerve agent sarin, on a small scale against the
opposition multiple times in the last year, in violation
of international norms.
We again call upon the Al-Assad regime to grant
the United Nations team, led by Mr. Sellström, free and
unfettered access to investigate any and all credible
allegations of the possible use of chemical weapons in
Syria. We urge all members of the Council to use their
influence with the regime to reinforce that point and
take other appropriate steps to support the investigation
initiated by Secretary-General Ban.
We also remain deeply concerned by the regime’s
ongoing campaign against the besieged city of Homs,
aided by Hizbullah and Iranian-backed paramilitaries.
Residents of the old city of Homs have received little
humanitarian aid for the past year, a result of heavy
fighting and the Syrian Government’s refusal to
support the delivery of such aid. We reiterate that
there is no justification for the Al-Assad regime to
prevent humanitarian access to Homs, and we call on
it to allow humanitarian organizations safe access to
evacuate the wounded and provide medical treatment.
We also reaffirm that those responsible for violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law must
be held accountable.
The impact of the Syrian conflict has created
immense challenges for Syria’s neighbours. We
strongly commend Lebanon, Turkey and Jordan for
their steadfast support of Syrian refugees, and we urge
all neighbouring countries to keep their borders open
to vulnerable people fleeing for their lives. Refugees

13-4029829

S/PV.7007

and host countries alike need our urgent and sustained
financial support.
Finally, we remain gravely concerned by the
violent clashes and bombings in Lebanon, including in
Sidon, Tripoli and Beirut. We condemn in the strongest
terms the attacks by militants against the Lebanese
armed forces that have killed soldiers and civilians.
The United States again reiterates our full support for
Lebanon’s policy of dissociation from the Syrian crisis
and its commitment to supporting a stable, sovereign
and independent Lebanon. We call on all the parties
in Lebanon to abide by the dissociation policy and to
act with restraint to ensure Lebanon’s stability and
security.
We welcome the important step the European
Union (EU) took yesterday in agreeing to designate the
military wing of Hizbullah as a terrorist organization.
With that action, the EU is sending a strong message
to Hizbullah that it cannot operate with impunity and
that there are consequences for its actions, including
last year’s deadly attack in Burgas, Bulgaria, which
the Security Council rightfully condemned, and for
plotting a similar attack in Cyprus. We call on other
Governments to follow the EU’s lead and take steps
to begin reining in Hizbullah’s terrorist and criminal
activities.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts in writing and deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I wish to inform all concerned that, as we have a
very large number of speakers, we will be carrying on
today’s open debate right through the lunch hour.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Allow me to begin by
thanking you, Madam President, for organizing today’s
timely meeting and to express my delegation’s deep
appreciation to Mr. Robert Serry for his comprehensive
briefing.

30

We meet today a few days after the adoption of a
presidential statement, on 10 July in which all members
around this table expressed
“deep concern at all violations of Lebanon’s
sovereignty and call[ed] on all parties to fully
respect Lebanon’s sovereignty, territorial integrity,
unity and political independence within its
internationally recognized borders, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions”.
(S/PRST/2013/9)
While my delegation expresses its appreciation for
the Security Council’s reiterated calls for full respect of
Lebanon’s sovereignty, I stand before it today to remind
the Council that the basic foundations of resolution
1701 (2006) and of that presidential statement are
challenged on a daily basis by Israeli fighter jets. That is
highlighted by the Secretary-General in paragraph 9 of
his latest report (S/2013/381) on the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006), where he stated that, “[d]uring
the period from 3 to 5 May alone, [the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)] counted 49 Israeli
fighter jets violating Lebanese airspace”. UNIFIL
and my Government protested those violations — my
Government did so in the strongest terms — and called
for their immediate cessation.
Need I also remind the Council that Israel persists
in violating the territorial integrity of my country by
occupying the Shaba’a farms and Kfar Shuba Hills?
Need I also remind the Council that Israel delays
in even responding to the plan proposed by UNIFIL
for ending Israel’s occupation of the northern part of
Ghajar? It is indeed high time that Israel withdraw from
the remaining occupied Lebanese territories.
Moreover, it is my privilege once again to recognize
the determination of the troop-contributing countries
and the men and women of UNIFIL and commend
them for their tireless efforts in helping to maintain
stability and security in southern Lebanon. Their
determination matches Lebanon’s commitment to the
full implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).
On the situation in Syria, let me thank you, Madam
President, for the concerns expressed in the Council’s
presidential statement regarding the “marked increase
of cross-border fire from the Syrian Arab Republic into
Lebanon” (S/PRST/2013/9), which violates my country’s
sovereignty and threatens to destabilize it.

13-40298

S/PV.7007

It is a well-known fact that since the beginning of
the crisis in Syria, my country has adopted a policy of
dissociation aimed at safeguarding Lebanon’s internal
unity and stability from regional conflicts, which
is a policy that has been reaffirmed in the Baabda
Declaration, adopted by the national dialogue committee
on 11 June 2012. However, dissociation from the Syrian
conflict could not and did not mean dissociating
Lebanon from its responsibilities towards our Syrian
brothers and its obligation under international law and
international humanitarian law. As I told the Council last
week, Lebanon will not close its borders, will not turn
back refugees and will continue to provide assistance
to them within available means (see S/PV.7000). Yet,
let me stress once again that Lebanon will not be
able, within its scarce and diminishing resources, to
cope with the increasing influx of Syrian refugees by
itself, hence our repeated appeal for the international
community to share the burden and intensify direct
support to Lebanon politically and financially.
Turning now to the main subject of today’s meeting,
I would like to commend the efforts of the Secretary
of State of the United States, Mr. John Kerry, for the
resumption of the Palestinian-Israeli negotiations in the
hope that they will lead to a just and lasting peace that,
in our view, can only be based on the principles and
rules of international law, the relevant decisions of the
United Nations, the Madrid terms of reference and the
Arab Peace Initiative.
Still, let us state it loud and clear: the main
danger facing such negotiations is the continuation
of provocative Israeli actions capable of undermining
them. To protect the negotiations, those actions
ought to be completely stopped. Obviously, there is
no better example of such actions than the unabated
construction in the past months of Israeli settlements
at an unprecedented rate, let alone the approval of new
settlement units, the latest being 1,169 units in June
and approximately 900 so far this month. How, too, can
we not mention the ongoing acts of land confiscation,
attacks on property and settler violence?
As to the prospects for the success of the
negotiations, the issue was eloquently framed in an
editorial in the leading Israeli paper, Ha’aretz, on
21 July:
“... the main responsibility for moving the talks
ahead rests on Israel. Only Israel can put an end

to the occupation, which is the key to everything
else.”
Finally, reference has been made in today’s meeting
to the addition by the European Union (EU) of what it
labeled “the military wing of Hizbullah” to its terrorist
list. As expressed yesterday by President Michel
Sleiman, my country hopes that the EU
“will re-examine its position on the basis of avoiding
hasty decisions, of safeguarding the stability
of Lebanon and of confirming the fundamental
options under discussion in the national dialogue
committee, mainly dealing with the terms of the
Baabda Declaration and the presidential plan for a
national defence strategy”.
In that regard, it is also clearly fitting to remind
the Security Council that, on 19 July, the EU also
issued a landmark directive barring cooperation with,
and financial support to, Israeli entities and projects
beyond the 1967 line in the occupied territories of the
West Bank, East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights. It
might be a small step, as many have said, in view of the
guideline nature of the EU instrument, but it is indeed
an important step in the right direction. We strongly
welcome that development to ask whether or not it is
high time for the Council to also send a similar message,
indicating that continued occupation in violation of
international law can no longer benefit from impunity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Alyas (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Madam President, I would like to extend my
sincere congratulations on your country’s assumption
of the Security Council presidency for this month and
for convening this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East.
I would like also to express my country’s support for
the statements made, or to be made, by the speakers on
behalf of the League of Arab States, the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation and the Non-Aligned Movement.
I would also like to thank Mr. Robert Serry for his
comprehensive briefing on the topic.
Israel continues to violate international law and
the rights of the Palestinian people through acts that
include, inter alia, displacement, expulsion, arbitrary
detention and ill-treatment of prisoners. It also continues
its settlement policy in a quest to change the situation
on the ground. That includes, but is not limited to, the

13-4029831

S/PV.7007

confiscation and destruction of Palestinian homes, the
expansion of settlements, arrests, the use of excessive
violence against demonstrators and the continued
blockade on the Gaza Strip. In addition to all of that,
the latest evidence of Israel’s arrogance and its defiance
of the will of the international community came last
week, when it declared its intention to approve the
construction of a thousand new housing units in a
number of settlements.
Not only does Israel continue to ignore international
efforts to revive the peace process, but Israeli officials
make statements that threaten the success of the peace
process and the two-State solution. That merits broad
international condemnation. On the other hand, we have
closely monitored the statements and reports on the
possible resumption of the peace process between the
Palestinians and Israel. Consequently, my delegation
stresses the importance of not relying on hopes without
the international community continuing to pressure
Israel in order to make it understand that there is no
choice but peace and that this issue is not limited to
routine reviews in the Security Council’s deliberations.
Meanwhile, my delegation commends the latest
decisions of the European Union (EU) that emphasize
the illegitimacy of settlements built on the territories
of the West Bank and Jerusalem, and the inclusion
of a clause in any future agreements between the EU
and Israel emphasizing that those settlements are not
under Israel’s authority. Moreover, we commend the
decisions of the EU not to cooperate with Government
agencies, especially the ones in Israeli settlements
in East Jerusalem and the West Bank. We call on the
countries of the world to follow suit and take similar
steps to condemn the criminal Israeli actions against
Palestinian citizens.
The situation in Syria is deteriorating day by day.
To date, more that 100,000 people have been killed,
including more than 6,500 children under the age of
10. All of that occurs as the international community
remains silent and refrains from forcing the Syrian
regime to respond to the legitimate aspirations of the
Syrian people. The Syrian humanitarian crisis is a
source of shame for the conscience of the international
community, which stands paralysed on this issue. As
a result, the Syrian refugee crisis has attained historic
proportions, becoming the worst crisis since the
genocide in Rwanda, according to testimony in the
United Nations.

32

Through the resolutions of the General Assembly,
especially resolution 67/262 of 15 May 2013, the
majority of States Members of the United Nations has
condemned the Syrian regime, which has massacred
tens of thousands of Syrian people. Moreover, the
Human Rights Council last June condemned the Syrian
regime for its violations of the human rights of the Syrian
people. My delegation therefore stresses the importance
of implementing these decisions through international
measures to support the Syrian people and stop the
genocidal massacre being committed by the Syrian
regime, as well to prevent a spillover of the crisis in the
region, which would have serious consequences with
the intervention by third parties, such as the flagrant
interference of Hizbullah in Al-Qusayr.
Any delay by the international community in taking
action means more suffering for the helpless Syrian
people. History too will hold the Council accountable
for any such delay.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Machado (Brazil): The past few weeks have
once again witnessed important events in the Middle
East and in North Africa. Brazil warmly welcomes
the announcement by United States Secretary of State
John Kerry on July 19 that an agreement has been
reached regarding the basis for resuming direct final
status negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis.
That is an encouraging development, one that has the
potential for reversing the deadlock and paralysis that
have characterized the peace process in recent years.
We hope this renewed effort will lead to the full and
overdue realization of the two-State solution. It is an
opportunity that must not be missed.
The Security Council must provide active and
sustained support to the resumption of the peace process
and work towards its satisfactory completion. The
current situation, with the Council sidelined and sterile
efforts to promote peace remaining in the hands of
small groups such as the Quartet, should be called into
question. Brazil herewith renews its firm and continued
commitment to peace between Israel and Palestine and
remains ready to support a genuine agenda for peace.
As the parties prepare to re-engage in direct
negotiations, we must continue to help meet the
humanitarian needs of the Palestinians, which continue
to be quite substantial. The Brazilian Government
has just concluded an agreement with the World Food

13-40298

S/PV.7007

Programme and the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East for the
donation of 11,500 tons of rice.
As we continue to grapple with the challenges of
achieving peace between the Israelis and Palestinians,
let us not forget the role played by civil society in
the region, and allow those voices that have been
clamouring for peace to be heard.
Brazil remains deeply concerned with the situation
in Syria, where a human tragedy is unfolding with
spillover effects in the entire region. We reiterate our
unequivocal condemnation of all forms of violence,
by whomsoever committed. We renew our call for
an immediate ceasefire, an end to all violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law, and
safe, immediate and unimpeded humanitarian access to
those in need.
We remain strong supporters of the initiative to
convene another Geneva conference as soon as possible
in order to promote an inclusive, Syrian-led political
process leading to a transition that meets the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people. We renew our support
for the work of the Joint Special Representative in that
endeavour and encourage him to brief the General
Assembly on his initiatives.
Comprehensive negotiations are the only viable
option at hand. Brazil reiterates its repudiation of
actions that further militarize the conflict in Syria. We
call on all members of the international community,
including members of the Security Council, to heed
the recommendation of the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry and cease arms transfers to
all actors involved in the conflict. The argument that
providing weapons to the parties will help reach a
military balance and somehow contribute to the success
of the planned Geneva conference is seriously flawed.
It will only promote an arms race, which in turn will
further reduce the chances of a political understanding.
A diplomatic surge, not an arms surge, is the path
to a political settlement which this Council should
promote. Furthermore, it is clear that more weapons
can sadly lead to more human rights violations. In the
light of the conclusions of the Commission of Inquiry
that all parties have gravely violated human rights, the
protection of civilians requires fewer, not more, arms in
the hands of the parties.

In view of the grave deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Syria, we commend neighbouring countries
for the humanitarian assistance provided to Syrian
refugees. We recognize that the burden placed on
the shoulders of those exercising active and laudable
solidarity with the Syrians has been extremely heavy.
Brazil has been contributing financially through the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to mitigate the plight of the refugees and
internally displaced people.
Brazil has been following with great concern the
grave situation in Egypt. We urge all actors to seek
solutions to the challenges facing the country with full
respect for the institutions. We further call for dialogue
and reconciliation, so that the legitimate aspirations
of the Egyptian people to freedom, democracy and
prosperity can be achieved without violence and fully
within the democratic order.
Let me conclude with a brief comment on Lebanon.
It is particularly worrisome that the violence is
becoming more and more sectarian, creating further
challenges in a country as diverse as Lebanon.
More than ever, the international community must
strongly and effectively support President Michel
Sleiman and the Lebanese Government’s commitment
to the dissociation policy. Peace and stability in
Lebanon should be firmly upheld by the international
community, with the resolute involvement of the
Council, as exemplified by its presidential statement
of 10 July (S/PRST/2013/9), which we support. We call
on all parties in Syria to fully respect the sovereignty,
political independence and territorial unity of Lebanon.
It is in their own interest not to further destabilize the
country. We also call on all Lebanese actors to avoid
further escalation and to embark on the path of political
understanding.
The President: I now give the floor to the Permanent
Observer of the Holy See to the United Nations.
Archbishop Chullikatt (Holy See): Mr. President,
allow me to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and to thank you for
having convened this meeting.
The Holy See has repeatedly voiced its urgent
concern for the peace and welfare of all the peoples in
the Middle East, regardless of their ethnicity or religion.
Pope Francis, in his first Easter message, on 31 March
this year, appealed for:

13-4029833

S/PV.7007

“Peace for the Middle East, and particularly
between Israelis and Palestinians, who struggle to
find the road of agreement, that they may willingly
and courageously resume negotiations to end a
conflict that has lasted all too long. Peace … above
all for dear Syria, for its people torn by conflict
and for the many refugees who await help and
comfort. How much blood has been shed! And how
much suffering must there still be before a political
solution to the crisis is found?”
Given the extreme seriousness of what has been
unfolding in Syria, especially during these past few
months, my delegation wishes to focus its remarks
today on the unbearable suffering of its people.
The whole world has been shocked by the everincreasing statistics describing the dire humanitarian
situation in Syria. The tragedy of such an intolerable
situation demands from us immediate measures to
assist the some 1.8 million refugees who now seek
peace, security and safety in Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq,
Turkey and Egypt.
Further, there are over 4 million internally
displaced persons, constituting nearly 18 per cent of
the population, and 6.8 million victims of this conflict,
half of whom are children, require urgent humanitarian
assistance. More than 4 million people have lost their
homes. Moreover, the challenges faced by neighbouring
countries in assisting and protecting refugees appear to
contribute to the further political destabilization of the
region.
On the political front, this destructive conflict
is only being exacerbated by outside influences and
extremist groups, which see it as an opportunity
for political or ideological gains rather than as an
appalling disaster that is engulfing Syria. Today, while
recognizing that the conflict has negative repercussions
for everyone, my delegation would like to bring to the
international community’s attention the devastating
impact that the conflict is having on Syria’s Christian
population, a population which in its various traditions
has been present in the country for 2,000 years.
These days, the Christian community faces
numerous challenges to its very survival in the region.
Christians face, on the one hand, ideological extremist
groups that seek to eradicate them from the region, and,
on the other, continued insecurity for their families
and homes as they are left to fend for themselves. The
murder of the Catholic priest François Murad is just one

34

of the many heinous acts in a long series of kidnappings
of Christians, including bishops and priests, and of
gruesome killings of innocent civilians. Christians have
also witnessed the destruction of more than 60 of their
churches and affiliated institutions. Here I would like
to thank the representative of Togo for having kindly
remembered the murder of Father Murad.
In many cases, they have had to seek ways and
means, in the midst of dangerous and life-threatening
circumstances, to safeguard their treasured sacred
objects and priceless manuscripts and artifacts
bearing witness to their bi-millennial tradition and
culture, which constitutes a veritable world heritage of
outstanding universal value for the whole of humanity.
These pertinent remarks are not indicative of any
lack of concern on the part of the Holy See for the
suffering that afflicts each and every Syrian citizen,
regardless of religion or ethnicity. Rather, they are
a fitting expression of the solicitude of the Holy See
for the whole Christian family and of what should be
the serious apprehension of the entire world about
the overlooked fate of so many thousands of victims,
including Christians as well as other ethnic and
religious minorities, who find themselves ruthlessly
targeted in that conflict through no fault of their own,
and who now, caught in the crossfire, are struggling
for their very survival. My delegation is convinced
that there can be no social progress and no justice if
religious and ethnic minorities are not accorded their
rightful place as full members of society.
The persistent refusal on the part of both sides to
the conflict to engage in a meaningful political dialogue
aimed at building a reconciled Syria augurs only more
deaths, fear, hatred and destruction. As has been stated
many times in this Chamber and in other international
forums, there can be no military solution to the Syrian
conflict. Regardless of this, the parties to the conflict
manifest the determination, with total impunity, to
shed yet more blood, to supply yet more weapons and
to destroy more lives before they can be brought to the
negotiating table.
War can never more be considered a means of
resolving conflicts. Yet war, when it occurs, can be won
only through peace; yes, peace won through negotiations,
dialogue and reconciliation. It is my delegation’s hope,
therefore, that the international community can find
the courage to reconcile its differences and show the
political determination necessary to pave the path to

13-40298

S/PV.7007

the much-awaited “Geneva II” conference, so as to help
all parties to the conflict rediscover the indispensable
path of dialogue with a view to reaching a concerted
and negotiated solution.
My delegation commends every effort to that end
and calls upon all responsible parties to desist from
hindering the long-overdue negotiated settlement of this
conflict. Peace in Syria makes us all winners, whereas
enduring conflict surely guarantees only losers.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.
Mr. Storaci: I have the honour of speaking on behalf
of the European Union (EU). The former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Albania, Ukraine and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.
The European Union warmly welcomes the
announcement by United States Secretary of State
John Kerry on 19 July that an agreement had been
reached establishing a basis for resuming direct final
status negotiations between the Palestinians and the
Israelis. This is a crucial step towards achieving a
lasting resolution to the conflict. The European Union
commends Secretary Kerry’s dedication and the
personal commitment demonstrated by Prime Minister
Netanyahu and President Abbas.
The European Union also praises the significant
efforts made by the League of Arab States to confirm
the strategic importance of the Arab Peace Initiative
for all parties.
Given the challenging negotiations ahead and
the difficult decisions to be taken, the continued bold
leadership of President Abbas and Prime Minister
Netanyahu and their sustained willingness to engage in
good faith will be crucial to success. Once negotiations
resume, they should lead to tangible and timely progress.
The European Union urges all parties to refrain from
actions that could undermine the negotiation process
and the prospects for peace.
The European Union recalls its previous Council
conclusions laying down its vision for the two-State
solution, resulting in an agreement on all final status
issues, ending all claims, and fulfilling the legitimate
aspiration of both parties, with the State of Israel and
an independent, democratic, contiguous, sovereign and
viable State of Palestine living side by side in peace and

security and mutual recognition, both States enjoying
normal relations with all the countries of the region. It
also recalls previous conclusions and will continue to
address all issues that put the viability of the two-State
solution at risk.
The European Union will remain fully engaged with
both parties and will also continue to contribute, together
with other regional and international partners, including
within the Quartet, to a negotiated solution on all final
status issues, including Jerusalem, borders, security,
water and refugees. The European Union will give
active and concrete support to help ensure negotiations
between the parties are successful, including through
support to any international arrangements aimed at
underpinning a peace agreement. If an agreement to
finally end this conflict were reached, the door would
open to deepened and enhanced cooperation between
the European Union and all the countries of the region,
contributing to the prospects for a new era of peace,
security and prosperity.
I will continue with a shortened statement. I would
ask participants to refer to the distributed text for the
whole statement.
With regard to the situation in Syria, the EU is
appalled by the disastrous humanitarian situation and
the continuing military crackdown of the regime, in
particular the relentless shelling of Homs, as well as the
denial of humanitarian access for the United Nations
and other humanitarian actors, which we deplore. We
are also alarmed by reports of the increasing brutality
of certain armed opposition groups. The European
Union demands that all parties ensure immediate,
regular, safe, unfettered and unimpeded access for aid
organizations to those in need in all areas of Syria, and
through all possible routes and channels, including
across borders and across conflict lines. In that regard,
the EU strongly supports the appeal made by UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Valerie
Amos on the Council on 16 July, and in that connection
calls on the Security Council to fully shoulder its
responsibilities.
The EU welcomes and strongly supports the joint
initiative of the United States and Russia to bring about
a political settlement in Syria by convening a Geneva
conference. The EU welcomes the Syrian National
Coalition’s enlargement, which will allow for an
effective, representative and cohesive participation of
the opposition at this conference.

13-4029835

S/PV.7007

The EU is deeply concerned over the involvement of
extremist and foreign non-State actors in the fighting in
Syria on all warring sides, and with the rising sectarian
tension in Lebanon and Iraq.

the call of President Sleiman to abide in practice by
Lebanon’s policy of dissociation from the Syrian
conflict, and to continue to genuinely commit to this and
other principles enshrined in the Baabda Declaration.

The EU reiterates the importance of the role of the
independent international commission of inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic, and expresses grave concern
about the findings reflected in its latest report. The
EU reaffirms that there will be no impunity for any
violation and abuse of human rights or international
humanitarian law, and recalls that the Council can refer
the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court at any time, as requested in the letter from the
Chargé d’Affaires of Switzerland to the Council of
14 January 2013 (S/2013/19).

The European Union urges a prompt formation of
a new Lebanese Government, and further encourages
Lebanese political leaders to resume their deliberations
over the electoral framework and the arrangements for
parliamentary elections.

The European Union is gravely concerned by the
recent assessment on the use of chemical weapons and
agents within Syria. The EU therefore once again urges
the Syrian authorities to grant the United Nations factfinding mission full and unfettered access to all sites of
alleged use of chemical weapons without delay.
Please allow me to turn to Lebanon. The European
Union fully subscribes to the content of the presidential
statement on Lebanon of 10 July 2013 (S/PRST/2013/9).
The European Union commends Lebanon’s decision to
keep its borders open to all refugees. In its generous
efforts of hosting and assisting these refugees, the
Lebanese authorities, however, face serious challenges
that have wide-ranging humanitarian, political, security
and socioeconomic implications.
The European Union has provided over €113 million
in support for Lebanon since the beginning of the crisis
and is committed to continuing its assistance.
The European Union reaffirms its support to the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, to which EU
member States actively contribute, and underlines the
importance of Lebanon’s continued commitment to the
full implementation of the relevant Council resolutions
and other international obligations, including those of
the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.
The EU notes with deep concern the involvement
of Lebanese parties in the fighting in Syria, including
Hizbullah’s openly acknowledged participation. It
also underscores its growing concern at cross-border
shelling and rocket fire from Syria into Lebanon, and
reiterates that violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty are
unacceptable. We urge all Lebanese actors to heed

36

Let me conclude with a few words on the situation
in Egypt, which we follow with great concern. The EU
greatly values its relationship with Egypt and continues
to stand with the Egyptian people in their struggle for
dignity, democracy, social justice and a decent life.
Yesterday, the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the EU
agreed to the Council’s conclusions on Egypt, which
outline the EU’s positions and concerns and to which
we refer. Let me reaffirm three key messages.
It is of utmost importance that Egypt embark on a
transition, allowing a transfer of power to a civilianled and democratically elected Government. Inclusivity
remains central to this process. All parties must refrain
from violence, and security and public order must be
maintained, while showing restraint and full respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms. The EU
stands ready to assist the Egyptian people in their
desire for a democratic and prosperous future.
I wish to add one point with regard to the European
Commission guidelines published last Friday, to which
the Permanent Representative of Israel and others
referred. Let me quote a statement made by the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy in that regard. That
document
“reiterates the long-held position that bilateral
agreements with Israel do not cover the territory
that came under Israel’s administration in June
1967”.
This is meant to clarify the European Union’s position
in advance of negotiations of agreements with Israel
during the forthcoming EU Financial Perspective
commencing in 2014. In no way will this pre-judge the
outcome of peace negotiations between Israelis and
Palestinians. The EU’s long-held position is that it will
recognize changes made to the borders once they are
agreed to by both parties. In that way, the EU hopes to
create an atmosphere for meaningful and sustainable

13-40298

S/PV.7007

negotiations leading to a peace agreement between the
parties.
However, the specific provisions of the guidelines
will not be implemented before 1 January 2014. In
the meanwhile, the EU looks forward to working and
consulting with Israel on a broad range of bilateral
issues, and has invited Israel to hold discussions on
the territorial scope of agreements with the European
Union that are currently under preparation.
The President: I now give the floor to the Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People.
Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): I thank you, Madam,
for your leadership of the Council this month. I also
thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Process, for his comprehensive briefing.
The volatile regional environment should not
deflect our attention from the Israeli-Palestinian track.
Finding a durable and just solution to this conflict is no
less important. The relative calm that prevails for now
could signal more turbulence.
We welcome the announcement in Amman with
regard to the conclusion of an agreement setting the
bases for the resumption of talks between Israelis and
Palestinians. The Committee appreciates the intense
diplomatic activity of the American Secretary of State,
John Kerry, who enjoys the support of the Arab League
follow-up committee, as well as of many heads of State.
It is imperative for the international community
to pursue its commitment in order to ensure that the
parties live up to their promises, negotiate in good faith
and refrain from any action that could jeopardize the
negotiation process. Just last month, the Committee
convened in Beijing an international meeting on the
Israeli-Palestinian peace talks. The large number of
participants and the extensive media coverage showed
that the international community sees this as a priority
issue. The Committee sincerely thanks the Chinese
Government for hosting thr event and is grateful to the
Chinese experts for their active participation.
The need to redouble longstanding efforts to
reach a negotiated two-State settlement was widely
recognized among participants at the conference.
Speakers appreciated the renewed engagement of the
United States and believed that the energetic diplomatic
efforts of Secretary of State John Kerry should be given
a chance to show results. They appreciated China’s

efforts and initiatives and welcomed the dynamic role
played by the League of Arab States. Nonetheless, they
regretted that other key stakeholders, such as the Council
and the Quartet, remained on the sidelines. They were
also deeply troubled by Israel’s refusal to abide by
its legal obligation to halt all settlement activities, to
respect the 1967 borders and to free prisoners, which
blocks any progress.
July marks nine years since the issuance of the
International Court of Justice advisory opinion (see
A/ES-10/273)that reaffirmed the illegal nature of
all settlements and called on Israel to dismantle the
separation wall and compensate Palestinians for all
damages. It has been 34 years since the adoption of
resolution 446 (1979), in which the Security Council
called on Israel to stop transferring settlers to
occupied territories. Both texts remain dead letters.
The construction of the wall continues, causing grave
humanitarian hardship. The first quarter of 2013 saw
an alarming rise in settlement activity, as compared to
2012.
The recent European Commission directive that
bans all European Union funding for Israeli projects
in the settlements is a first concrete step towards
preventing the development of those settlements.
We welcome it and hope it will be followed by other
measures. It sends a strong message and shows that the
international community has ran out of patience with
regard to Israeli settlements. The Israeli leadership
should pay heed and act wisely if they do not wish
to irreparably harm the efforts being made to restart
negotiations.
The Committee will continue to remind States
Members of the United Nations of their obligation to
ensure Israel’s compliance with international law. It
will keep calling for the lifting of the siege on Gaza, in
line with resolution 1860 (2009). We hope that, despite
regional upheavals, Palestinians will not lose sight of
the goal of reconciliation, without which there can be
no two-State solution, as the deadline for elections
and for constituting a Government of national unity
approaches.We will continue to mobilize assistance for
Palestinian State institutions. The Committee can be
relied upon to support all efforts to relaunch good-faith
negotiations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.

13-4029837

S/PV.7007

Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to express our appreciation for the excellent briefing by
Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process.
The delegation of Egypt supports the statements
to be delivered by the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and by representative of Djibouti on behalf
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. I wish to
add some additional points.
First, Egypt supports the recent efforts by the
United States aimed at resuming peace negotiations,
following a number of visits by the Secretary of
State to the region. Those efforts recently led to the
announcement that direct talks between the two parties
would resume shortly. We hope those efforts will
result in real progress soon, before we reach a point
of no return regarding the two-State solution. We also
reaffirm that United States mediation efforts are not
enough by themselves. The Israeli side must also show
the political necessary for the negotiations to succeed.
They must choose between peace and settlements, and
choose peace rather than settlements. Egypt also looks
forward to reviving the road map of the Quartet once
peace negotiations have resumed.
Secondly, Egypt supports Palestine’s position that
negotiations should start on the basis of the 1967 borders
and a stop to settlement activities. It emphasizes that
demands made by Palestine are not preconditions; they
only reflect a legitimate call for the implementation of
the relevant United Nations resolutions.
Thirdly, Egypt condemns the continued Israeli
attacks on Palestinians in the occupied territories,
the persistent violence by Israeli settlers against
unarmed Palestinians and the destruction of Palestinian
property. It calls for the immediate release of thousands
of Palestinian prisoners being held in Israeli detention
centres and for an end to the violations to which they
are subjected.
Fourthly, Egypt condemns the illegal Israeli
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territories, especially in East Jerusalem and surrounding
areas. It calls on the international community to take
firm measures to stop those illegal acts, which most
recently include Israel’s plan to expel the population
of eight Palestinian villages in southern Hebron under
the pretext that they fall within the scope of a military
training area, as well as the approval by the Israeli

38

Knesset of a law on the organized resettlement of
Bedouins in the Negev. In that connection, Egypt recalls
that, in March 2012, the Commission on the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination determined that the draft law
would legalize racist practices against Arab citizens
in Israel in order to settle the Arab population on the
smallest land area.
We also call for a halt to the approval by Israeli
authorities of a public park south of Jerusalem. One
fifth of that park is to be built on Palestinian land — an
innovative form of land confiscation.
Egypt commends the recent decision of the
European Union to exclude the settlements from
any future agreement with Israel. It clearly indicates
non-recognition of Israeli sovereignty over the
Arab territories occupied since 1967. Egypt views
this decisions as a step in the right direction, a step
towards the two-State solution, and a step to resist
the intensification of settlements. We hope that it will
convince Israel to stop building settlements, instead of
restricting the activities of the European Union in the
West Bank in response.
Fifth, Egypt rejects the illegal Israeli blockade
imposed on the Gaza Strip, as well as the restrictions
imposed on the Palestinian Authority. They have led
to the destruction of the Palestinian economy and the
deterioration of the living conditions of the Palestinians.
Sixth, the Egyptian security forces are addressing
the security threats in Sinai, in accordance with the
provisions of the peace accords.
Seventh, Egypt reaffirms situation in the region
should not distract us from the developments related
to the question of Palestine, or from the need to stop
the settlement activities and establish the independent
State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Nevertheless, we also call for an immediate end to
the violence in Syria, urgent assistance to the Syrian
refugees, and the provision of the necessary support to
the countries hosting them. We reaffirm the importance
of preserving the unity and territorial integrity of Syria,
while maintaining the cohesion of Syrian society.
The current situation in Syria in no way justifies
the continued occupation of the Syrian Golan. We call
for the implementation of Security Council resolutions
related to the occupied Syrian Golan, including the
Israeli withdrawal from the Syrian territories. We
are deeply concerned by the increasing breaches of

13-40298

S/PV.7007

Lebanese airspace by the Israeli air force, in violation
of Lebanon’s sovereignty and in contravention of the
United Nations Charter, international law, and the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Egypt once again calls on the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibilities by taking the necessary
measures for the immediate cessation of the illegal
Israeli settlements activities and ensuring a final
solution, especially since the question of Palestine has
been and still is the main reason behind the instability
in the Middle East region which threatens international
peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): We thank you, Madam, for
organizing this open debate. The Middle East is going
through a significant period of transition and change.
At the heart of the challenges we face in the region still
lies the Palestinian question. This issue continues to
undermine the prospects for regional peace, cooperation
and welfare.
Turkey has always supported a two-State solution
based on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the
capital of the State of Palestine, living side by side in
peace and security with Israel, and with us on an equal
footing under this roof. The revival of the Middle East
peace process and the resumption of comprehensive
peace negotiations between the parties for a just and
lasting solution have become increasingly crucial.
In this regard, we appreciate and support the
recent efforts of United States Secretary of State John
Kerry towards a breakthrough in revitalizing talks
between the parties. Another chance for a viable twoState solution should not be missed. We encourage the
parties to commit to preparing a solid ground for talks
on the basis of 1967 borders, with agreed land swaps.
Parties must build confidence, including settlement
freeze, prisoner release and security arrangements for
both sides. We also believe that any provocative step
against holy sites, especially the Al-Aqsa mosque, must
be avoided.
I would like to reiterate once again that Turkey
is, as always, ready to contribute to all international
efforts towards a just and lasting settlement.
Unfortunately, Israel’s illegal settlement activities
in occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, remain a major obstacle to meaningful

negotiations. It is time to seriously commit to and
respect the established parameters of the peace process.
The worrying situation of the Palestinian prisoners
under Israeli custody continues to be yet another source
of great concern.
We are following closely the developments
regarding the recent European Union guidelines
banning funding and other provisions in relation to the
occupied territories.
It goes without saying that the blockade on Gaza
is inhumane, illegal and unsustainable. We repeat our
call on the Israeli Government to lift the blockade,
in accordance with its bilateral and multilateral
commitments. In the meantime, Turkey will continue
to fully support Palestinian reconciliation, which we
believe constitutes one of the bases of a lasting solution
and peace in the Middle East. We strongly support the
goal of establishing a unity Government, embracing
the Palestinian people as a whole, within the timeframe
determined in Cairo on 14 May.
The achievement of Palestinian reconciliation
and unity must enjoy importance and priority in the
search for a fair, comprehensive and viable solution
to save Palestine from the yoke of occupation. Turkey
will continue to support the Peace Process, as well as
the rightful aspirations of the Palestinian people to
internationally recognized statehood in accordance
with United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles,
the road map and the Arab Peace Initiative.
This is the third Ramadan that the Syrian people
are living the inhumane and indiscriminate attacks by
the Syrian regime. The situation in Syria is already
the biggest humanitarian tragedy of the twenty-first
century. The crisis is increasingly threatening regional
peace and security, as well as posing a grave burden on
Syria’s neighbours.
There is an immediate need for a political
solution paving the way for a democratic transition in
accordance with the legitimate demands of the Syrian
people. However, the prospect for a peaceful settlement
will remain elusive so long as the attacks of the regime
continue unabated with heavy weapons, including
ballistic missiles and chemical weapons. This is totally
unacceptable.
We must act urgently to stop the attacks of
the regime, protect the people of Syria, ensure the
withdrawal of foreign militia forces from Syria, and

13-4029839

S/PV.7007

start the democratic transition process. In this vein,
we once again call on the Security Council to assume
its responsibilities and act urgently, resolutely and
collectively.
Let me conclude by reiterating that 2013 is vital for
peace in the Middle East, and it is now time for sincere
and concrete action. We need to seize any momentum
that will help to revitalize the talks between the parties
and take concerted action towards a two-State solution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation reiterates its forceful rejection
of the insistence of certain delegations on diverting the
deliberations of the Security Council on the item “The
situation in the Middle East” from the primary purpose
for which it was established by forcibly introducing
other topics outside the scope of the item, such as the
internal situations in Syria, Egypt, Lebanon or other
countries. Their objective is clearly to marginalize the
Israeli occupation of Arab territories, to demote it on
the list of United Nations priorities, and to nullify the
terms of reference and substance of the item, which,
as we all know, is connected primarily to the effort to
end the Israeli occupation and to achieve a settlement of
the Arab-Israeli conflict in accordance with the wellknown terms of reference.
It was very strange to hear the Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General disregard, in
his briefing this morning, the clear legal description
of the occupied Syrian Golan accepted by the United
Nations. He continually referred to “the Golan” rather
than to “the occupied Syrian Golan”, which is the
accepted expression used in the United Nations. On
top of that was his failure to address the importance
of ending the Israeli occupation of the Golan in
accordance with Security Council resolutions. He also
failed to highlight the cooperation between Israel, on
one side, and the armed terrorist groups that are active
in the area of separation in the Golan, on the other side.
I will not respond to the arguments and claims
of certain delegations about my country under the
agenda item for this meeting, because I do not wish
to contribute to efforts that serve only the continuing
Israeli occupation and the policies of those who protect
it. I should say, however, that we have much to say in
refutation and dissection of the claims made by the
delegations of the same States that support, shelter and

40

arm the terrorists spreading destruction and extremism
in Syria and working very hard to ensure the failure
of any peaceful solution to the crisis under Syrian
leadership. In that regard, I would name in particular
the Governments of Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Turkey,
as well as various well-known Western States, as was
recently confirmed by Zbigniew Brzezinski, a former
United States National Security Advisor, and Roland
Dumas, a former Minister for Foreign Affairs of France.
The Israeli occupation of the Arab territories and
its consequences for the peace and security of the area
have reached dangerous levels, in the context of the
international community’s failure to compel Israel to
end the occupation in compliance with the relevant
international resolutions and to halt Israel’s gross
violations of international conventions, particularly
the 1949 Geneva Conventions, and its continuing and
unprecedented settlement activity and expulsion of
Arab peoples from their lands. In that regard, it is very
strange that certain countries that feign enthusiasm
for the protection of civilians and respect for human
rights lose that enthusiasm where Israeli violations are
concerned, depriving the Palestinian people of their
right to self-determination and to rid themselves of
the racist Israeli occupation. In that regard, we should
point out the dangers of Israel’s pursuit of what is called
the Prawer Plan, which effectively seeks to confiscate
800,000 dunums of Arab lands in the Negev, destroy
36 Arab villages and displace 45,000 Palestinian
residents from their homes in order to build Israeli
settlements instead, in order to further its plans for
ethnic cleansing and Judaization, practised by Israel in
full view of merchants of crisis around the world.
The suffering of Syrian citizens continues under
the Israeli occupation in the Syrian Golan, in the
absence of the international will needed to end that
occupation in accordance with relevant United Nations
resolutions, especially resolution 497 (1981), and in the
context of the impotence of international human rights
mechanisms and the failure to take steps to end Israel’s
methodical and gross violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law in the Golan. There has
unfortunately been no serious international movement
to end those violations, or to halt the campaign of
settlement, oppression and racial discrimination, as well
as the kidnapping of Syrian citizens from the area of
separation and Israel’s construction of a separation wall
in the occupied Golan. Almost 46 years have passed
since Israel occupied the Golan and began its barbaric

13-40298

S/PV.7007

practices there. Unfortunately, during that time, we
have heard no one call for meetings aimed at defending
and protecting the population of the Golan suffering
under the occupation or those displaced by Israel from
their lands. We have heard no one call for conferences
to be held to collect humanitarian assistance for those
people — not to mention the fact that the enthusiasm of
certain parties for establishing commissions of inquiry
suddenly evaporated when it came to the occupied
Syrian Golan.
Thanks to this international silence concerning
such Israeli practices, Israel went so far as to commit
an act of aggression against Syrian territories on
5 May, and has continued to threaten further such
acts. We would like to state here that Israel’s continued
perpetration of such acts of aggression has increased
tension in the area to unprecedented levels that could
lead to the outbreak of a widespread regional war,
which could threaten international peace and security.
The continuing practice of certain permanent members
of the Security Council of providing cover for acts
of aggression and occupation of Arab territories by
Israel makes them partners in those acts and entirely
responsible for their consequences.
Israeli occupation forces are providing assistance
to terrorist groups in the area of separation in Golan
by transporting injured terrorists across the line of
separation to Israeli hospitals, where they are treated
and returned to Syrian territory across the line of
separation, where they can continue their terrorist
activities in that very sensitive area. We should focus
on the fact that such Israeli assistance to terrorists
is not merely a blatant violation of the Separation of
Forces Agreement, the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) and
international law, it also puts the lives of United Nations
forces there at risk and undermines their work. That
is exactly what happened when, on several occasions,
terrorist groups kidnapped members of UNDOF’s staff
with direct incitement by Qatari intelligence. This is a
very grave matter, and we are still awaiting the results
of the Under-Secretary-General’s investigation of it.
In conclusion, there are those whom it behooves
not to continue deceiving themselves and the rest of
the world or providing justifications and excuses for
Israel. It is well known to all that Israel is a settlement
entity built on ethnic cleansing and that it has thus
never been concerned with peace. It has responded to
every peace initiative with postponements, diversions

and justifications about what they falsely term security
concerns, at the expense of the Arab population, which
has now been living under the Israeli occupation for
decades.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I will be making a shorter
statement and circulating the full text.
Malaysia associates itself with the statements to be
made by the representatives of Iran, on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, and of Djibouti, on behalf of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Malaysians join other Muslims around the world
in observing this Islamic holy month of Ramadan. At
the same time, our thoughts are with our fellows of the
Ummah who face oppression and subjugation under the
ongoing illegal Israeli occupation. As a member of the
United Nations Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices in the Occupied Palestinian Territories, we
participated in a fact-finding mission to Amman and
Cairo last month, where we heard disturbing testimony
by witnesses. The situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory continues to deteriorate, and as Israel
continues to build illegal settlements, the window for
peace is slowly closing.
The Special Committee was told that Israel had
reinstated the three-nautical-mile limit on fishermen
from Gaza and conducted numerous arrests, as well as
confiscating boats. That has led to a decrease of 60 per
cent in the total amount of fish caught this year, which
in turn has contributed to the 80 per cent poverty rate
among Palestinian fishermen. We also heard testimony
that farmers from Gaza have had to face danger in
farming on their own lands where they fall in the
deadly buffer zone, where Israeli soldiers have fired
indiscriminately at people as far as 300 to 1,000 metres
away. By the end of last year, that heinous practice had
claimed the lives of five Palestinians and resulted in
another 92 injured.
The economic blockade on Gaza, including the
near total restriction on exports, is producing chilling
results. My delegation reiterates its condemnation of
that illegal blockade, which is now in its seventh year,
and calls for an end to such cynical and deliberate
Israeli policies of collective punishment towards the
Palestinian people.

13-4029841

S/PV.7007

My delegation also remains deeply concerned about
the illegal detention of more than 5,000 Palestinian
prisoners. What is more alarming is the detention of
approximately 200 Palestinian children. The appalling
conditions that the children have had to endure will do
nothing but inflict long-term psychological damage on
such young minds. We therefore demand the release of
all Palestinian children in Israeli detention centres.
It is no surprise to us that Israel also continues to
contravene international law with impunity elsewhere
in the Middle East. Early this year, Israel granted
exclusive rights to a United States-Israeli company
to drill for oil in half of the occupied Syrian Golan
Heights — a blatant violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention.
With regard to the Middle East peace process,
Malaysia is keenly observing the developments leading
up to the potential resumption of direct negotiations. We
recognize the progress made by the shuttle diplomacy
of Secretary of State John Kerry. We wish him well and
offer our support for his tireless efforts to try to bring
the two sides together.
It is therefore timely to reiterate our support for a
two-State solution based on the borders of 4 June 1967,
with East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine.
My delegation also commends the European Union
for its recently announced European Commission
guidelines, which backs up its position and political
commitments with effective sanctions against Israeli
settlement practices.
Turning to the situation in Syria, Malaysia
welcomes the United States-Russia initiative to organize
an international conference. We stress the need for an
immediate cessation to violence and underscore the
importance of dialogue to reach a political solution.
Malaysians empathize with the suffering of the Syrian
people. Nevertheless, in our view, only the Syrian
people can decide on their own destiny. We therefore
continue to believe that a Syrian-led inclusive political
process is the way forward, based on resolutions 2042
(2012) and 2043 (2012), as well as the final communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) of the Action Group for Syria
issued in Geneva on 30 June 2012.
To conclude, Malaysia reiterates its support
for Lebanon in its efforts to fully liberate all of its
territories. In that regard, we urge Israel to fully
implement resolution 1701 (2006), which calls for a

42

permanent ceasefire and for the complete withdrawal
of Israeli troops from Lebanon, with full respect for the
Blue Line.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Umemoto (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to thank the United States Mission for its leadership
in convening this open debate. I also express my
appreciation to Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing.
Japan has long understood the aspiration of
Palestinians to build an independent State and has
supported the right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination. Japan therefore endorses a two-State
solution, under which Israel and a future independent
Palestinian State would coexist, side by side, in peace
and security.
From that standpoint, Japan sincerely welcomes
the announcement made by United States Secretary
of State Kerry last week in Amman on an agreement
that establishes a basis for resuming direct final-status
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians. The
entire international community should now mobilize
the political and economic means at its disposal to help
Israel and Palestine overcome their differences.
At this critical juncture, Japanese Foreign
Minister Kishida will visit Israel, Palestine and Jordan
starting today. Through bilateral meetings with his
counterparts, he will urge both parties to conduct
frank and meaningful negotiations in order to make
substantial progress, based on the agreement announced
by Secretary of State Kerry.
My Minister is also scheduled to chair a
ministerial-level meeting with Israel, Palestine and
Jordan to discuss the “corridor for peace and prosperity”.
That initiative, which Japan launched in 2006 with the
aim of developing a sustainable Palestinian economy,
has been making tangible progress. Several companies
have expressed interest in its flagship project, the
Jericho Agro-Industrial Park. Japan looks forward to
future investments coming from various countries and
areas for that project.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
our commitment to the Middle East peace process
and to close cooperation with the United States, Arab
countries, Europe and other partners. In that context,
Japan will continue to actively promote its initiative

13-40298

S/PV.7007

of the conference on cooperation among East Asian
countries for Palestinian development.
With regard to Syria, Japan is deeply concerned
about the serious and escalating situation there. Japan
profoundly deplores the death of many thousands
of people as a result of violence, which continues
despite the Secretary-General’s appeal to its cessation
during Ramadan. The briefings to the Council by
United Nations humanitarian agencies last week (see
S/PV.7000) were yet another occasion to hear appalling
accounts of the tragic incidents taking place daily on
the ground. Japan concurs with the Council’s concern,
expressed in a presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/9)
adopted on 10 July, at the risk of the regionalization of
the Syrian conflict, especially its growing impact on
Lebanon’s stability.
Faced with this scourge of war, the entire
international community urgently needs to address the
rapidly deteriorating humanitarian situation in Syria.
Japan remains committed to significantly contributing
to such international efforts. Japan’s support through
international organizations and non-governmental
organizations now totals $90 million. Japan has also been
disbursing ¥ 240 million in loans for the stabilization of
Jordan. As part of cross-border assistance, Japan will
provide assistance in health services and other areas
to local residents, in cooperation with the assistance
units of opposition groups and local non-governmental
organizations.
Humanitarian assistance, however, cannot be an
end in itself. The political process needs to be engaged
as a matter of urgency. In that respect, it is regrettable
that recent military offensives by the Syrian army have
made it even more difficult to convene the “Geneva II”
conference. Japan condemns the Syrian authorities for
not keeping their commitments and responsibilities to
protect their own citizens, and calls upon all parties in
Syria to immediately halt the violence and human rights
abuses. We must all strive to create an appropriate
environment that will bring about an early Syrianled political transition. Japan hopes to see the Syrian
National Coalition play a major role in advancing the
political process under the leadership of its newlyelected President Ahmed Al-Jarba.
Before concluding, I would like to briefly touch
upon Egypt. Following the swearing in of the interim
President Adly Mansour, an interim Government has
been set up and begun working according to its political

road map. Japan calls on all the relevant parties to desist
from acts of violence and to exhibit maximum selfrestraint and responsibility. At the same time, Japan
hopes that Egypt will return to a democratically elected
civilian Government as soon as possible through an
inclusive process that respects human rights and the
rule of law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Djibouti.
Miss Hassan (Djibouti): I would like to clarify that
my delegation has the honour to speak on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), as that fact
has not been reflected in the list of speakers.
I congratulate the United States for assuming the
presidency this month and commend you, Mr. President,
for the way you are steering its work. I would like also
to thank Mr. Robert Serry for his briefing today.
I wish to express the appreciation and support of
the OIC for the efforts of Secretary of State John Kerry
aimed at resuming the Israeli-Palestinian peace talks.
Those timely efforts are essential to achieving the lofty
goal of resolving the thorny Arab-Israeli conflict. We
hope that Secretary Kerry will succeed in bringing the
parties back to the negotiation table, as the implications
of missing fundamental opportunities are certainly
unfavourable, especially at a time when the situation in
the Middle East is highly unstable and volatile.
Despite the promising reality that has emerged
from the recent efforts exerted by Secretary Kerry
to revitalize Israeli-Palestinian peace negotiations,
Israel, the occupying Power, has persisted in carrying
out illegal practices aimed at fortifying its decadeslong occupation of the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem.
In that regard, the OIC believes that Israeli settlement
activities, chiefly in occupied East Jerusalem, which
have markedly escalated recently, remain the core
challenge that needs to be seriously addressed. There is
no doubt that, at a time when well-intended efforts have
been made to give a new lease on life to the Middle East
peace process, the continuation of the illegal Israeli
settlement activities, in violation of international law
and peace commitments, will only undermine prospects
for the two-State solution and destabilize the region.
Hence, Israel’s willingness to engage in serious peace
negotiations will depend upon its genuine readiness

13-4029843

S/PV.7007

to halt all of its settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including in East Jerusalem.
The OIC, which has endorsed the Arab Peace
Initiative, believes that efforts to resolve the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict should be carried out
within the widely agreed upon parameters, particularly
the well-established principle of Israel’s withdrawal
from the territories that it occupied in 1967, and the
establishment of the independent Palestinian State
on those territories. That raises the need for Israel
to unequivocally accept the 1967 borders in order to
facilitate the resumption of peace negotiations. At the
same time, Israel, the occupying Power, should carry
out several confidence-building measures that can
create an environment favourable to the resumption of
peace negotiations. Releasing Palestinian detainees,
especially those detained prior to the signing of the
Oslo Accords, remains an important cornerstone in that
regard.
In addition, the removal of Israeli restrictions
imposed on the mobility of Palestinians and the
prevention of acts of terror by fanatical Israeli settlers
against Palestinian civilians are important steps that
should be taken prior to recommencing negotiations.
In that connection, the OIC welcomes the decision of
the European Union (EU) to exclude Israeli settlements
from any future agreement with any EU country, and
to prohibit funding, cooperation and the issuance of
scholarship or research grants to any Israeli individuals
or institutions located in the settlements situated in the
Palestinian and Arab territories occupied since 1967.
Nevertheless, the OIC is very concerned about the
human rights violations against Palestinians in Israeli
jails. The deaths of Palestinian prisoners in an Israeli
jail early this year not only exposed the inhuman
policies and systematic violations perpetrated by the
Israeli occupation against Palestinian prisoners, it
also requires urgent intervention by the international
community to take effective action in order to defend
the Palestinian prisoners’ human rights, save their lives
and pressure Israel to respect its obligations towards
Palestinian detainees in accordance with international
humanitarian law and the Geneva Conventions, and to
release them immediately.
The Organization of Islamic Cooperation is very
much concerned about the deteriorating situation
in Syria and the ongoing bloodshed, violence and
destruction of property. The OIC stresses the need

44

to preserve Syria’s unity, sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity. The OIC therefore calls for
the immediate cessation of violence, killing and
destruction, for respect for Islamic values and human
rights, and for saving Syria from the danger of an allout civil war.
The OIC urges the Syrian regime to show wisdom
and to engage in serious dialogue with the opposition
in order to pave the way for a transition process that
allows the Syrian people to achieve their legitimate
aspirations for democratic reforms and changes.
However, while reiterating the OIC’s commitment
to a peaceful solution to the crisis in Syria, the OIC
calls upon the international community, in particular
the Security Council, to assume its responsibilities
and act promptly to stop the killing, destruction and
displacement perpetrated against the Syrian people,
and to find a peaceful and lasting solution to the Syrian
crisis.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm the full support
and solidarity of the OIC with the Palestinian people,
in their endeavour to regain their legitimate and
inalienable national rights, including their right of
return, self- determination and the establishment of
their independent Palestinian State on their national
soil, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): It is an
honour for me to address the Security Council on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) at this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine.
Since the last open debate (see S/PV.6950), despite
regional and international peace initiatives and efforts,
Israel, the occupying Power, has continued its policy of
the colonization of Palestine. The occupying Power’s
settlement campaign reached a seven-year high in
the first quarter of this year alone, in violation of the
relevant resolutions and in grave breach of international
law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention.
Palestinian civilians have continued to be arrested,
detained and forcibly displaced. The occupying forces
have continued to use excessive force against Palestinian
demonstrators and to cause civilian casualties. The
blockade on the Gaza Strip has continued, inflicting
grave socioeconomic loss and humanitarian hardship.

13-40298

S/PV.7007

And settlers have continued to attack and terrorize
Palestinians and their villages and properties, including
religious sites.
In addition to announcing plans to construct more
than 1,000 settlement units, in recent months more
Palestinian land has been seized by the occupying
forces and more Palestinian buildings have been
demolished, displacing several Palestinian families.
Acts of provocation have continued against Muslim
and Christian holy sites, especially in occupied
East Jerusalem, dangerously inflaming religious
sensitivities.
The ongoing Israeli settlement campaign and
other provocative and illegal actions underscore
the occupying Power’s preference for occupation,
annexation and domination of the Palestinian people
and their land. It also starkly highlights the occupying
Power’s unwillingness to respect international law and
to act in good faith for the sake of peace and stability in
the Middle East.
As a result, the recent period has witnessed the
deterioration of the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and the two-State
solution based on the pre-1967 borders remains in grave
danger. If Israel persists with such unlawful behaviour,
it will only undermine the current efforts being exerted
aimed at achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace in the Middle East and will further destabilize
the fragile situation, which threatens international
peace and security.
The international community must therefore act
to ensure that those efforts do not fail. That requires
that Israel, the occupying Power, be called upon to
cease forthwith all of its illegal measures and to abide
by international law and the spirit and long-standing
parameters of the peace process.
The Non-Aligned Movement therefore reiterates
its call for a halt to all the occupying Power’s illegal
practices in the occupied Palestinian territory. Respect
for international law and United Nations resolutions,
including resolutions of the Security Council, is
fundamental for the realization of a just and peaceful
solution to the Middle East conflict. The continued
failure to comply with the law demands accountability.
NAM stresses the need for the international
community to act urgently to redress the unjust and
critical situation being endured by the Palestinian

people under Israel’s decades of military occupation.
The members of the Security Council cannot remain
onlookers, but rather must act to contribute to advancing
the efforts to resolve the prolonged, tragic conflict by
which the Palestinian people have been deprived too
long of their inalienable human rights, including the
right to self-determination and the right to return and
enjoy freedom in their independent State of Palestine
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The Israeli Air Force has continued to violate
Lebanese airspace, intensifying its incursions into
Lebanon, including recent low-altitude flights over
Beirut. Such activities are a blatant violation of
Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant international
resolutions, particularly resolution 1701 (2006).
They are also a clear infringement of the Charter of
the United Nations and the principles and provisions of
international law. NAM calls on the Security Council to
condemn those violations in the strongest possible terms
and to prevail on Israel to end its violations of Lebanese
sovereignty — whether by air, sea or land — and to
fulfil all of its obligations under resolution 1701 (2006).
With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement is concerned about the Israeli military
fortifications in violation of the 1974 Disengagement
of Forces Agreement between Israeli and Syrian forces,
which could result in the risk of tension, escalation
and confrontation in the area. NAM reaffirms that
all measures taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to
alter the legal, physical and demographic status of the
occupied Syrian Golan, as well as Israeli measures
to impose its own jurisdiction and administration
there, are null and void and have no legal effect. The
Non-Aligned Movement demands that Israel abide
by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967,
in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).
NAM condemns in the strongest possible terms
the act of aggression committed by Israel against the
Syrian Arab Republic on Sunday, 5 May. NAM requests
the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities by
clearly condemning the Israeli aggression against the
Syrian Arab Republic, taking the necessary measures
to prevent its recurrence and holding Israel accountable
for that act of aggression.

13-4029845

S/PV.7007

I shall now speak in my national capacity to briefly
react to what was said by the representative of the
Israeli regime against my country.
With regard to the presidential election, I should
say that the Iranian nation is proud to have held a
democratic election with more than a 70 per cent
turnout, wherein Mr. Rouhani won a landslide majority
on 14 June. The high turnout once more showed the
vibrancy of the Iranian polity and society and the strong
potential that exists for dealing with any impediments
along the way towards the stability and enhancement
of Iran’s international stature. That is a reality that the
Israeli regime cannot endure. That is why, in the days
remaining before the presidential inauguration, it has
already started its smear campaign to distort the facts
about Iran’s election and elected officials. That reflects
its deep concern about any development towards
stability and tranquillity in the region.
On Iran’s nuclear issue, which is exclusively
peaceful in nature and in full conformity with our
international obligations, I should say that we are not
only party to the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, but we are party to all major international
instruments banning weapons of mass destruction and
are fully committed to all the relevant legal obligations
under those treaties. The Israeli regime’s non-adherence
to the international instruments on weapons of mass
destruction and its non-compliance with its related
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, however, are well-known facts.
Furthermore, the Israeli-regime’s brutal practices
in killing innocent women and children, in particular
during the 33-day war against Lebanon and the 22-day
attack on Gaza, are also well-known facts. The regime’s
terrorist operations all around the world, including the
assassination of Iran’s nuclear scientists, are known to
the world as well. To cover up its terrorist nature, the
Israeli regime tries to pin the blame for terrorism on
others. That is partly because of the impunity that the
regime enjoys.
The European Union’s indecision to condemn
Israel for all its State terrorism, on the one hand, while
putting Hizbullah’s military branch on a terrorism list,
on the other, based on false and unjust accusations,
is a double-standard approach towards terrorism.
Hizbullah is part of Lebanon’s socio-political fabric
and is respected and accepted by the people of Lebanon
as a legitimate resistance movement against the Israeli

46

regime’s aggression. The European Union’s decision
will not generate any doubts as to the popular character
of Hizbullah; rather, it will further complicate the
situation in the Middle East. The European Union
should live up to its responsibility in redressing the
situation and reconsider its decision.
In conclusion, our advice to the representative of
the Israeli regime is that instead of levelling baseless
allegations against others in the region, it would
do better to abide by the norms and regulations of
international law and the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and to correct its behaviour for the
sake of peace and stability in the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): The delegation of
Indonesia is pleased to participate in this open debate.
In that regard, I would first like to thank the United
States, as President of the Council for the month of
July, for convening this meeting. My delegation is also
grateful to the United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Robert
Serry, for his comprehensive and detailed briefing.
In making these remarks, Indonesia would also like
to associate itself with the statements delivered by the
Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and by the
representative of Djibouti on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation.
The Middle East region continues to undergo great
instability, with tragic human consequences, a dire
humanitarian situation and an uncertain conclusion.
Indonesia remains deeply committed to, and concerned
about, the prospects for peace in the Middle East. The
question of Palestine, which is a key concern for my
country, has dragged on both as a fact and as an agenda
item in the Council for far too long.
We are deeply appalled that the Israeli policy
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, has continued with little regard for the need
to create conditions conducive to peace and a resolution
of the conflict. In that regard, it remains our concern
that nothing poses as obvious an obstacle to progress as
the construction of illegal settlements, which constitute
a strong symbol of Israel’s lack of commitment to
meeting the Palestinians on a productive playing field.

13-40298

S/PV.7007

Similarly, throughout the occupied Palestinian territory,
Israel has continued with such policies and practices
as the construction of the separation wall, home
demolitions, residency revocations and the closure of
Palestinian institutions. In Gaza, the humanitarian
situation continues to deteriorate. Israel’s blockade,
which has continued for five years, is asphyxiating the
economy, as it frustrates the movement of people and
goods, thereby increasing unemployment and shrinking
private-sector businesses.
Indonesia has always been deeply supportive of
the two-State solution, based on the conviction that
an independent State of Palestine, with rights and
responsibilities that are coterminous with those of
other States, will contribute to the attainment of a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East,
and not detract from it.
We believe that peace on the basis of the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as the capital of the State
of Palestine, is the irreducible minimum basis for
negotiations. In that regard, my delegation welcomes
the ongoing efforts being made by the United States,
including through Secretary Kerry’s visits to the region
in the past three months. We furthermore welcome the
plans for a resumption of direct talks and look forward
to that historic process.
In order to give that initiative a good chance of
success, Indonesia urges Israel to halt any conduct that
might impair the effort. To that end, my delegation
would like to underline that Israel must be prevailed
upon to recognize the futility of ignoring the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinians with regard to the
core issues, namely, illegal settlements, the status of
Jerusalem, refugees, security and permanent borders.
If true progress is ever to be made on the Middle
East file, it is essential that Israel act as a responsible
partner and member of the international community.
It is critical that Israel abandon the impunity through
which it has ignored and defied United Nations
resolutions and international law for more than 60 years.
To put it simply, no nation should be immune from
the consequences of violating international law, and
that includes Israel. Indonesia therefore welcomes the
European Union’s (EU) new guidelines on the eligibility
of Israeli entities and their activities in the occupied
territories for grants, prizes and financial instruments
funded by the EU. Under the new guidelines, the EU
will not recognize any changes to pre-1967 borders

other than those agreed by the parties to the Middle
East peace process. In accordance with our belief that
violations of international law should not be rewarded,
we support that approach and commend it to other
members of the international community.
Permit me now to turn to Syria.
As my delegation observed during the last
debate (see S/PV.6950), the catastrophe in Syria has
regrettably continued to evolve, with no response from
the international community, including the Council.
As members of the Council know only too well,
however, the situation on the ground has become so
dire that it now threatens the stability of the region.
We have on our hands a grave humanitarian crisis in
Syria that involves refugees and displaced persons,
which calls for immediate attention. On the question
of refugees, it is self-evident that the spillover of more
than 1.7 million people, including 71,000 Palestinian
refugees, to neighboring countries is an issue of great
concern for the Governments involved. Those refugees
require further assistance through international relief
organizations. We should see to it that they receive the
help they need.
Without doubt, part of the response to the situation
in Syria is political. In that regard, Indonesia reiterates
its call for a political process that will lead to a
permanent solution to the conflict in accordance with
the aspirations of the Syrian people. In that connection,
members of the Council must put their differences aside
in fulfilment of their mandate and must commence
earnest measures to bring the violence to an end.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): It is indeed a great
honour for me to speak at this very important debate.
I shall limit my statement to the issue of occupied
Palestinian territories.
The saga of Palestinian misfortune is often repeated
in international discourse without any effective remedy.
It is a unique story of the long suffering of one segment
of the human race inflicted by another, starting with
the occupation of land, the alteration of history and
then the escalation of violence and military incursions,
leading to the imposition of inhuman conditions on the
Palestinian people through the demolition of homes, the
confiscation of land, closures and blockades. The Gaza
borders have been subjected to a regime of closure

13-4029847

S/PV.7007

that is without precedent anywhere on the planet. The
quality of life of the Palestinians in the entire occupied
territories has been reduced to a subsistence level.
For example, in Gaza 1.7 people have been living in
a 360 square kilometre area. Of that number, 80 per
cent are extremely poor and rely on food handouts.
Some 90 per cent of the available water is unfit for
human consumption, and 30 per cent of vital medicines
are unavailable in the hospitals. Those are only a few
disturbing statistics that demonstrate the precarious
condition in which the people of Palestine, particularly
women and children, are languishing. Unfortunately,
all that is happening before the eyes of the international
community and in the absence of any resolute action.
Despite the global outcry and International Court
of Justice advisory opinion against it (see A/ES-10/273),
Israel continues to build a separation wall on the West
Bank, dividing and isolating communities, destroying
livelihoods and preventing hundreds of thousands
access to their jobs, families, markets, schools and
hospitals. The repeated appeals of the international
community to improve the deteriorating conditions of
the Palestinian people remain unheeded.
It is abundantly clear now that there cannot be a
military solution to that longstanding conflict. Peace
cannot be achieved in that land by force or through
military means. Only through negotiations can there
be a viable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The Security Council cannot evade its role, particularly
since its own resolutions adopted over time on the matter
remain unimplemented. The stalled peace process must
restart. We believe that the Fourth Geneva Convention,
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978), the
principle of land for peace, the terms of refernce of the
Madrid Peace Conference, the road map and the Arab
Peace Initiative are the best guides for achieving a
peaceful solution. We see a flicker of hope in Secretary
of State John Kerry’s efforts to bring the parties to the
negotiating table. We fully support that initiative.
The root cause of the conflict is the occupation,
which must end sooner than later. The settlements
present an existential threat to the viability of a future
Palestinian State. They are contrary to international law
and the road map, and must therefore cease. If peace in
the Middle East is to be achieved, we must prevail upon
Israel to cease further illegal settlements and dismantle
the existing ones, in line with its obligations under
article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention. In that

48

regard, we consider the recent action of the European
Union to be the right move in the right direction.
The upgraded status of Palestine at the United
Nations last year was a small step towards amending
a historical injustice. Much work lies ahead to create
the conditions that will allow a meaningful and just
solution. Our goal remains realizing the inalienable
and legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people
by creating an independent, viable and contiguous
State of Palestine based on the 1967 borders with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel in
peace and harmony. The realization of that goal needs
our collective resolve. Let us all commit to working for
lasting peace in the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I would like to begin by thanking you
for convening today’s open debate, which allows us
to express our points of view on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestine question.
The Government of Ecuador expresses once again
its concern over the Security Council’s prolonged
management of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The intransigence of Israel, with its illegal
colonization policy, has closed every door to a bilateral
solution. Therefore, it is time for the parties to seek
an alternative to the conflict in order to achieve peace
between the State of Palestine and Israel.
My country believes that it is time to restart the
peace process, which has been stalled since 2010, and
insists that it be a credible and serious process based on
clear parameters and framed within a specific timeline.
President Abbas has responded that any peace proposal
must first be political and never subsumed by economic
arguments. In reference to the economic plan proposed
by United States Secretary of State John Kerry, he has
been clear in his rejection of temporary agreements and
provisional borders that sidestep political solutions.
President Abbas has called on the Government of
Israel to come to the negotiating table with specific
maps in order to have borders on the basis of which it
will be possible to reach a final agreement. My country
recognizes that these borders should be those of 1967,
in accordance with relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, including Security Council resolutions, the
Madrid terms of reference and the Arab Peace Initiative

13-40298

S/PV.7007

of 2002. Palestine, with the support of the international
community, is committed to peace on that basis.

settlements and refrain from these illegal acts, which
may negatively affect the spirit of negotiations.

Israel, the occupying Power, is rejecting a peaceful
solution with its settlement policy, the construction of a
separating wall, land confiscations, house demolitions,
the displacement of civilians and unlawful detentions.
Settler terrorism against the Palestinians on their lands
should be condemned. The Security Council itself
should be called upon to meet its obligations under the
Charter in that regard. The high contracting parties to
the Fourth Geneva Convention should also be called
upon to fulfil their responsibilities, as those actions
constitute serious violations.

We commend the Palestinians for agreeing to
return to negotiations under such arduous and difficult
conditions. That shows their commitment to peace
through a spirit of compromise, which is essential if
this intractable conflict is to be resolved. We call on
all the Palestinian parties and organizations, including
Hamas, to see that as a positive step towards lasting
peace. The future of Palestine is significantly dependent
on the unity of its people. Therefore, we encourage the
Palestinians to strive for unity as a weapon against those
who are bent on dividing them for their own benefit.

Finally, Ecuador reaffirms its commitment to
recognizing Palestine as a full Member State, which
is its just status. We need to increase calls upon all
countries around the world to recognize Palestine. That
is the peace that the majority on our planet demands.

On a positive note, we welcome Israel’s decision to
free some Palestinian prisoners as a confidence-building
measure and a gesture of their commitment to the peace
talks. However, South Africa is deeply concerned at the
plight of the Palestinians who are illegally imprisoned
in Israeli jails and have long lived in appalling
conditions. We once again call on Israel to respect the
human rights of all Palestinian prisoners and abide by
relevant international human rights and humanitarian
law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention. As the
international community, we have a responsibility to
put our shoulders to the wheel and assist the parties in
all manner of ways to ensure that the negotiations yield
positive results.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mcakuvana (South Africa): Mr. President,
let me join others in congratulating you and your
country on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council during the month of July. My delegation
expresses its appreciation to Mr. Robert Serry for
briefing the Council today. We associate ourselves with
the statement delivered earlier by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and
thank the Ambassadors of Palestine and Israel for their
statements.
Since October 2010, there has been no significant
signal that direct negotiations between Israel and
Palestine would resume any time soon, despite regional,
international and other efforts to defuse the stalemate
in the peace process. The agile re-engagement of the
United States in the peace process in recent times
is commendable. We appreciate in particular the
efforts undertaken by Mr. John Kerry to facilitate the
resumption of the peace talks between the parties.
South Africa welcomes the announcement that an
agreement has been reached between Israel and Palestine
that will form the foundation for the resumption of final
status negotiations, despite outstanding disagreements
especially with respect to the critical issue of the illegal
settlements that Israel continues to construct with
impunity. We call on Israel to reconsider its position on

Clearly, the success of negotiations requires an
immediate end to acts of aggression occasioned by
continued home demolitions, price tag attacks, illegal
excavations of religious sites and the restriction of
access and movement. Settler attacks on civilians, the
desecration of Palestinian mosques and churches, the
destruction of property and the felling of olive trees
should be condemned in the strongest possible terms
and ultimately stopped.
With regard to the situation in Gaza, South Africa
remains deeply concerned about Israel’s continued
blockade. The blockade and restrictions imposed are in
violation of international humanitarian law, including
article 23 of the Fourth Geneva Convention, and
contrary to the will of the international community
as expressed in various Security Council resolutions,
including 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1515 (2003) and 1860
(2009), among other international legal instruments
and frameworks.
We welcome the decision of the European Union
(EU) to put pressure on Israel by publishing new

13-4029849

S/PV.7007

guidelines banning the Union’s funding for entities
linked to settlements or territories occupied since the
1967 war. As is well known, that decision is in line with
the EU’s position on settlements and should be a clear
sign to Israel that settlements are not just illegal but
can also attract retributive actions from law-abiding
nations and organizations. We hope that other countries
and organizations will also consider applying pressure
on Israel so as to coerce it to abandon its regressive
policy of settlement construction.
South Africa is deeply concerned about the situation
in Syria and hopes that a solution will soon be found
before many more are killed, injured or displaced. We
would like to emphasize our concern about the plight of
the Palestinian refugees in Syria, some of whom have
now left the country due to the ongoing violence. It is
encouraging that, despite the hardships that come with
being a refugee, a Palestinian refugee emerged recently
as the winner of the Arab Idol singing competition.
That is one of those achievements that are a testimony
to the resilience of the human spirit. The decision
by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to
name Mohammad Assaf the UNRWA Regional Youth
Ambassador for Palestine Refugees is most welcome.
That should encourage the Palestinians to continue
with their struggle until their liberation is complete.
Finally, last week we celebrated Nelson Mandela
International Day and reflected on the life of President
Mandela, who has dedicated his life to the freedom of
his people and that of the Palestinians. I believe it would
be appropriate for me to conclude with his wisdom as
regards the issue of Palestine: “We know too well that
our freedom is incomplete without the freedom of the
Palestinians”. Let us therefore work together to free
the Palestinians from the bondage of occupation and
deliver them to the promised land of freedom, for which
they so yearn.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you,
Sir, for having convened this meeting and Mr. Serry for
his briefing.
Despite the passage of more than six decades
since the Arab-Israeli conflict began and despite
the many efforts made and initiatives proposed to
reach a comprehensive and lasting solution thereto,
unfortunately unilateral stances are prolonging the

50

illegitimate occupation and attempts to change the
demographic nature of the Palestinian territories,
especially the Judaization of Al-Quds Al-Sharif,
continue. The arrest and detention of Palestinians,
the continued unjust blockade against Gaza, measures
to strangle the Palestinian economy, especially the
withholding of tax revenues owed to the Palestinian
Authority, and other illegal and illegitimate practices
and measures — all of these factors have undermined
international efforts and returned us time and again
to square one. Tensions have thus spread throughout
the region and the chances of conflicts escalating
increased, with ramifications not only for the Middle
East but the entire world.
My country has a well-established record of
engaging in international and bilateral efforts to
achieve a just, comprehensive and peaceful solution to
the conflict that would take into account the interests
of the various parties and lead to the establishment
of an independent and viable Palestinian State, with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, on the basis of the
pre-1967 borders and a withdrawal from occupied Arab
territories, including the occupied Syrian Golan and the
remaining occupied Lebanese territories.
In the light of all of this, we see the current
efforts of the United States to end the deadlock in the
negotiations between the Israelis and the Palestinians as
a reaffirmation of the importance that the international
community attaches to negotiation, dialogue and respect
for the resolutions of international legitimacy. This
was reaffirmed at the Arab summit held in March in
Doha, which reaffirmed its support for the Arab Peace
Initiative and efforts to achieve its implementation in
cooperation with the international community.
We take this opportunity to express our readiness
to spare no effort to support these international efforts,
and we look forward to seeing similar support from the
international community so that we do not waste this
opportunity, which promises so much in the midst of
such complicated events in the Middle East.
In this context, we welcome the recent decision
of the European Union (EU) to withhold financial
assistance from Israeli organizations that are active in
the occupied Palestinian territories and not to recognize
any changes in the pre-1967 borders. This is a clear
decision to support the internationally legitimate
resolutions and international law in general, and
indicates the rejection by the international community

13-40298

S/PV.7007

of the illegal settlements and of any developments that
may threaten the prospects for a two-State solution. We
hope that other States will follow suit and emulate the
EU precedent in this context.
When discussing the situation in the Middle East,
we must recognize that the current situation in Syria
poses a clear threat and challenge to the international
community. The Syrian regime’s insistence on pursuing
a security solution and State terrorism, in the light of
the failure of the international community to achieve
a swift and decisive solution, may have dangerous
repercussions and could unleash a spillover that would
threaten the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
social unity of Syria, as well as peace and security in
neighbouring countries and beyond.
The Syrian regime is holding the Syrian people
hostage and using them as fuel for its continued
existence, with no regard for the grave results of such
a policy. In this regard, it is relying on the existing
division within the Security Council. The number of
victims among the innocent civilian population has
exceeded 100,000, in addition to the millions of refugees
and internally displaced persons, and the systematic
destruction of homes and facilities and countless other
violations. The Security Council must therefore adopt
effective and swift measures based on its responsibility
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
The international community, as represented by
the United Nations, has issued numerous resolutions
addressing the various violations committed against
the Syrian people. The world is therefore confused
and frustrated, and questions how long the regime
will continue its killing, destruction and displacement
of innocent civilians and why the resolutions of the
international community are being ignored.
An objective review of the substance of the more
than 15 resolutions of the Security Council, General
Assembly and Human Rights Council concerning the
situation in Syria reveals the extent and variety of the
violations against the Syrian people. It is very clear
that the regime is willing to resort to any means, even
at the price of destroying the entire Syrian nation and
imperiling the peace and security of the region and the
world.
Since its inception, the United Nations has played
an international humanitarian role that has made
us proud. The Security Council has moved very
quickly to end many violations. Therefore, the Syrian

people — children, women, men, the elderly and all the
victims of the conflict — are looking impatiently to the
Security Council for an effective solution that will bring
about a just resolution based on international law and
international legitimacy and bring those responsible
for crimes and violations to justice so that the Syrian
people can define their own future and exercise selfdetermination following their prolonged suffering.
The international community deals with such
violations, wherever they occur, on the basis of
internationally defined criteria and standards. The
Security Council has the responsibility to intervene
wherever such violations take place and to end them
in a manner that enjoys international legitimacy and
preserves human dignity.
The violations and horrors being committed by
the Syrian regime on a daily basis would lead any fairminded person to wonder whether that regime actually
believes in the Charter of the United Nations and in
international humanitarian and human rights law.
Why does it pursue its aggressive and irresponsible
policies, in violation of human and divine law? Should
not the United Nations therefore take a firm position
to assist the Syrian people and hold responsible those
who continue to inflict such suffering? How can the
international conscience bear any more sorrow?
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Dhanapala (Sri Lanka): I join other speakers
in commending you, Sir, for having convened this
important debate. The Sri Lankan delegation associates
itself with the statement made by representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
According to statistics recently released by the
United Nations country team in the occupied Palestinian
territory, immediate measures are required to assuage
the human suffering in the area. If unethical practices
continue, the likelihood of a two-State solution could
be diminished.
The continued construction of settlements is one
of the reasons for the disruption of the peace process.
Settlement activities are a factor in the recurrence of
violence in the region. The international community
has repeatedly called for a freeze on settlement activity.
Restrictions on imports and exports due to the
blockade on Gaza are stifling economic growth. Those

13-4029851

S/PV.7007

restrictions need to be lifted within the framework
of resolution 1860 (2009), as that would contribute
significantly to the economic advancement of Gaza and
the well-being of its people.

of the Palestinian people, and we are confident that
Palestinian internal reconciliation efforts will continue.
The progress made by the Palestinian Authority is
commendable.

Sri Lanka also supports the work of the United
Nations agencies in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which
keep the majority of the people in Gaza supplied with
the basic necessities. However, the positive results of
their efforts will be stymied as long as the blockade
remains in place. For sustainable development to
take place in the Gaza Strip, the blockade needs to be
dismantled.

Sri Lanka supports Palestine’s application for
admission to full membership in the United Nations,
and it is our hope that the Security Council will play a
more constructive role in making that a reality.

Both parties to the conflict must create the
environment necessary to facilitate peace. There is an
urgent need for mutual confidence-building measures
in support of efforts to resume dialogue and substantive
negotiations. Israel must protect the Palestinian civilian
population in the occupied territories from actions that
are contrary to the established rules of international
law and practice. Settlement freezes should not be
seen as preconditions to negotiations, considering that
they have been accepted in previous agreements. The
security needs of the Israeli people must be respected.
We encourage both parties to exercise the utmost
restraint for the sake of the safety of civilians and for
the greater goal of peace.
It is important that the international community
remain engaged in the quest for a just and durable
solution to the situation in the Middle East. Recently
the Government of China hosted the United Nations
International Meeting in Support of Israeli-Palestinian
Peace, under the auspices of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People. Sri Lanka supports the implementation of the
General Assembly resolutions regarding the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people to statehood and the
attainment of a two-State solution.
We are heartened by the efforts of the United
States Secretary of State, John Kerry, in recent
months to revive the peace process, and we call upon
both parties to demonstrate goodwill and engage
in confidence-building measures to pave the way
for renewed negotiations. We also recognize that
the viability of the two-State solution will depend
on the political unity and economic advancement

52

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela endorses the statement delivered by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Our country condemns the continued denial of the
inalienable rights of Palestinian people due to the Israeli
military occupation of the State of Palestine, including
East Jerusalem, and the illegal measures taken by the
occupying Power, which result in civilian casualties,
humanitarian and socioeconomic deprivation, and
the destruction of Palestinian institutions, properties,
infrastructure, and land and water resources,
fragmenting its territory.
Venezuela rejects in particular the construction
of settlements and of the separation barrier; the use
of lethal force against Palestinian civilians, including
unarmed demonstrators; the detention and ill-treatment
of political prisoners; the imposition of a blockade on
the Gaza Strip; and the establishment of hundreds of
checkpoints in the West Bank. Likewise, we object to
the withholding of Palestinian revenues and the various
other measures aimed at isolating East Jerusalem and
modifying its historical character.
The State of Israel has since 1947 systematically
disregarded the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations that advocate a two-State solution. Israel
ignores the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and of international humanitarian
law.
Our country supports any action taken by the State
of Palestine aimed at seizing the opportunities offered
to it by the United Nations and reiterates its full support
for the desire of Palestine to be a full State Member of
the Organization.

13-40298

S/PV.7007

Venezuela eagerly awaits the resumption of the
political dialogue between the State of Palestine and
Israel and reiterates its call on the occupying Power to
end the policies that stand in the way of that goal.
In that regard, we aspire to a bilateral solution, with
a contiguous and economically viable Palestinian State
based on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, in accordance with the resolutions of the
United Nations.
The Government of Venezuela believes that the
Syrian Arab Republic must be respected and that the
only way to resolve the conflict in that country is through
political dialogue between the Syrian authorities and
the opposition, which is the Syrian people themselves
see as the only alternative.
Venezuela deplores the fact that arms are being
supplied from abroad to groups involved in terrorist
activities that refuse to participate in a political
dialogue.
My country rejects any foreign intervention in
violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity and
political independence of the Syrian Arab Republic.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, we commend you and the Mission of the
United States on your skilful and effective leadership
of the Council during this month of July.
Costa Rica has decided to speak at this meeting, as
we believe that it comes at a particularly important and
auspicious moment for the Middle East. The interest we
attach to this debate is evidenced by the five continuous
hours that we have remained here to listen to the
speakers. Unlike in previous months, today there is a
small glimmer of hope that a negotiated solution might
be found to the long and complex conflict between the
States of Israel and Palestine, with clear repercussions
for the rest of the area.
While the eventual negotiation process is still in its
preliminary stages and many difficulties still lie ahead,
we must underscore the constructive and systematically
dedicated role that has been played by the Secretary of
State of the United States, John Kerry. His commitment
and effective efforts merit our gratitude.
Costa Rica, as a peace-loving country that
voluntarily disarmed more than 60 years ago, is

a firm believer in a peaceful solution to conflicts
between peoples and States, in the framework of
international law and multilateral diplomacy. We are
therefore delighted by the announcement made last
week regarding the beginning of talks between the
Palestinian and Israeli parties aimed at establishing
the basis for direct negotiations leading to what is an
accepted objective for the international community,
that is, peaceful coexistence between an independent
and viable Palestinian State and the State of Israel.
We know that this is but a first step. The road ahead
is full of difficulties and obstacles. There will certainly
be those who seek to impose their perverse goals or
exclusive viewpoints, or their obsolete intolerance or
extremism, which not only rejects reconciliation and
prevents progress in this difficult process, but is also
based on outdated, sterile and unjust visions for both
peoples.
Costa Rica has no false illusions about this
emerging negotiation process, but we believe in the
creative power of good judgement, realism and human
persistence. We believe that history is written, first and
foremost, thanks to the will of individuals. Through
that will, and within realistic parameters, human action
can change the course of events. That is what we are
now witnessing as a possibility in this prolonged and
painful conflict. It is essential to exchange the logic
of confrontation, blame and war for one of good faith,
resolve, good will and peace. The logic of peace will
transform confrontation into a search for common
ground, demands into proposals and hatred into
hope for tomorrow. We believe that the Israeli and
Palestinian leadership, and those who share in helping
them to shoulder their great responsibilities, will have
the courage to move forward whenever possible so
as to overcome their differences. None of the parties
will achieve everything they are seeking, but there is
an opportunity for all to attain the minimum to which
they aspire and for both sides to achieve the end goal of
peace and coexistence.
The Security Council, the Secretary-General and
the United Nations as a whole should work so that leaders
can help their peoples understand that concessions are
not defeats, but rather the cement that binds together
the pieces of a structure that, if it is completed, will
become the home where each of those peoples live in
a safer and more peaceful neighbourhood. In order to
resolve this conflict, the extremists must be isolated
and the moderate forces strengthened on both sides. As

13-4029853

S/PV.7007

an organization and as countries we should be ready to
cooperate in that undertaking. Costa Rica is prepared to
participate in that task, however small our contribution
may be. We are not stakeholders in this effort, but as a
peace-loving country, a friend of Israel and of Palestine,
and a society accustomed to peaceful coexistence, we
call on the parties to do their best in tirelessly seeking
just and legal solutions to their differences and to work
with whomever can help them where necessary in order
to emerge from an impasse.
We believe that sooner rather than later we will be
returning to this Chamber, no longer calling for tolerance
and intelligence in order to begin the negotiating
process between Palestinians and Israelis but rather to
celebrate their agreements and the end of the conflict,
and to begin to discuss plans for harmonious relations
between their peoples.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland.
Ms. Gunnarsdóttir (Iceland): In her briefing
to the Security Council earlier this month on the
situation in Syria, Under-Secretary-General Valerie
Amos said, “We are watching the destruction of not
only a country, but also its people” (S/PV.7000, p. 2).
With 100,000 people dead and millions who have fled
from the violence and become refugees or internally
displaced persons, and with a breakdown of vital
education and health services, the situation can only
be described as a tragedy. The Government of Syria,
along with all other parties to the conflict, must abide
strictly by international humanitarian and human
rights law, including by affording immediate access to
humanitarian assistance.
We strongly urge the Security Council to overcome
its internal differences and focus on exercising its
leadership role in fostering a political and peaceful
solution to the civil war in Syria. The parties have
demonstrated that they are not going to lay down arms
without external interference, and the Council has
yet to demonstrate that it is doing all in its power to
prevent further human tragedy. Before the conflict
escalates further, with even more serious consequences
for regional peace and security, we ask that the Council
please take action.
In the meantime we welcome the briefing to be given
in the General Assembly next Monday by Mr. Pinheiro,
Chair of the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic. As long as the

54

Council is not living up to its responsibility regarding
the conflict, it is important that the wider membership
engage in the matter. Earlier this month, when
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon visited Reykjavik and
spoke at the University of Iceland, he said, “The people
of Syria need peace, but all they have for the moment
are talks about talks. We must do better.” Indeed, we
must do better.
Last week, we celebrated Mandela International
Day to pay tribute to Nelson Mandela’s legacy and what
he stands for. Mr. Mandela once said that we are not
truly free if we take away someone else’s freedom, just
as surely as we are not free when our freedom is taken
from us.
I now turn to the Palestinian question. The
occupation affects all Palestinians as well as the
Israelis. They are affected in different ways, since one
is the occupied and the other the occupier, but both are
affected. The security of the Palestinians is greatly
affected, not least for young men, but also for those
who now live at close quarters with the settlements, and
with settlers becoming increasingly violent towards
Palestinians in the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
The security of Israelis is also affected, including by
the firing of rockets from Gaza, indiscriminately and
in clear violation of international law, threatening and
terrorizing the civilian population in southern Israel.
Iceland believes in a peaceful solution to the
conflict, and we believe it is urgent and possible that
the parties come to an agreement. We therefore very
much welcome the renewed engagement of the United
States in reviving the peace process. We particularly
welcome the announcement last Friday by Secretary of
State Kerry that an agreement has been reached that
establishes a basis for resuming direct final status
negotiations. We hope that this time the negotiations
will result in two States, living side by side in peace
and security, which is the only way forward for
both parties and the only means by which relations
between Israel and its neighbours can be normalized.
Until an agreement is actually reached, however,
the international community must continue to do its
utmost to prevent and address ongoing violations of
humanitarian law and international human rights law
on the ground.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.

13-40298

S/PV.7007

Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. In our national capacity, we wish to
highlight some important aspects of the subject we are
discussing today.
Time and again, the Security Council convenes
these debates on the Middle East without making any
progress. It is deplorable that the situation in the region
in general and the occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem, in particular remains unresolved.
The region continues to be marked by instability and
insecurity. The principal political problem of the
Middle East is the systematic aggression of Israel, the
occupying Power, against Palestine. It is urgent that
the Security Council assume its designated role as a
defender of international peace and security and take
concrete, practical steps to make Israel end its abuses
against the Palestinian people.
Israel’s behaviour deliberately contravenes
United Nations resolutions, poses a threat to regional
and international peace and security, and violates
the human rights of an entire people. Israel’s illegal
occupation of Palestinian and other Arab territories
remains the main obstacle to attaining a just, durable
and comprehensive peaceful solution in the Middle
East. As long as these acts of aggression continue and
unless the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people
are taken into consideration, there can be no peace in
the Middle East.
The General Assembly took an unprecedented step
when it granted Palestine non-member observer status
at the United Nations. In keeping with its historic stance
of supporting the cause of the Palestinian people to
uphold their rights, Cuba supported that decision. The
Cuban delegation reiterates its support for admitting
Palestine as a fully-fledged State Member of the United
Nations. The Security Council must consider and
promptly approve the request submitted by Palestine in
2011 for the United Nations to recognize it as a Member
State.
The current situation in the region is tense and
explosive. Reports indicate the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, further
complicating the living conditions of its inhabitants
following the tightened blockade in that area. The
Palestinian people are suffering more as a result of
the growing number of illegal Israeli settlements,

the difficulties and pain experienced by Palestinian
prisoners, and the closing of access to goods,
humanitarian aid and fuel to the Gaza Strip. Only the
end of the settlement policy, the release of Palestinian
prisoners and the lifting of the blockade on the Gaza
Strip would make it possible to embark on a significant
political process that could lead to peace throughout the
region.
Cuba will continue to support the Palestinian
people in their legitimate and just struggle for selfdetermination and the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital. It
insists that Israel comply with international law and
withdraw from all Arab territories it occupies. Once
again, Cuba reiterates its support for a just and lasting
peace among all the people of the Middle East.
Cuba continues to follow closely the situation in
Syria and its international repercussions. It remains
alarmed that those who seek regime change are calling
for the use of force and violence instead of encouraging
dialogue and negotiation. It is the duty of this organ to
strengthen peace, not violence; to prevent instability,
not to contribute to financing, arming or training those
who want to destabilize the country; and to protect
innocent people, not to use or manipulate them for
geopolitical purposes. That is also the responsibility of
the Organization as a whole.
Cuba is opposed to NATO’s manoeuvring to obtain
the approval of the Security Council to attack Syria. It
also rejects the media’s habitual complicity in distorting
reality and failing to answer for the consequences of
its actions. A civil war in Syria or the intervention
of foreign forces would have dire consequences for
international peace and security and in particular for
the volatile Middle East.
Cuba is concerned about the loss of innocent
lives in Syria and everywhere else in the world. It
condemns all acts of violence against innocent civilians
perpetrated by those engaged in this and all others
conflicts. It rejects the need to protect human lives
being used as a pretext for foreign intervention, be it
direct or through irregular armed groups, including
mercenaries, who only sow destruction and death. We
reaffirm the right of the people of Syria to exercise full
self-determination and sovereignty, free from foreign
interference or intervention.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.

13-4029855

S/PV.7007

Mr. Román-Morey (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to commend you, Sir, for convening an open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine. We are also grateful to the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Robert Serry.
Since 1947, when Peru joined the United Nations
Special Committee on Palestine, it has consistently
maintained a clear position on the question of Palestine,
in line with the norms and principles of international
law, and in particular with people’s right to self
determination. Peru therefore recognizes the need
to implement General Assembly resolution 181 (III),
which lays the groundwork for the creation of two
States in Palestinian territory, one Arab and one Jewish,
coexisting peacefully within mutually recognized,
secure borders, free from threat or acts of force.
Recognizing the inalienable right of the Palestinian
people to establish its own independent State, and
convinced that the creation of a Palestinian State is
crucial for finding a peaceful, lasting solution to this
conflict, Peru has recognized Palestine as a State and has
supported resolutions adopted by the United Nations,
including the historic General Assembly resolution
67/19 of 29 November 29, which it co-sponsored,
granteing Palestine non-member observer status within
the Organization. In line with these same principles,
Peru voted in favour of Palestine’s request to join
UNESCO.
In the same spirit, and as a sign of respect for the
two-State solution, Peru also recognizes the unwavering
right of the State of Israel to develop peacefully and in
harmony with its neighbours, within secure borders and
free of any threat against its citizens. Peru also firmly
condemns any act of aggression against Israel. However,
while it recognizes the right of Israel to preserve its
existence and security, this right must abide by human
rights and be enjoyed within internationally defined
and recognized borders.
My delegation reiterates that, under international
law, the acquisition of territories by force is unacceptable,
nullifying any act committed by Israel to impose its
laws, jurisdiction and administration. In line with the
provisions of numerous General Assembly resolutions,
Peru calls for an immediate end to settlement activities,
demolitions and evictions in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem,

56

In keeping with its traditional and unwavering
commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes,
Peru reaffirms its full support for a lasting peace
in the Middle East, which can come about only as a
result of direct negotiations between the parties and
on the basis of full compliance by all stakeholders
with their obligations under the Madrid principles,
the Quartet road map and other agreements, in full
respect for international law, including the relevant
Security Council resolutions. Peru therefore welcomes
the initiative of United States Secretary of State John
Kerry to revive the peace process in the Middle East, as
well as any other peace initiative that could lead to the
implementation of the two-State solution 65 years after
it was first conceived.
In conclusion, my delegation expresses its serious
concern over the intensification of the conflict in Syria,
which, according to reports of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, has already claimed
more than 90,000 lives and seen grave violations
of human rights, crimes against humanity and war
crimes. Peru condemns all types of violence, by
whomsoever committed, and expresses its concern for
the manifestations of sectarianism in the conflict. We
call on the international community to urge the parties
to launch an inclusive political dialogue, free from
preconditions, that will promote a political transition in
Syria on the basis of the road map set out in the Geneva
communiqué of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/523, annex).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): Let me begin by expressing
our appreciation to the delegation of the United States
for convening this quarterly open debate, which will
allow the Council to take stock of recent developments
in the Middle East, including the State of Palestine.
I would like to thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry, for his
comprehensive briefing.
We welcome United States efforts, including the
visits of Secretary of State John Kerry, to re-engage
Israel and Palestine in direct talks. We hope that the
recent announcement of the two sides of their intention
to restart direct talks, after perhaps one of the longest
periods of stalemate since the signing of the Oslo
accords, will lead to concrete results. In that context,
it is necessary to address the issue of Israeli settlement
activities, which have continued unabated and remain

13-40298

S/PV.7007

a serious obstacle. Those activities are not only illegal,
but also pose a serious threat to the two-State solution.
We join others in urging Israel to halt settlement
activities.
The blockade of Gaza is also continuing and
adversely affecting essential services, economic
activities and infrastructure development. While we
appreciate the measures taken by Israel to allow the
flow of essential goods into Gaza, those measures
cannot be a substitute for lifting the blockade.
The Palestinian Authority continues to face one of
its worst financial crises, which threatens to erode the
progress made in building Palestinian State institutions.
It is important that the international community
continue to support the financial needs of the Palestine
Authority.
As a member of the Council in 2011 and 2012, India
supported Palestine’s bid for full and equal membership
in the United Nations. Continuing its support, India
co-sponsored General Assembly resolution 67/19
in November 2012, which upgraded the status of
Palestine to that of non-member observer State. India
continues to partner with the Palestinian Authority
in its socioeconomic development, including through
the provision of direct budgetary grants, training
programmes and projects led by the India-Brazil-South
Africa Dialogue Forum.
India also continues its consistent support for a
negotiated solution to the Israeli-Palestinian issue,
resulting in a sovereign, independent, viable and united
State of Palestine, living within secure and recognized
borders with East Jerusalem as its capital, side by
side and at peace with Israel, as endorsed in various
United Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map. We call on the international
community to redouble its efforts for an early resolution
of the conflict.

Before I conclude, let me express our deep
concern at the deterioration of the situation in Syria.
We look forward to an early holding of the “Geneva
II” conference, which should help to commence a
Syrian-led, inclusive political dialogue that resolves the
current crisis and meets the legitimate aspirations of all
sections of Syrian society. Any further militarization
will only exacerbate the conflict and must be avoided
by all parties concerned, internal as well as external.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Serry to
respond to comments.
Mr. Serry: I will be brief. We have had another
long but, in my view, relatively instructive debate in
which nearly all speakers have registered their strong
support for the important United States-led effort to
relaunch meaningful negotiations and not, as a few
have noted, merely talks about talks. Virtually every
speaker has also stressed the urgency of the situation
and the immediate need for these efforts to provide, at
long last, a credible political horizon for achieving a
two-State solution.
That means that we are heading into yet another
important period, and I want to assure the Council of
the Secretary-General’s and my own support for the
important efforts under way. I would stress, in the light
of some statements, that our support includes providing,
as requested, fair, balanced and factual briefings on
what all will agree is a very complex situation in the
Middle East.
The President: I thank Mr. Serry for the
clarification he has provided.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

13-4029857
