S/PV.8980

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8980th meeting

Sunday, 27 February 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Mr. Kelly
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-27077 (E)
*2227077*

Ukraine

S/PV.8980

Russia cannot veto our voices, Russia cannot veto the
Ukrainian people, and Russia cannot veto the Charter
of the United Nations. Russia cannot and will not
veto accountability.

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/136)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2022/160, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Albania and the United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, France, Gabon, Ghana, Ireland,
Kenya, Mexico, Norway, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Against:
Russian Federation
Abstaining:
China, India, United Arab Emirates
The President (spoke in Russian): The draft
resolution received 11 votes in favour, 1 against and
3 abstentions. The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 2623 (2022).
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): On Friday night, we stood together outside
this Chamber to declare that the Russian veto (see
S/PV.8979) would not stop us from holding Russia
accountable for invading a sovereign State — a State
that dared to be a democracy. Russia vetoed Friday’s
draft resolution (S/2022/155) but, as I have said before,
2/9

27/02/2022

Now, the Security Council has taken an important
step forward towards that accountability. For the
first time in decades, it has called for an emergency
special session of the General Assembly. The Council
members who supported resolution 2623 (2022)
recognize that this is no ordinary moment. We need
to take extraordinary actions to meet this threat to our
international system and do everything we can to help
Ukraine and its people.
Just this morning, President Putin put Russia’s
nuclear forces on high alert, although he is invading a
country with no nuclear weapons and is under no threat
from NATO, a defensive alliance that will not fight in
Ukraine. This is another escalatory and unnecessary
step that threatens us all. We urge Russia to tone down
its dangerous rhetoric with regard to nuclear weapons.
These are issues that affect all Member States,
and now in the General Assembly they can all make
their voices heard on Russia’s war of choice. We will
then vote on a draft resolution that will hold Russia to
account for its indefensible actions and for its violations
of the Charter.
As we speak, rockets continue to rain down
on Kyiv and across Ukraine. Tanks are tearing
through cities. Russia continues to ready even more
brutal weaponry — bombs that flatten cities and
indiscriminately target civilians — for an unjustifiable
assault, fabricated out of lies and the rewriting of
history. Russia also propagates outrageous lies about
Ukraine’s conduct in its own defence.
We are alarmed by the mounting reports of
civilian casualties, videos of Russian forces moving
exceptionally lethal weaponry into Ukraine and the
widespread destruction of civilian facilities like
residences, schools and hospitals. To the Russian
officers and soldiers, I say that the world is watching,
photographic and video evidence is mounting, and they
will be held to account for their actions. We will not let
atrocities slide.
Those of us here safely sitting in this hallowed
Chamber have a moral responsibility to respond
to Russia’s desecration of human life. That means
humanitarian aid like the thermal blankets that the
22-27077

27/02/2022

Ukraine

United States Agency for International Development
has already airlifted to tens of thousands of Ukrainians
in need and the recently announced $54 million in
additional humanitarian assistance that will reach
hundreds of thousands more. That means military
support, including the additional $350 million
of security assistance that the United States is
shipping to Ukraine. And it means holding the sole
aggressor — Russia — accountable for its actions.
That will take some courage from some fellow
Member States, and I know that. For inspiration, I
would ask them to look to the Ukrainian people. They
have shown strength, courage and resilience in the face
of Russian guns, soldiers, bombs and rockets. They also
maintain the courage to sit down and talk. We welcome
their continued willingness to participate in peace talks.
On Friday night, darkness descended on Kyiv.
Missiles attacked a sheltering city. But the next morning,
Ukrainians woke up to a new citizen — a baby girl born
to a mother in a bomb shelter. The baby’s name is Mia.
Photos of her tiny hand gripping her mother as they hid
underground have inspired the world. Let us have the
courage of Mia’s mother. Let us have the courage of
the Ukrainian people standing bravely to defend their
democracy, way of life and futures. Let us show them
that they are not alone; that the world stands behind
them; that the United Nations has a purpose; and that
the additional bravery of the protesters in Russia is
not in vain. Let us do everything we can to help the
people of Ukraine as they stand up for themselves, their
sovereign country and their children.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Albania voted in favour
and welcomes the adoption of resolution 2623 (2022).
Formally, this short text is of a purely procedural
nature, but its significance is of historic proportions.
Last Friday (see S/PV.8979), a veto tried to lock the
United Nations at a time when we need it most. That
is no longer the case. The five lines of the text we have
just adopted open the big doors of the place where the
world meets — the General Assembly — to speak out
and condemn an unprovoked and unjustified pure act
of aggression.
The General Assembly emergency session is all
about condemning an unprovoked war. It is all about
upholding the Charter of the United Nations. It is
about sending a clear and iron-clad message of what is
acceptable and what is not, including to the Russians
citizens who need to listen to the world and hear it.

S/PV. 8980

Russia must be stopped in its attempt to break the
international rules-based order and replace it with
its will.
All Member States, especially the small ones like
mine, which constitute the majority of United Nations
Members, must remember that international law, rules
and the Charter are their best friend, their best army,
their best defence and their best insurance. Russia’s
actions undermine them. It is time to learn from past
mistakes, not repeat and perpetuate them.
Russia can at any moment come back to reason,
stop the war, recall its invading troops and return to
talks — but they must be genuine talks for peace, not
for surrender or capitulation. But that requires lucidity,
courage and wisdom, not threats of an apocalypse. As
we said last Friday, this is no time to remain idle or look
away. It is time to stand up. Ukraine and Ukrainians are
resisting. We are and will stand with Ukraine.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): On
Friday (see S/PV.8979), the Russian Federation was
alone in the Council in blocking the adoption of draft
resolution S/2022/155, co-sponsored by 82 United
Nations Member States. It called for an end to the
aggression against Ukraine. France does not accept
such obstruction. It therefore voted today in favour of
resolution 2623 (2022), which calls for convening an
emergency special session of the General Assembly.
The matter remains before the Security Council. France
will remain poised within the Council to ensure that it
assumes its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security.
In this context, the President of the French Republic,
Emmanuel Macron, would like the Security Council to
meet as soon as tomorrow on the humanitarian situation
in Ukraine. Together with Mexico, France will submit a
draft resolution to guarantee unhindered humanitarian
access to meet the urgent needs of the people remaining
in Ukraine.
In response to those who attempt to impose the
law of the strongest, the international community must
demonstrate its unity, solidarity and adhesion to the rule
of law. France stands firmly by Ukraine and its people.
Mr. Kelly (Ireland): Ireland once again strongly
condemns the Russian Federation’s further invasion
of Ukraine, a sovereign and independent country.
Since we last met on Friday (see S/PV.8979), the
Russian Federation has intensified its unjustified

22-270773/9

S/PV.8980

Ukraine

and unprovoked attack against Ukraine. Russia’s
aggression is causing mounting hardship and suffering
for the people of Ukraine, who have shown remarkable
resilience and resolve. Ireland stands in full solidarity
with them today.
The Security Council has a responsibility to act
in the face of conflict and respond to this grave threat
to international peace and security. We have failed
to exercise that responsibility. We were rendered
powerless to do so, despite the clear will of 11 members
of the Council, by the Russian Federation’s use of the
veto in a flagrant attempt to excuse its own military
aggression against Ukraine — a fellow Member of our
United Nations. The use of the anachronistic veto in
such terrible and tragic circumstances is reprehensible
and undermines the legitimacy of the Council in the
eyes of the watching world.
However, the veto will not prevent the international
community from responding to Russia’s blatant
breaches of international law, nor will it deter us from
holding Russia accountable for its actions. Ireland
voted in favour of resolution 2623 (2022) to convene
an emergency special session of the General Assembly.
Ireland calls on our fellow members of the General
Assembly to step up where the Council has failed,
to uphold the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, to condemn aggression and to support a return
to the path of diplomacy and peace. That is the very
least that the people of Ukraine deserve from us in their
hour of need. We cannot let them down.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): On Friday, 25 February (see S/PV.8979), as a
result of the exercise of the veto, the Security Council
was unable to fulfil its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, as it
was unable to adopt draft resolution S/2022/155, on the
situation in Ukraine, despite the fact that 11 members
voted in favour of it.
In response to the paralysis of the Security Council,
today we have invoked General Assembly resolution
377 (V), entitled “Uniting for peace”, to convene an
emergency special session of the General Assembly
with the urgency that the situation warrants. Since 1945,
Mexico has maintained its unwavering position against
the exercise of the veto by the permanent members of
the Security Council. As we have repeatedly stated and
reiterate today, that power should not be a privilege.
In every situation, it constitutes an enormous and
4/9

27/02/2022

highly sensitive responsibility. Consequently, Mexico
unequivocally supports convening the eleventh
emergency special session of the General Assembly. As
the Permanent Representative of France noted, we will
convene a meeting of the Security Council to consider
the overall humanitarian situation on the ground and
facilitate the swift delivery of humanitarian aid to those
most in need.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): We are
currently witnessing dramatic changes in the situation
in Ukraine. China has on many occasions made its
position clear on the issue of Ukraine, and it remains
unchanged. We believe that the top priority now is for all
parties to exercise the necessary restraint to prevent the
situation in Ukraine from deteriorating. China supports
and encourages all diplomatic efforts conducive to the
peaceful settlement of the Ukraine crisis and welcomes
direct dialogue and negotiations between Russia and
Ukraine as soon as possible.
At the same time, China supports discussions on
an equal footing between the European Union and
Russia on European security issues and upholding the
principle of indivisible security to eventually establish
a balanced, effective and sustainable European security
mechanism. China believes that the Security Council
should give priority to regional peace and stability
and the universal security of all countries, and play
a constructive role in resolving the Ukraine issue.
Actions taken by the United Nations should help calm
the situation and facilitate diplomatic solutions to avoid
an escalation of tensions.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
The United Kingdom welcomes the result of the voting
on resolution 2623 (2022) today.
By voting in favour of convening an emergency
special session of the General Assembly on Ukraine
tomorrow, the members of the Security Council have
laid bare Russia’s diplomatic impotence. Russia again
was isolated in opposing the resolution, but Russia
cannot stop the world from coming together to condemn
its invasion of Ukraine.
As each day passes in this unprovoked and
unjustified war, support for the people of Ukraine, their
plight and their fight for freedom grows. We therefore
urge all Members of the United Nations to use their
voice tomorrow to call for the immediate withdrawal of
Russian forces from Ukraine and end this war.
22-27077

Ukraine

27/02/2022

Mr. Tirumurti (India): It is regrettable that the
situation in Ukraine has worsened further since the
Security Council last convened on this matter (see
S/PV.8979). We reiterate our call for an immediate
cessation of violence and an end to all hostilities. There
is no other choice but to return to the path of diplomacy
and dialogue.
Our Prime Minister has advocated this strongly
in his recent conversations with the leadership of the
Russian Federation and Ukraine. In this regard, we
welcome today’s announcement by both sides that they
will hold talks at the Belarus border.
The global order is anchored on international law,
the Charter of the United Nations and respect for the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of all States. We
are all agreed on these principles.
We continue to be deeply concerned about the
safety and security of Indian nationals, including a
large number of Indian students who are still stranded
in Ukraine. Our evacuation efforts have been adversely
impacted by the complex and uncertain situation at
the border crossings. It is important to maintain an
uninterrupted and predictable movement of people.
It is an urgent humanitarian necessity that must be
immediately addressed.
Taking into consideration the
circumstances, we decided to abstain.

totality

of

Ms. Juul (Norway): Norway voted in favour of
resolution 2623 (2022).
Just two days ago, in this Chamber (see S/PV.8979),
we all saw that Russia was isolated and had no support
for its attack on Ukraine. Russia’s action is unacceptable.
Russia is wrong. Russia is the aggressor that violates
the very core principles of international law that the
United Nations stands for.
On Friday, the Security Council failed to uphold
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The Council’s
response to the breach of the peace and the act of
aggression failed because of the veto by the aggressor
itself. Preventing such acts is a direct responsibility of
the Security Council. Therefore, it was necessary to
reconvene today to decide to call an emergency special
session of the General Assembly on this issue.
Now, we will take this matter to the General
Assembly for the purpose of making appropriate

S/PV. 8980

recommendations to Members for collective measures.
Russia will be held accountable.
The civilian population, including children, is
suffering the consequences of this horrifying conflict:
killings, displacement and disappearances; fighting
in and around urban areas; the use of heavy explosive
weapons; and the destruction of civilian infrastructure.
We remain deeply concerned about the protracted harm
to the civilian population.
Norway is on the side of the Ukrainian people and
its Government. We are providing further assistance
to Ukraine. The Norwegian Government has today
decided to provide $226 million in humanitarian
assistance to Ukraine.
Let me conclude by reiterating that Norway insists
that the Russian Federation immediately, completely
and unconditionally stop all fighting and withdraw all
its forces from the territory of Ukraine.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Last Friday (see
S/PV.8979), my delegation laid out before the Security
Council a comprehensive view of its concerns regarding
the security developments in and around Ukraine.
Nothing in the intervening period has allayed those
concerns. On the contrary, in fact, as we speak the
number of casualties, the human suffering and the risks
to international peace and security keep increasing
by the hour. Indeed, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees recently indicated the
number of refugees to already be 422,000.
We voted in favour of resolution 2623 (2022) before
the Council, despite misgivings about its timing and its
contribution to achieving peace. These misgivings arise
ultimately from our unyielding commitment to respect
for and interest in upholding the Charter of the United
Nations and the role of the security Council.
The urgency of the situation has convinced us of
the need to add the voice of the General Assembly to
that of the Security Council in seeking solutions to the
crisis in and around Ukraine. This in no way detracts
from our firm belief that the Council, with its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security, has not yet exhausted the instruments and
mechanisms at its disposal to contribute to a negotiated
and diplomatic solution towards peace.
Therefore, we reiterate our call for an immediate
cessation of hostilities, for full respect for humanitarian
law and for a renewed attempt within the Security

22-270775/9

S/PV.8980

Ukraine

Council to promote and support the process of dialogue
between the parties involved — a role that the Council is
inherently better equipped to play — to bring a peaceful
solution to the Ukrainian conflict. The Security Council
and the General Assembly must work together.
As we renew our calls for an immediate ceasefire,
we also appeal to Ukraine and Russia to facilitate
the withdrawal of all persons who want to leave the
Ukrainian territory. Brazil already wishes to express
its gratitude to Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, Moldova,
Romania and others that are facilitating the exit of
people fleeing the conflict, in particular Brazilians and
Latin Americans.
Let us be exceedingly cautious in moving forward
in the General Assembly. The supply of weapons,
the recourse to cyberattacks and the application of
selective sanctions, which could affect sectors such
as fertilizers and wheat, with a strong risk of famine,
entail the risk of exacerbating the conflict and not of
resolving it. We cannot be oblivious to the fact that
these measures enhance the risks of wider and direct
confrontation between NATO and Russia. It is our duty,
both in the Security Council and the General Assembly,
to stop and reverse this escalation. We need to engage in
serious negotiations, in good faith, that could allow the
restoration of Ukraine’s territorial integrity, security
guarantees for Ukraine and Russia, and strategic
stability in Europe.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in
French): The Council meets today, Sunday, in an
attempt to echo the unequivocal messages of the
international community against the war in Ukraine.
As we stated in the Council just two days ago (see
S/PV.8979), we reiterate our ongoing commitment to
the founding principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, which must be respected by each of its Member
States. We also have faith in international solidarity
and multilateralism.
It is those values that give our Charter and
Organization their full relevance and integrity, and
the reason we voted in favour of holding an emergency
special session of the General Assembly on Ukraine.
Today, our thoughts are with the innocent people
suffering the horrors of a war that they neither chose nor
provoked and the thousands of civilians fleeing their
homes, towns and country to seek refuge elsewhere.
My country is deeply concerned about the attacks
on civilians and civilian public goods and calls for
6/9

27/02/2022

de-escalation. We call on the parties to the conflict to
refrain from any use or threat of use of weapons that
may have indiscriminate effects.
Lastly, Gabon continues to call for an immediate
ceasefire and the resumption of open sincere dialogue.
There is still time — there is always time — to choose
dialogue and diplomacy over force.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): The
United Arab Emirates regrets the fact that the situation
in Ukraine has worsened since our last meeting (see
S/PV.8979) and reiterates its call for a cessation of
hostilities. We remain steadfast in our belief that
dialogue and diplomacy should be the only path to
resolving differences. We therefore welcome today’s
news that talks may commence tomorrow morning
on the Ukraine-Belarus border. That is urgent and
much needed.
We will work tirelessly to support efforts towards
a peaceful resolution. As we conveyed on Friday, the
developments in Ukraine undermine regional and
international peace and security. The United Arab
Emirates reiterates that the protection of civilians in
Ukraine is of the utmost importance, particularly as
the security situation escalates. Civilians trying to
reach safety must be able to leave unhindered. It is of
paramount importance that the necessary humanitarian
aid be delivered to those in need. Space for humanitarian
assistance must be preserved so that humanitarian
actors can maintain access to civilians.
We emphasize the importance of upholding
international humanitarian law and mitigating the
impact of the conflict on the most vulnerable. We
reiterate once again the absolute need to uphold the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, in
particular respect for the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of all Member States.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by
acknowledging the dangerous moments in which we
live and noting the necessity for diplomacy to triumph
over war. I therefore urge that, even at this difficult
moment, and as diplomatic representatives of our
States, we maintain the commitment of our States to
dialogue and the objectives of peace.
Last Friday, because of the exercise of the veto
(see S/PV.8979), the Council was unable to assume its
primary responsibility to act on a threat to international
peace and security following the Russian Federation’s
22-27077

27/02/2022

Ukraine

aggression against Ukraine. It is time for the General
Assembly to assume its residual responsibility and to
pronounce itself on the matter. It is for that reason that
Ghana voted in favour of resolution 2623 (2022), just
adopted. As we consider the resolution we have just
adopted, it is important that we do so with sobriety, not
only for this generation, but also for those whose blood
and trust speak to us from the restless graves of those
who died in the two World Wars.
As a condition for becoming a Member of the
United Nations, we all declared that we would fulfil
our obligations under the Charter of the United Nations
in averment of our peace-loving nature. Today, the
peace we say we love is threatened. Ghana therefore
calls on all Member States to participate in the
emergency special session of the General Assembly
in a constructive manner and to unite around the call
for peace to stop this unjustified war that has already
caused the needless loss of many lives.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
Russia voted against resolution 2623 (2022) because
its authors proposed that it be placed on record that
the Security Council is unable to uphold its primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. There is no hint in the text of any attempt to
find a constructive solution in the Council. Two days
ago (see S/PV.8979), we vetoed another draft resolution
(S/2022/155) for the same reason — it was one-sided
and unbalanced. There are no new initiatives either.
The United Nations and the Security Council
were created in a post-war period to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of a new war. To that end,
global Powers decided to negotiate among themselves,
ideally to achieve consensus. In any event, the objective
was never to attempt to impose decisions on each
other or to disregard the interests of any of the five
permanent members. That is precisely why the Security
Council grants its permanent members the right to veto
decisions. It is not a privilege but a tool for ensuring the
balance of interests, which is of paramount importance
to the entire world. The balance of interests ensures
global stability. Any attempt to circumvent or disregard
the position of the Russian Federation undermines the
bedrock of the Charter of the United Nations.
What we need is not to ram through such schemes,
but instead attempt to find common ground, regardless

S/PV. 8980

of the attempts of our Western partners to avoid that,
including when they disregard our legitimate concerns
about NATO policy and violations by Western States
of the core principles of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe on the principle of the
indivisibility of security.
We now need to focus on resolving the situation
that led to the current crisis. It did not start when Russia
launched a special military operation in Ukraine. It
started much earlier, when for eight years the Council
turned a blind eye to crimes perpetrated by Ukrainian
nationalists in Donbas. Today once again, no mention
was made of the suffering of the people of Donbas.
The images of homes in Donbas that were destroyed
by nationalists and Ukraine’s armed forces have been
brazenly presented by Western media outlets as a
consequence of Russia’s military operation in Ukraine.
At today’s meeting, we are once again hearing lies and
false information about the indiscriminate bombing of
Ukrainian cities, hospitals and schools.
The Russian military poses no threat to Ukraine’s
peaceful citizens. The military does not fire at peaceful
civilian infrastructure. However, Ukrainian nationalists
pose a threat as they hold the people of Ukraine hostage
and use them as human shields. There is ample evidence
from ordinary Ukrainians proving that, despite public
protests, nationalists are deploying heavy equipment
and multiple rocket launchers in residential areas. That
is an egregious violation of international humanitarian
law that needs to be duly condemned. Essentially, those
are the same tactics being used by Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant terrorists.
All responsibility for the potential repercussions
lies in the hands of the Maidan regime. The residents
of Ukraine are also under threat from the ongoing
activities of radicals, who are giving power to all those
who want it, including prisoners escaped from jail, and
giving weapons to marauders, thieves and criminals.
There has been sufficient evidence of that on social
networks from the residents of Kyiv and other cities,
demonstrating the reckless attitude of the Ukrainian
authorities towards their own citizens.
An information war has now been unleashed against
the Russian Federation on social networks. Insofar as
evidence of the destruction of civilian infrastructure
by the Russian military does not exist, Ukrainian
strikes and accidental strikes and videos from Donbas

22-270777/9

S/PV.8980

Ukraine

are being portrayed as such, whereas they are actually
being carried out by Ukrainian nationalists.
Furthermore, social networks have a host of
educational manuals on how to create fakes to depict
Russian military operations and other fabrications.
There are 1.2 million such fakes currently circulating
on social networks. We urge our colleagues not to
aid and abet the proliferation of such disinformation,
although I fear that, once again, our call will fall upon
deaf ears.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I would like to express
my gratitude to those Council members that have
supported the request to call for an emergency special
session of the General Assembly.
I immediately express my regret that, once again,
rule 20 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure
has not been properly applied by the presidency.
However, I express my relief that this rape of the
institution of the presidency of the Security Council
will be over in less than 48 hours.
To those who appear to see no reason to support the
request to hold the emergency session — despite the
letter I sent to all members yesterday — as well as the
representative of the aggressor, I would like to address
the following.
Do they know what the most common warning is
now in most Ukrainian cities? “Attention: air raids.
Please proceed to the shelters.” I recommend that they
look at the pictures and footage of what is happening,
day after day, night after night.
I will continue to invite all members of the Security
Council to join in the catharsis — the purgation — of
this institution that will save it for the next generation.
Russia persists in its aggression, despite the
initial plan for a blitzkrieg, which has failed. We can
all see that. That failure prompted the bloody and
mad Russian leadership to order the heavy shelling of
residential areas, critical infrastructure and hazardous
material storage sites in retaliation for Ukrainian
resilience and resistance. It is extremely alarming
that, today, the Russian President has resorted to open
nuclear blackmail. The world must take that threat
very seriously.
8/9

27/02/2022

Now, most instances of fighting are occurring
around the Ukrainian capital, as well as in the northeast in the cities of Kharkiv, Sumy and Chernihiv and
in the southern cities of Kherson, Zaporizhzhia and
Mariupol. Long-range operational and tactical aircraft,
high-precision long-range weapons and multiple
rocket launcher systems are being widely used against
the Ukrainians.
Among the most telling recent examples of the
Russian course of action in Ukraine was a missile strike
on the town of Vasylkiv, which is practically a suburb
of the capital. A missile hit the oil depot, causing a
large-scale fire. There was also shelling in Kharkiv that
damaged the gas pipeline.
According to the Ukrainian Minister for Health,
Mr. Viktor Lyashko, at least 16 children have been
killed since 24 February, when the large-scale
military aggression against Ukraine was launched. On
26 February, a 7-year-old girl died after having been
seriously wounded during the shelling of a kindergarten
in the city of Okhtyrka. On the same day, due to the
shelling and gunshots, a child was killed and two more
wounded at the Okhmadet Children’s Hospital, in Kyiv.
Due to the threat of air raids, maternity hospitals in a
number of Ukrainian cities — including Kiev, Kharkiv,
Sumy, Irpin and Bucha, to name just a few — cannot
operate normally. Ukrainian children are being born in
bomb shelters.
According to the Ministry of Education of Ukraine,
as of now more than 350,000 schoolchildren have no
access to education. Thirty-three schools with over
5,500 students are closed due to severe insecurity in
civil areas.
Today, I have brought those appalling facts to the
attention of UNICEF, asking it to respond immediately
to the situation, give proper qualification to the actions
of the Russian Federation and take all possible measures
to prevent further deaths and violence against children
in Ukraine due to the blatant Russian aggression. I sent
them via diplomatic note and I look forward to working
with UNICEF on the issue.
The losses of the enemy as early as 27 February have
amounted to nearly 4,300 personnel killed and over 200
taken as prisoners of war. That detailed information has
been posted by the Ministry of Defence of Ukraine.
As always, Russia denies that its soldiers have
been taken prisoner and does not acknowledged all the
22-27077

27/02/2022

S/PV. 8980

Ukraine

soldiers who have been killed. In that regard, Ukraine
has opened a hotline entitled “Come Back Alive from
Ukraine” for the relatives of Russian soldiers who are
not aware of their whereabouts and cannot contact
them. The hotline was opened by the Government of
Ukraine and received over 100 calls from Russian
mothers during its first hour of operation.
It is unfortunate, however, that today, pursuant to
the decision of the Prosecutor-General of the Russian
Federation, the hotline and its dedicated website have
been shut down. I therefore want to take this opportunity
to read out the telephone number for anyone in Russia
who would like to call regarding soldiers who may have
been killed or taken prisoner in Ukraine and enquire
about their well-being. The number is (380) 894201860.
We will distribute that information after the meeting. I
hope that the Russian Government does not shut down
the website of the United Nations now that I have read
that number.
We condemn the fact that Belarus is deeply
engaged in the armed aggression against Ukraine.
Since the beginning of the Russian aggression, Belarus
has provided its territory for the Russian offensive.
Today, Zhytomyr Airport, in the Ukrainian city of
Zhytomyr, was hit by Iskander missiles launched from
the territory of Belarus. That is quite an invitation for
the negotiations at the border of Belarus — quite a way
to escalate and raise stakes by the aggressor on the eve
of negotiations.
Ukraine has filed a case against the Russian
Federation at the International Court of Justice, as
well as a request for the Court to issue an order of
provisional measures against Russia. We will distribute
that information and very soon, if it is not already there,
it will be available on the Court’s website. Ukraine
seeks an emergency hearing and an order by the Court
that Russia must cease its unlawful attack on Ukraine.
Russia will have to answer for its behaviour at the
world court in The Hague. The Court has jurisdiction to
hear Ukraine’s case and to order emergency measures
on the basis of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, also known as
the Genocide Convention. The Genocide Convention is

one of the most important international treaties drafted
in response to the horrors of the Second World War and
the Holocaust.
Russia, however, has twisted the concept of
genocide and perverted the solemn treaty obligation
to prevent and punish genocide. It has made an
absurd and unfounded claim of alleged genocide as a
justification and pretext for its own aggression against
Ukraine, in violation of the sovereignty and human
rights of the Ukrainian people. Ukraine’s case before
the International Court of Justice will establish that
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine is based on a lie
and a gross violation of international law and must be
stopped. As the Ukrainian people continue to bravely
stand against Russian aggression, Russia’s lies will
be exposed and Russia’s contempt for international
law will be confirmed. Ukraine will bring Russia to
account.
(spoke in Russian)
In conclusion, I wish to address the Ambassador of
the Russian Federation. During a previous meeting, I
spoke about children and parents who take pride in, or
are ashamed of, theactions taken by their kin. It seemed
to me, at that point, that the Russian Ambassador
took my words very personally. I am prepared to take
back my words if he were to follow the example of his
colleague, Oleg Anisimov, the head of the delegation of
the Russian Federation of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change at the closure of the session. Today,
in response to the emotionally charged statement of the
Ukrainian delegation — and it is difficult now for us to
speak without emotion — he said that “those who see
what is taking place can find no justification for the
attack against Ukraine.” That statement was made at
a closed meeting, but it was confirmed by a number of
participants, and subsequently by Mr. Anisimov himself.
There are always choices to be made in life. For
example, one can remain a human being or one can
continue to defend evil. Everyone has a choice.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more speakers inscribed on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.05 p.m.

22-270779/9
