172

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

current negotiations on the replenishment of the Intemational Fund for Agricultural Development to enable it to
maintain its effective contribution to agricultural and food
development, as well as the early consideration and completion of the eighth replenishment of the Intemational
Development Association at an adequate level;
6. Expresses its deep concern about the shortfall of
resources of the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities and the impact on its ability to carry out its
planned programmes, and urges ali countries to continue
and increase their support for the Fund;
7. Requests the Director-General for Development and
Intemational Economic Co-operation to report on the
results of the efforts to increase collaboration between the
Department of Technical Co-operation for Development
and the United Nations Development Programme;
8. Requests the Economic and Social Council, in discharging its responsibilities as defined in the annex to General Assembly resolution 32/197, to assist the Assembly in
establishing overall strategies, policies and priorities for
the system as a whole in respect of operational activities,
and to formulate suggestions and recommendations at the
time ofits consideration ofthe 1986 comprehensive policy
review;
9. Invites the goveming bodies of the organizations of
the United Nations system, where possible, to provide the
Economic and Social Council at its second regular session
of 1986 and the General Assembly at its forty-first session
at the time of the 1986 comprehensive policy review of
operational activities, their views on the system-wide policy issues affecting operational activities identified by the
Assembly in its resolution 38/ l 71 and in the present resolution, and also invites the organizations of the United
Nations system to co-operate with the Director-General
for Development and Intemational Economic Co-operation in the preparation of his report for that review.
120th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/212.

International Volunteer Day for Economic
and Social Development

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report of the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme on the United
Nations Volunteers programme, 128 and the relevant decision of the Goveming Council, 129
Considering that volunteer service, including that of the
United Nations Volunteers, is making an important contribution to socio-economic development activities,
Recognizing the desirability of stimulating the work of
ali volunteers both in the field and in organizations multilateral, bilateral or national, non-govemmental or
govemment-supported - and of giving encouragement to
those volunteers, many of whom engage in volunteer service at considerable personal sacrifice,
l. Invites Govemments to observe annually, on 5
December, an Intemational Volunteer Day for Economic
and Social Development, and urges them to take measures
to heighten awareness of the important contribution of
volunteer service, thereby stimulating more people in all
walks of life to offer their services as volunteers, both at
home and abroad;
2. Invites a/so specialized agencies, other organizations
of the United Nations system and non-govemmental
128 DP/1985144, chap. 11.
129 Ojfina/ Records ofrhe Econom1c and Social Counc1/, /985, Supp/emen1
No. I I (E/1985/32 and Corr. l ), annex l. decision 85/23.

organizations that provide, are affiliated with or benefit
from volunteer service to undertake and promote activities to stimulate greater awareness of the contribution to
their work made by volunteers;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to promote world-wide publicity on the important role ofvolunteer service.
120th p/enary meeting
17 December /985

40/213. Role of qualified national personnel in tbe
social and economic development of developing countries
The General Assembly,
Referring to its resolutions 33/ 135 of 19 December
1978, 35/80 of5 December 1980, 37/228 of20 December
1982 and 39/219 of 18 December 1984 on the role of
qualified national personnel in the social and economic
development of developing countries,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, and 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States,
Desiring to promote full implementation of the provisions of the Intemational Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade conceming
the important role of qualified national personnel in the
achievement of the development goals of the developing
countries, 130
Reaffirming the crucial role of human resources in the
socio-economic development process of developing
countries,
Taking into account the increasing importance of
United Nations activities in the field of human resources
development as they are envisaged in future years,
Recognizing that the training of qualified national personnel is an important and integral part of human
resources development,
l. Takes note ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on
the role of qualified national personnel in the social and
economic development of developing countries; 131
2. Reaffirms the importance of implementing the provisions ofits resolution 37/228;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to monitor the further implementation of its resolution 39/219;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to take into
account the need for an integrated and multidisciplinary
approach to ali aspects of human resources development,
in particular the training of qualified national personnel, in
the programmes of work of the United Nations and the
organizations of its system;
5. Invites the Secretary-General to continue bis consultations with the Govemments of Member States, in
accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution 39/219, on the
role of qualified national personnel in the social and economic development of developing countries, and to submit a progress report, through the Goveming Council of
the United Nations Development Programme and the
110 Resolution 35/56. annex, para 4"
1 l l A/40/549 and Add

1.

173

V. Resoludons aclopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly at
its forty-second session.
120th p/enary meeting
17 December 1985

40/214. Long-term financio, and future of the
United Nations Institute for Training and
Research
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 39/177 of 17 December 1984, in
which it requested the Secretary-General to prepare a comprehensive study on the United Nations lnstitute for
Training and Research, its activities in training and
research, its funding and its future role, keeping in mind
related activities within the United Nations system and
the relevant provisions ofthe Statute ofthe Institute, 132 in
order to determine the most effective manner of discharging those functions, and to submit bis report together with
the comments of the Board of Trustees of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research thereon, to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session,
Reca/ling a/so its resolutions 37/ 142 of 17 December
1982 and 38/177 of 19 December 1983, in which it called
upon the Secretary-General to submit a report on longterm financing arrangements for the Institute which would
place its financing on a more predictable, assured and continuous basis,
Having considered the report ofthe Secretary-General' 33
and the statement made on 8 November 1985 by the
Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation, 134
Noting with regret that, so far, no agreement has been
reached on the future role and, in particular, the long-term
funding of the Institute,
Noting a/so with regret that the 1985 United Nations
Pledging Conference for Development Activities, 125 was
unable to provide the General Fund ofthe United Nations
Institute for Training and Research with the level of
resources required to maintain the Institute as a viable
entity during 1986,
Acknowledging with regret that voluntary contributions
to the Institute have so far been insufficient to guarantee
the level of resources needed to maintain it as a viable
entity, and that it has not been possible to reach agreement
on any of the three options for long-term financing
arrangements for the Institute recommended by the Board
of Trustees, namely, the setting up of a reserve fund, the
adoption of a replenishment system or the establishment
of an endowment fund, 135
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General;
2. Reaffirms the continuing relevance of the mandate
entrusted to the United Nations lnstitute for Training and
Research, namely, to enhance the effectiveness of the
United Nations, and takes note of the view of the Secretary-General that this mandate continues to be essential to
the functioning of the Organization today;
3. Takes note ofthe administrative, staffing and organizational arrangements outlined in the report of the Secretary-General on the future work of the Institute;
4. Stresses the need to take a final decision on the longterm financing and future of the Institute at the latest at
132 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second Session.
Annexes, agenda 1tem 4S, document N6875, annex III.

133 N40/788.
134 See Officia/ Records ofthe General Assembly, Fortieth Session, Second

Committee, 29th meeting, paras. 13-15.
135 N39/148, para. 8.

the forty-first session ofthe General Assembly and, to this
end, requests the Secretary-General to prepare comprehensive specific plans for the future of the Institute based on
two options contained in bis report: 136
(a) To close down the Institute, including the possibility of re-allocating the functions of the Institute to other
agencies and bodies throughout the United Nations system
where those functions could be undertaken in an efficient
and cost-effective manner;
(b) To restructure the Institute, including the possibility of transferring to the Insti tute appropriate ongoing and
planned training and research functions of other agencies
and bodies throughout the United Nations system;
such plans should include a detailed assessment of the
financia) implications of the two options, including a
blueprint for a specific scheme for the long-term and stable
funding ofthe Institute, which could be tried on an experimental basis;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to keep in mind,
while preparing the plans requested in paragraph 4 above,
the need for specific suggestions for the improvement of
administrative arrangements to ensure cost-effectiveness;
6. A/so requests the Secretary-General to consult, as
appropriate, with all States and the Board of Trustees of
the United Nations Institute for Training and Research
before finalizing the plans, which should be submitted to
the General Assembly not later than l September 1986;
7. Urges all States that have not yet contributed to the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research to do
so, and calls upon all countries, especially those donor
countries that are not contributing at a level commensurate with their capacity, to increase their voluntary contributions in order to meet the needs of the Institute.
120th p/enary meeting
/7 December 1985

40/215. Assistance to Democratic Yemen
The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 391184 of l 7 December 1984
and Economic and Social Council resolutions 1982/6 of 28
April 1982 and 1982/59 of 30 J uly 1982 concerning the
extensive devastation caused by the heavy floods in Democratic Yemen,
Recalling a/so resolution 107 (IX) of 11 May 1982 ofthe
Economic Commission for Western Asia, 137 in which the
Commission called for the urgent establishment of a programme for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the
flood-stricken arcas of Democratic Yemen,
Having considered the report prepared by the Office of
the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator on the
extent and nature of the damage caused by the floods, 138
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to Democratic Yemen, 139
Recognizing that Democratic Yemen, as one of the least
developed countries, is unable to bear the mounting burden of rehabilitation and reconstruction of the affected
areas,
Recognizing a/so the efforts made by Democratic
Yemen to alleviate the suffering of the victims of the
floods,
136 A/40/788, para. 5.
13 7 See Officia/ Records ofthe 1-:conomic and Social Council. /982, Supplement No. 12 (E/1982/22). chap 1
138See E/ECWNl5ó
1 JO A/40,435.
