THE SITUATION BETWEEN IRAN AND IRAQ"

Decisions

gate allegations of the use of chemical weapons in the
conflict."

On 16 January 1987. after consultations. the President
made the following statement on behalf of the members of
the Council:''
.. In consultations. I have been authorized lo make the
following statement on behalf of the members of the
Council:
'"The members of the Security Council are dismayed and profoundly concerned by the fact that. in the
period which has elapsed since the statement made by
the President of the Council on 22 December 1986."
hostilities between the Islamic Republic of Iran and
Iraq have intensified and the risk that the armed
conflict, now more than six years old. may pose a
further threat to the security of the region has increased.
"The large-scale military operations which have
taken place since the end of last December. and which
continue at this time, and the parties' repeated allegations of serious and recurrent violations of the norms
of international humanitarian law and other laws of
armed conflict clearly indicate the considerable escalation in recent weeks of this conflict, which has taken
the lives of countless persons, both combatants and
civilians, and has caused grievous human suffering and
heavy material losses. The members of the Council
reiterate their serious concern over the widening of the
conflict through increased attacks on purely civilian
targets.
"'In view of this critical situation, the members of
the Council, recalling the statements made on behalf of
the Council on 21 March'' and 22 December 1986.
again issue an urgent appeal to the parties to comply
with Council resolutions 582 ( 1986) and 588 ( 1986).
In this context, they appreciate the efforts made by the
Secretary-General and urge him to persevere in those
efforts.
'"The Security Council. on which the Members of
the United Nations have conferred primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security, will remain seized of the situation and will
continue to make every effort to bring about the
cessation of hostilities and the resolution of the conflict
by peaceful means in accordance with the Charter.'"

··Deeply dismayed by the unanimous conclusions of
the specialists that there has been repeated use of
chemical weapons against Iranian forces by Iraqi forces,
that civilians in Iran also have been injured by chemical
weapons. and that Iraqi military personnel have sustained
injuries from chemical warfare agents. they again strongly condemn the repeated use of chemical weapons in
open violation of the Geneva Protocol of 1925'" in which
the use of chemical weapons in war is clearly prohibited.
"Recalling the statements made by the President of the
Council on 30 March 1984."' 25 April 1985"' and
21 March 1986. '' they again emphatically demand that
the provisions of the Geneva Protocol be strictly respected and observed.
"They also condemn the prolongation of the conflict
which, in addition to violations of international
humanitarian law, continues to exact an appalling toll of
human life, to cause heavy material damage in the two
States, and to endanger peace and security in the region.
"They express grave concern over the dangers of an
extension of the conflict to other States in the region.
"They reiterate their call for respect for the territorial
integrity of all States in the region.
"They reaffirm resolution 582 ( 1986) and call on both
parties to co-operate with the efforts of the Security
Council to open the way to an early settlement of the
conflict on the basis of justice and honour.
"They express support for the Secretary-General's
efforts to restore peace to the peoples of Iran and Iraq and
call on both States to respond positively to his efforts."

At its 2750th meeting. on 20 July 1987, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Iraq to participate.
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled "The
situation between Iran and Iraq".

Resolution 598 (1987)
of 20 ,July 1987

On 14 May 1987, after consultations. the President made
the following statement on behalf of the members of the
Council:'"
"The members of the Security Council. seized with the
continuing conflict between the Islamic Republic of Iran
and Iraq. have considered the report of the mission of
specialists dispatched by the Secretary-General to investi-

The Security Council,
Re,!tfirming its resolution 582 ( 1986).
Deeply concerned that. despite its calls for a cease-fire,
the conflict between the Islamic Republic of Iran and Iraq
continues unabated. with further heavy loss of human life
and material destruction.
Deploring the initiation and continuation of the conflict,

" Resolutions or decision~ on this question were abo a<loptc<l hv the
Council in 1980. 1982. 1983. 1984. 1985 an<l 1986.
·
'·' Sil86IO.
"See Re.wlutions and Decisions ,!(1he Sernritr Co1111cil. /986. p. 13.
'' Ibid .. p. 12.
"'S/18863.

" Official Records <!f the Sernritr Council. Fonr-wm,u/ }hir. Supplemenl.fi,r April. May wrd J1111e /987, document SI 18852.
'' League of Nations. T,-eu/y Series. vol. XCIV (1929). No. 2138.
,. See Re.m/111io11s and Decisions of1he St'rnritr Council. /984. p. IO.
"Ibid .. 1985. pp. 6 and 7.

5

to assign a team of experts to study the question of
reconstruction and to report to the Council;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to examine,
in consultation with Iran and Iraq and with other States of
the region, measures to enhance the security and stability of
the region;

Deplorin,? also the bombing of purely civilian population
centres. attacks on neutral shipping or civilian aircraft, the
violation of international humanitarian law and other laws
of armed conflict, and, in particular, the use of chemical
weapons contrary to obligations under the 1925 Geneva
Protoco I,"
Deeply concerned that further escalation and widening of
the conflict may take place,
Determined to bring to an end all military actions
between Iran and Iraq,
Convinced that a comprehensive, just, honourable and
durable settlement should be achieved between Iran and
Iraq,
Recalling the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, and in particular the obligation of all Member
States to settle their international disputes by peaceful
means in such a manner that international peace and
security and justice are not endangered,
Determining that there exists a breach of the peace as
regards the conflict between Iran and Iraq,
Acting under Articles 39 and 40 of the Charter,
I. Demands that, as a first step towards a negotiated
settlement, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Iraq observe an
immediate cease-fire, discontinue all military actions on
land, at sea and in the air, and withdraw all forces to the
internationally recognized boundaries without delay;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to dispatch a team of
United Nations observers to verify, confirm and supervise
the cease-fire and withdrawal and further requests the
Secretary-General to make the necessary arrangements in
consultation with the Parties and to submit a report thereon
to the Security Council;
3. Urges that prisoners-of-war be released and repatriated without delay after the cessation of active hostilities
in accordance with the Third Geneva Convention of
12 August I 949;"
4. Calls upon Iran and Iraq to co-operate with the
Secretary-General in implementing this resolution and in
mediation efforts to achieve a comprehensive, just and
honourable settlement, acceptable to both sides. of all
outstanding issues, in accordance with the principles contained in the Charter of the United Nations;
5. Calls upon all other States to exercise the utmost
restraint and to refrain from any act which may lead to
further escalation and widening of the conflict. and thus to
facilitate the implementation of the present resolution;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to explore. in consultation with Iran and Iraq. the question of entrusting an
impartial body with inquiring into responsibility for the
conflict and to report to the Council as soon as possible;
7. Recognizes the magnitude of the damage inflicted
during the conflict and the need for reconstruction efforts,
with appropriate international assistance, once the conflict
is ended and, in this regard. requests the Secretary-General

9. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Council
informed on the implementation of this resolution;
10. Decides to meet again as necessary to consider
further steps to ensure compliance with this resolution.
Atlopt(·d 11111111i1111ms/_1· 111 the
2750th meetin)i.

Decision
At its 2779th meeting, on 24 December 1987, the
Council proceeded with the discussion of the item entitled
"The situation between Iran and Iraq".

At the same meeting, the President made the following
statement:''
"After consultations, 1 have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the members of the
Council:
.. 'The members of the Security Council take note of
the assessment made by the Secretary-General to the
Council on IO December 1987 following his consultations with the emissaries of the Islamic Republic of
Iran and Iraq concerning the implementation of resolution 598 ( 1987) as well as of his request for a fresh and
resolute impulse from the Council. They express their
grave concern over the slow pace and lack of real
progress in these consultations.
'"Determined to bring the conflict to an end as soon
as possible, they reaffirm their commitment to resolution 598 ( 1987) as an integrated whole. They also
reaffirm that the implementation of that resolution is
the only basis for a comprehensive, just, honourable
and durable settlement of the conflict.
'"They support the Secretary-General's outline plan,
as endorsed by the Council, as well as his efforts to
implement resolution 598 ( 1987).
"'They consider it essential that the SecretaryGeneral continue to fulfil the mandate assigned to him
by resolution 598 ( 1987).
.. 'They declare their determination, in accordance
with paragraph I O of resolution 598 ( 1987), to consider further steps to ensure compliance with this resolution.'"

" United Nations. Treatv Serie.i-. vol. 75. No. 972.

'' S/19382.

6
