IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Aware of the heavy burden which active involvement in
the process of multilateral treaty-making places upon
Governments,
Convinced that the most rational use should be made of
the finite resources available for the elaboration of multilateral treaties,
Taking into account statements made at the current session during the debate on this item in the Sixth Committee, 44
I. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General
submitted to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth43 and
thirty-sixth45 sessions, including the replies and observations made by Governments and international organizations
on the review of the multilateral treaty-making process;46
2. Decides, in the light of statements made on this item
at the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly, to establish at the thirty-seventh session a working group of the
Sixth Committee;
(a) To consider the questions raised in annex I of the
report of the Secretary-General to the General Assei:nbly at
its thirty-sixth session45 and any other relevant matenal submitted by Governments and international organizations;
(b) To assess the methods of multilateral treaty-making
used in the United Nations and in conferences convened
under its auspices to determine whether the current methods
of multilateral treaty-making are as efficient, economical
and effective as they could be to meet the needs of the
Member States;
(c) To make recommendations on the basis of the abovementioned assessment;
3. Invites Governments and international organizations
to submit by 30 June 1982 their observations on the reports
submitted by the Secretary-General, taking into account the
specific questions contained in annex I of the report submitted to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session,
as well as their comments on any other aspect of the subject,
as they consider desirable;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a report containing the observations and comments received pursuant to
paragraph 3 above;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to prepare documentation containing the material and information listed
in annex II of the report of the Secretary-General to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session, in the form of
a provisional version of a volume in the Legislative Series,
as well as a topical analysis of the observations and replies
received, in time for use by the working group referred to
in paragraph 2 above;
6. Funher requests the Secretary-General to prepare
and publish as soon as possible new editions of the Handbook of Final Clauses41 and the Summary of the Practice
of the Secretary-General as Depositary of Multilateral
Agreements, 48 taking into account relevant new developments and practices in that respect;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Review of the
multilateral treaty-making process''.
92nd plenary meeting
JO December 1981
"Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session, Sixth
Committee, 54th-57th, 63rd and 64th meetings; and ibid., Sixth Committee,
Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum.
., N36/553.
""N36/553/Add. I and 2.
•1

STILEG/6.
.. STILEG/7.

36/113.

243

United Nations Conference on Succession of
States in respect of State Property, Archives
and Debts

The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter II of the repo~ of t~e lnt~rnational Law Commission on the work of its th1rty-th1rd
session49 which contains final draft articles and commentaries on succession of States in respect of State property,
archives and debts,
Noting that the International Law Commission at its first
session in 1949 listed succession of States and Governments
among the topics of international law selected for codification, that at its fourteenth session in 1962, pursuant to
General Assembly resolution 1686 (XVI) of 18 December
1961, it included the topic on its priority list and that at its
fifteenth session in 1963 the Commission endorsed the objective of preparing draft articles on the topic,
Recalling that in its resolutions 1765 (XVII) of 20 November 1962, 1902 (XVIII) of 18 November 1963, 2045
(XX) of 8 December 1965, 2 I 67 (XXI) of 5 December
1966, 2272 (XXII) of 1 December 1967, 2400 (XXIII) of
11 December 1968 and 250 l (XXIV) of 12 November 1969,
the General Assembly recommended that the International
Law Commission should continue the work of codification
and progressive development of succession of States a~d
Governments, taking into account the views expressed m
the General Assembly and the comments submitted by Governments with appropriate reference to the views of States
which have achieved independence since the Second World
War,
Recalling further that, by its resolution 3496 (XXX) of
15 December 1975, the General Assembly decided to convene a conference of plenipotentiaries to consider the International Law Commission's draft articles on succession
of States in respect of treaties and to embody the results of
its work in an international convention and such other instruments as it might deem appropriate,
Noting also that the Vienna Convention on Succession
of States in respect of Treaties 50 was adopted on 23 August
1978,
Noting further that, subsequent to the adoption of General
Assembly resolutions 2634 (XXV) of 12 November 1970,
2780 (XXVI) of 3 December 1971, 2926 (XXVII) of 28
November 1972, 3071 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973,
3315 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974, 3495 (XXX) of 15
December 1975, 31/97 of 15 December 1976 and 32/151
of 19 December 1977, the International Law Commission,
pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 33/139 of 19
December 1978, 34/141 of 17 December 1979 and 35/163
of 15 December 1980, completed at its thirty-third session
its draft articles on succession of States in respect of State
property, archives and debts, 51
Recalling that, as stated in paragraph 86 of the report of
the International Law Commission on the work of its thirtythird session, the Commission decided to recommend that
the General Assembly should convene an international conference of plenipotentiaries to study the Commission's draft
articles on succession of States in respect of State property,
archives and debts and to conclude a convention on the
subject,

49
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. JO (N36/IO and Corr.I).
,o Official Records of the United Nations Conference on Succession of
States in Respect of Treaties, vol. III. Documents of the Conference (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.Y.10), p. 185.
" Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session, Sup·
plement No. JO (N36110 and Corr. I), chap. II, sect. D .

244

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

Mindful of Article 13, paragraph 1 a, of the Charter of
the United Nations, which provides that the General Assembly shall initiate studies and make recommendations for
the purpose of encouraging the progressive development of
international law and its codification,
Believing that the successful codification and progressive
development of the rules of international law governing
succession of States in respect of State property, archives
and debts would contribute to the development of friendly
relations and co-operation among States, irrespective of
their differing constitutional and social systems, and would
assist in promoting and implementing the purposes and principles set forth in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the International Law
Commission for its valuable work on the question of succession of States in respect of State property, archives and
debts, and to the Special Rapporteur on the topic for his
contribution to this work;
2. Decides that an international conference of plenipotentiaries shall be convened to consider the draft articles
on succession of States in respect of State property, archives
and debts, and to embody the results of its work in an
international convention and such other instruments as it
may deem appropriate;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the United
Nations Conference on Succession of States in respect of
State Property, Archives and Debts early in 1983 at a place
to be determined by the General Assembly at its thirtyseventh session;
4. Invites Member States to submit, not later than I
July 1982, their written comments and observations on the
final draft articles on succession of States in respect of State
property, archives and debts, prepared by the International
Law Commission;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate such
comments so as to facilitate the discussion on the subject
at the thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session an item entitled "United Nations
Conference on Succession of States in respect of State Property, Archives and Debts".
92nd plenary meeting
JO December 1981

36/114. Report of the International Law Commission
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-third session, 49
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development
of international law and its codification in order to make it
a more effective means of implementing the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and
in the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations 52 and
to give increased importance to its role in relations among
States,
Noting with appreciation that at its thirty-third session
the International Law Commission, pursuant to General
Assembly resolutions 34/141 of 17 December 1979 and 35/
163 of 15 December 1980, completed the second reading
of the draft articles on succession of States in respect of
State property, archives and debts, and commenced the sec-

» Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

ond reading of the draft articles on treaties concluded between States and international organizations or between
international organizations,
Noting further with appreciation the progress made at
that session by the International Law Commission on State
responsibility, international liability for injurious consequences arising out of acts not prohibited by international
law, jurisdictional immunities of States and their property
and the status of the diplomatic courier and the diplomatic
bag not accompanied by diplomatic courier,
Taking note of the intention of the International Law
Commission to appoint a new Special Rapporteur on the
topic •'The law of the non-navigational uses of international
watercourses' ' 53 and stressing the desirability of the Commission doing so at the commencement of its thirty-fourth
session, thus ensuring continuity of its work on the topic,
Recognizing the importance of referring legal and drafting
questions to the Sixth Committee, including topics which
might be submitted to the International Law Commission,
thus enabling the Commission further to enhance its contribution to the progressive development of international law
and its codification,
1. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-third session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International Law
Commission for the work accomplished at that session;
3. Recommends that, taking into account the written
comments of Governments as well as views expressed in
debates in the General Assembly, the International Law
Commission should:
(a) Complete at its thirty-fourth session the second reading of the draft articles on treaties concluded between States
and international organizations or between international organizations, adopted at its twenty-sixth, twenty-seventh and
twenty-ninth to thirty-second sessions, also taking into
account the written comments of principal international
organizations;
(b) Continue its work aimed at the preparation of draft
articles on:
(i) Part two of the draft on responsibility of States for
internationally wrongful acts, bearing in mind the
need for a second reading of the draft articles constituting part one of the draft;
(ii) International liability for injurious consequences
arising out of acts not prohibited by international
law;
(iii) The law of the non-navigational uses of international
watercourses;
(iv) Jurisdictional immunities of States and their property;
(v) The status of the diplomatic courier and the diplomatic bag not accompanied by diplomatic courier;
(c) Continue its study of the second part of the topic
of relations between States and international organizations;
4. Endorses the conclusion reached by the International
Law Commission regarding the establishment, at its thirtyfourth session, of general objectives and priorities which
would guide its study of the topics on its programme of
work within the term of office of Commission members
elected at the current session of the General Assembly;~ 4
5. Expresses its satisfaction with the conclusion of the
International Law Commission that it will continue to keep
under review the possibility of improving further its present

" Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. /0 (N,6/10 and Corr. I}, para. 256 (c).
4
'
Ibid .. para. 25X
