XIII
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FOURTH
COJ\11\HTTEE
320 (IV).

Political advancement
Trust Territories

of

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report 1 of the Trusteeship Council covering its fourth and fifth sessions
and the various decisions and recommendations
made by it in the course of the discharge of its
functions,
1. Takes note of the decisions taken by the
Trusteeship Council and expresses its full support
of the Council's recommendations to the Administering Authorities for the adoption by the latter of measures which would hasten the advancement of the Trust Territories towards self-government or independence, in accordance with the
objectives laid down in Article 76 b of the
Charter;
2. Recommends to the Trusteeship Council
that it should include in its annual reports to the
General Assembly information in a special section
dealing with the implementation hy the Administering Authorities of the Council's recommendations concerning the measures adopted to grant
the indigenous inhabitants of the Trust Territories a larger degree of self-government through
participation in the legislative, executive and
judicial organs and procedures of the Trust
Territories.
240th plenary meeting,
15 November 1949.

321 (IV). International Trusteeship
System: petitions and visiting missions
The General Assembly,
C onsideri:ig that the examination of petitions
is one of the principal functions of the Trusteeship
Council under the Charter, and that the prompt
and effective discharge of this function is indispensable for the realization of the objectives set
forth in Article 76 b of the Charter and for tht'
promotion of the confidence of the inhabitants
of the Trust Territories in the International
Trusteeship System,
Observing with partirnlar interest the activitie~
of the Trusteeship Council in sending visiting;
missions to the Territories under trusteeship,
Recommends to the Trusteeship Council that it
should:
.1. Take such measures as it may deem appropriate with a view to facilitating and accelerating the examination and disposal of petitions;
1

2. Direct v1s1hng 1111ss1011s to report fully on
the steps taken towards the realization of the
objectives set forth in Article 76 li of the Charter,
under the headings of political, economic, social
and educational advancement, and in particular,
on the steps taken towards self-government or
independence.
240th plenary meeting,
15 November 1949.

322 (IV). Economic advancement in
Trust Territories
The General Assembly,
ll aving taken note of the conclusions2 and recommendations of the Trusteeship Council on the
economic advancement of the following Trust
Territories: the Cameroons and Togoland under
British administration, the Cameroons and Togoland under French administration, Western Samoa, New Guinea and Nauru,
Resol·ves:
1. To express full support of the recommendations of the Trusteeship Council and of all steps
leading to a greater participation of indigenous
inhabitants in the profits and management o{
entities, public or private, engaged in the exploitation of mineral and other natural resources or
in the production of, or trade in, raw materials
and commodities basic to the economy of Trust
Territories;
2. To reaffirm the principle that the interests
of the indigenous inhabitants must be paramount
in all economic plans or policies in Trust Territories, particularly in raising the standards of living and the level of wages, and in improving
housing, nutrition and health conditions;
3. To express its concern that the lack of
hudgetary autonomy in some cases and the scarcity
oi data in others did not allow the Trusteeship
l ·()uncil to make a thorough examination of the
f,,1a11cial situation of certain Territories;
-t To note with satisfaction the excellent financial situation in the Trust Territories of Western Samoa and Nauru and to endorse the recom111endations of the Council regarding the need
for the formulation of plans laying down a sound
economic foundation for these two Territories;
5. To recommend to the Trusteeship Council
the inclusion in its annual reports to the General
Assembly of a special section on the implementation by the Administering Authorities of its recommendations on the economic advancement of
the Trust Territories.
240th plenary meeting,
15 November 1949.

See Official Records of the fourth session of the Gen-

2 See Official Records of the fourth session of the General Assembly, Supplement No. 4.

eral Assembly, Supplement No. 4.

38
