A/61/PV.63

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-first session

63

rd plenary meeting
Friday, 1 December 2006, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Al-Khalifa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bahrain)

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Report of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
(A/61/35)
Report of the Secretary-General (A/61/355)
Draft resolutions (A/61/L.31, A/61/L.32,
A/61/L.33 and A/61/L.34)
The President (spoke in Arabic): Members will
recall that the General Assembly held a debate on this
item at its 60th and 61st plenary meetings, on 29 and
30 November 2006.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Senegal to make an oral revision to draft resolution
A/61/L.34.
Mr. Badji (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to inform the General Assembly of some revisions
that have been made to draft resolution A/61/L.34,
which is now before the Assembly. The revisions have
not yet been translated. I will therefore read them out
in English.
(spoke in English)
The following are the revisions that have been
made to the text. As members will note, there are some
minor changes, but for the sake of clarity I present the
following, which constitute the bulk of the changes.

The sixteenth preambular paragraph has been
split into two, although the meaning has been retained.
The sixteenth preambular paragraph should read as
follows:
“Expressing deep concern about the Israeli
policy of closure and the severe restrictions,
including curfews and the permit regime, that
continue to be imposed on the movement of
persons and goods, including medical and
humanitarian personnel and goods, throughout
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and the consequent negative impact on
the socio-economic situation of the Palestinian
people, which remains that of a dire humanitarian
crisis”.
The new seventeenth preambular paragraph reads
as follows:
“Concerned
about
the
continued
establishment of Israeli checkpoints in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and the transformation of several of
these checkpoints into structures akin to
permanent border crossings inside the occupied
Palestinian territory, which are severely impairing
the territorial contiguity of the territory and
severely undermining efforts to rehabilitate and
develop the Palestinian economy”.
The previous twentieth preambular paragraph has
been replaced with the following, twenty-first,
paragraph:

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

06-63748 (E)

*0663748*

A/61/PV.63

“Welcoming the efforts of the Arab foreign
ministers demonstrated in the meeting held in the
Security Council on 21 September 2006, who
called for, among other things, a solution to the
conflict on the basis of relevant United Nations
resolutions, especially from the United Nations
Security Council, the Arab Peace Initiative and
the Road Map”.
The
previous
twenty-second
preambular
paragraph, now the twenty-third, has been revised to
read as follows:
“Welcoming
the
Stockholm
Donors’
Conference on the Humanitarian Situation in the
Palestinian Territories of 1 September 2006 and
encouraging further donor meetings, as well as
the establishment of international mechanisms,
and the regard acknowledging the temporary
international mechanism to provide assistance to
the Palestinian people and to alleviate the
financial crisis and the dire socio-economic and
humanitarian situation being faced by the
Palestinian people”.
The former twenty-sixth preambular paragraph
has been replaced by the following paragraph, the
twenty-seventh:
“Welcoming the Palestinian truce initiative,
and its acceptance by Israel that came into effect
on 26 November 2006 and urging both sides to
maintain this truce, which could pave the way for
genuine negotiations towards a just resolution to
the conflict and extend it to the West Bank”.
Operative paragraph 4 has been deleted.
Paragraph 5, now paragraph 4, should read as follows:
“Calls upon the parties themselves, with the
support of the Quartet and other interested
parties, to exert all efforts necessary to halt the
deterioration of the situation, to reverse all
measures taken on the ground since 28 September
2000, and to immediately resume direct peace
negotiations towards the conclusion of a final
peaceful settlement on the basis of relevant
United Nations resolutions, especially from the
Security Council, the Arab Peace Initiative, the
terms of reference of the Madrid Conference and
the Road Map”.

2

(spoke in French)
Those are the revisions that have been made to
draft resolution A/61/L.34. I thank delegations for their
patience — especially those that are non-Englishspeaking — as regards those last-minute changes.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The General
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolutions
A/61/L.31, A/61/L.32, A/61/L.33, and A/61/L.34 as
orally revised.
We shall first consider draft resolution A/61/L.31,
which is entitled “Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People”. I should
like to announce that, since the issuance of document
A/61/L.31, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic has
become a sponsor of the draft resolution.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chile, China, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, United
Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia

06-63748

A/61/PV.63

Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Colombia,
Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Moldova,
Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Papua New Guinea,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Tonga, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay,
Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/61/L.31 was adopted by 101
votes to 7, with 62 abstentions (resolution 61/22).
[Subsequently the delegations of Gambia,
Guinea-Bissau and Lesotho advised the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in
favour, and the delegation of Nauru advised that
it had intended to vote against.]
The President (spoke in Arabic): We turn next to
draft resolution A/61/L.32, entitled “Division for
Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,

06-63748

Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Qatar, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cameroon, Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Moldova,
Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Papua New Guinea,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Tonga, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/61/L.32 was adopted by 101
votes to 7, with 62 abstentions (resolution 61/23).
[Subsequently the delegations of Gambia,
Guinea-Bissau and Lesotho advised the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in
favour, and the delegation of Nauru advised that
it had intended to vote against.]
The President (spoke in Arabic): We turn next to
draft
resolution A/61/L.33,
entitled
“Special
information programme on the question of Palestine of
the Department of Public Information of the
Secretariat”. A recorded vote has been requested.

3

A/61/PV.63

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominica,
Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad
and
Tobago,
Tunisia,
Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against:
Australia, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Canada, Fiji, Malawi, Moldova,
Papua New Guinea, Tonga, Uganda, Vanuatu

4

Draft resolution A/61/L.33 was adopted by 157
votes to 7, with 9 abstentions (resolution 61/24).
[Subsequently the delegations of Gambia,
Guinea-Bissau and Lesotho advised the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President (spoke in Arabic): We turn next to
draft resolution A/61/L.34, as orally revised, entitled
“Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon,
Lesotho,
Liberia,
Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad
and
Tobago,
Tunisia,
Turkey,

06-63748

A/61/PV.63

Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against:
Australia, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Canada, Côte d’Ivoire, Fiji, Malawi,
Moldova, Papua New Guinea, Tonga, Uganda,
Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/61/L.34 as orally revised was
adopted by 157 votes to 7, with 10 abstentions
(resolution 61/25).
[Subsequently the delegations of Gambia,
Guinea-Bissau and Lesotho advised the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the observer of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I just want to thank all
those who voted in favour of these resolutions, as well
as to say that this is another indication of the massive
support of the international community for a just and
peaceful solution on the basis of two States and for
moving the peace process forward. We hope that one
Member State will take note of these votes and listen to
the overwhelming decision of the international
community.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We have thus
concluded this stage of our consideration of agenda
item 14.
Agenda item 13 (continued)
The situation in the Middle East
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/61/298
and A/61/355)
Draft resolutions (A/61/L.35 and A/61/L.36)
The President (spoke in Arabic): Members will
recall that the General Assembly held a debate on this
item at its 61st and 62nd plenary meetings, on
30 November 2006.

06-63748

We shall now proceed to
resolutions A/61/L.35 and A/61/L.36.

consider

draft

We will first take up draft resolution A/61/L.35,
entitled “Jerusalem”. I should like to inform members
that, since the issuance of document A/61/L.35, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has become a
sponsor of the draft resolution.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El
Salvador,
Eritrea,
Estonia,
Ethiopia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland,
Italy,
Jamaica,
Japan,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad
and
Tobago,
Tunisia,
Turkey,

5

A/61/PV.63

Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Fiji, Malawi,
Moldova, Papua New Guinea, Tonga, Uganda,
Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/61/L.35 was adopted by 157
votes to 6, with 10 abstentions (resolution 61/26).
[Subsequently the delegations of Gambia and
Guinea-Bissau advised the Secretariat that they
had intended to vote in favour.]
The President (spoke in Arabic): We turn next to
draft resolution A/61/L.36, entitled “The Syrian
Golan”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin,
Bhutan,
Bolivia,
Brazil,
Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa,

6

Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Moldova, Monaco,
Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/61/L.36 was adopted by 107
votes to 6, with 60 abstentions (resolution 61/27).
[Subsequently the delegations of Gambia and
Guinea-Bissau advised the Secretariat that they
had intended to vote in favour.]
The President (spoke in Arabic): Before giving
the floor to speakers in explanation of vote on the
resolutions just adopted, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to explain the votes of the delegations of
Brazil and Argentina in connection with resolution
61/27, entitled “The Syrian Golan”, which the General
Assembly has just adopted.
Brazil and Argentina voted in favour of the
resolution because we believe that the illegality of the
seizure of territory by force is at the heart of the
resolution. Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the
United Nations prohibits the use or threat of use of

06-63748

A/61/PV.63

force against the territorial integrity of States. That is a
peremptory norm of international law.
We would also like to clarify the position of our
delegations with regard to paragraph 6 of the
resolution. Our votes were not intended to prejudge the
matters referred to in that paragraph, in particular its
reference to the line of 4 June 1967.
On behalf of the Governments of Argentina and
Brazil, I would like to take this opportunity to urge the
authorities of Israel and Syria to resume negotiations
with a view to finding a lasting solution to the question
of the Syrian Golan in accordance with Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace.
Mrs. Schroderus-Fox (Finland): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
countries of Bulgaria, Romania, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia, Liechtenstein and
Ukraine align themselves with this statement.
I would like to explain our votes on draft
resolution A/61/L.36, on the Syrian Golan. The
European Union remains concerned about the situation
in the Middle East. It welcomes the agreement between
President Mahmoud Abbas and Prime Minister Ehud
Olmert to establish a mutual ceasefire in Gaza, and
calls on the parties to do more to facilitate the urgent
reinvigoration of the peace process. There can be no
military solution to the Middle East conflict.
A just, lasting and comprehensive settlement of
the situation in the Middle East, including on the
Syrian and Lebanese tracks, must be based on Security
Council resolution 242 (1967) — which emphasizes
the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by
force and the need to work for a just and lasting peace
in which every State in the region can live in security
— and on subsequent resolutions 338 (1973), 1397
(2002) and 1515 (2003). Such a settlement must also
be based on the Madrid Terms of Reference, in
particular the principle of land for peace, as well as on
the implementation of the road map and all existing
agreements between the parties. We reiterate our
intention to continue to work relentlessly with the
regional parties as part of the Middle East Quartet
towards that goal.
The European Union would like to reiterate that a
final peace settlement will not be complete without

06-63748

taking account of the Israel-Syria and Israel-Lebanon
aspects. Negotiations should resume as soon as
possible with the aim of reaching an agreement.
It should be recalled that, earlier this week in the
Fourth Committee, the European Union voted in favour
of draft resolution A/C.4/61/L.17, on the occupied
Syrian Golan, which called upon Israel to desist from
changing the demographic composition of the occupied
Syrian Golan and, in particular, to desist from the
establishment of settlements. We believe that the
resolution on the Syrian Golan under today’s agenda
item contains references that could undermine the
process of bilateral negotiations. For that reason, as in
previous years, the European Union has abstained in
the voting on the resolution.
Finally, in the spirit of rationalizing the work of
the General Assembly agenda, the European Union
would prefer to have only one resolution dealing with
this issue before this body.
Mr. Mottaghi-Nejad (Islamic Republic of Iran):
My delegation voted in favour of the resolutions just
adopted under agenda items 13 and 14, on the situation
in the Middle East and the question of Palestine,
respectively. The views of the Islamic Republic of Iran
on those important issues were articulated during the
general debate and the debate on the question of
Palestine in the Assembly. In short, we believe that a
durable peace in Palestine will be possible through
justice, an end to discrimination, an end to the
occupation of all Palestinian territories, the return of
all Palestinian refugees, the resort to democratic means
to determine the wishes of the people and the
establishment of a democratic Palestinian State with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
Mr. Siegel (United States of America): The
United States cannot support resolution 61/27, on the
Syrian Golan. We continue to disagree with the text,
with prejudges final status issues that must be
negotiated between the parties. In recent days, we
abstained in the voting on the Fourth Committee draft
resolution entitled “The occupied Syrian Golan”
(A/C.4/61/L.17). Recently, we acted with reason and
restraint in not blocking consensus on a Syrian
candidate for the Committee on Conferences. Today we
voted no.
Our decisions on these matters, as with all issues
that come before the United Nations, are rooted in our
regard for the United Nations and the importance of

7

A/61/PV.63

dealing with individual issues in a responsible manner.
Unfortunately, not all Member States share that view.
As we voted today, the United Nations must take this
occasion to register its profound unhappiness over
Syria’s continued disregard for United Nations and
relevant Security Council resolutions. Syria is using
the General Assembly to direct accusations at Israel
even as it flouts a number of Security Council
resolutions — including resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680
(2006) and 1701 (2006) — with its refusal in practice
to treat Lebanon as a genuinely sovereign country.
We would like to reiterate our alarm at
indications that Syria is working with Hezbollah and
other Lebanese allies to destabilize the democratically
elected Government of Lebanon. Syria’s political and
material support for Hezbollah’s continued existence as
a militia was made clear during last summer’s
hostilities in Lebanon, despite the call by Security
Council resolution 1559 (2004) for the disarmament of
all militias in Lebanon. We reiterate our concern that
Syria is not abiding by the embargo of the
unauthorized weapons shipments into Lebanon
imposed by Security Council resolution 1701 (2006).
The Security Council has also adopted a series of
resolutions under which Iraq’s neighbours are called
upon to take steps to prevent the destabilization of
Iraq. Yet Syria continues to allow its territory to be
used by networks that terrorize Iraq.
Syria also continues to host organizations that
reject peace efforts and conduct terrorist attacks
against Israel.
We call upon the Syrian regime to reverse its
destructive and destabilizing policies, namely, to halt
its support for terrorism, to end its efforts to destabilize
Lebanon, to prevent the use of its territory to support
the insurgency in Iraq and to cease the harassment of
Syrians who seek to defend their rights and to bring
democratic change to their country. We remain focused
on the need to change and to counter the policies of the
Syrian regime. The Syrian people and people across the
region deserve better.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I call on the
representative of Syria on a point of order.
Mr. Al-Jafari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): If we understand correctly, in accordance with
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, we are
entitled to take the floor immediately upon raising a

8

point of order. My delegation therefore regrets that it
was not given the floor when we initially raised the
point of order.
The representative of the United States has
strayed from the topic under discussion to distract the
world’s attention from the important issues we are
discussing, namely, the agenda items on Palestine and
on the situation in the Middle East.
The representative of the United States referred,
among other things, to Syria’s alleged lack of respect
for the United Nations. In that context, it is important
to say — and we could say many things — that the
United States has not always respected the United
Nations since its inception. It is important to bear that
in mind, especially as the representative of the United
States has said so himself, that the United States has
stood in the way of international legitimacy 84 times
since the early days of the Organization. The United
States has used its right of veto 84 times to prevent
justice from being done throughout the world in the
settling of disputes, thereby bringing States into
conflict with one another, encouraging wars and coups
d’etat and the spilling of blood throughout the world.
The memory of the international Organization is not
short. The United States has used its veto privilege
44 times to protect Israel, its foster son, and to stop it
from adhering to resolutions of international
legitimacy. Therefore, how can the United States talk
about non-respect by Syria for the United Nations,
when we are one of the founding States of the
Organization? We achieved our independence through
the United Nations. Our diplomacy is based on
resolutions adopted by the United Nations. Our appeals
for a just and comprehensive peace are based on
United Nations resolutions.
The representative of the United States crossed a
red line by referring to my country’s domestic affairs
and even suggesting that Syria has a tendency to
interfere in the internal affairs of other States. As to his
allegations concerning Lebanon, I would point out to
him that many Arabs, Lebanese and people throughout
the world reproach the United States for its ongoing
flagrant interference in Lebanon’s affairs through its
ambassador and embassy in Beirut. I would remind my
American colleague that Syria has implemented the
relevant provisions of Security Council resolution 1701
(2006) even as Lebanon’s airspace and the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon are violated by
Israel by sea and air. That information has been

06-63748

A/61/PV.63

officially recorded by the Lebanese and distributed to
Member States from time to time.
Such American provocations are shabby and in
keeping with its cheap political tactics. The total
ignorance embodied in the United States statement is a
reflection of the United States’ policy in the Middle
East. That failed policy, which has unleashed further
disasters — bloodshed, invasions, occupation and
instability in the region — has also had disastrous
consequences throughout the world, to which all of us,
even those who work for the United States
Administration, can bear witness.
I have some advice for the representative of the
United States. I ask him to read the first-rate report
issued by the group led by Mr. Baker and Mr. Hamilton
on the serious policy errors committed by the United
States Administration in the Middle East. I advise him
and his colleagues to closely read the comment
recently made by the international media, the
diplomatic corps and the Secretary-General on the
calamitous results throughout the world of the United
States belligerent, aggressive policies of occupation —
policies based on invasions, the use of force and
arbitrary actions, rather than on the influence that
could be wielded by a large country like the United
States to achieve stability in the world and the peaceful
settlement of conflict through dialogue and interaction
instead of invasions or threats of invasion and
occupation.
This morning, the representative of the United
States made a statement that is difficult to understand
following the adoption by the Assembly of the
resolution on the Syrian Golan, which clearly
demonstrates that the overwhelming majority of States
oppose Israel’s occupation of the Golan. Although the
resolution was adopted, the representative of the
United States still sought to teach us about the need to
respect this international Organization. Instead, he
should have apologized for not voting in favour of the
resolution.
I am extremely surprised that the representative
of the United States should insist on damaging his own
country, and I am sure that many other delegations
have also been taken aback and cannot understand why
the United States should defend a failed regional policy
that is arbitrary and misguided. An Arab proverb says
that it is better for you to hide if you have inflicted
disaster. In that context, the representative of the

06-63748

United States might do better to consider that proverb
so as to improve his performance at the United
Nations.
I call upon the United States once again not to
involve itself in the internal affairs of States, to respect
the United Nations Charter, to stop using the veto, to
cease undermining resolutions that enjoy international
legitimacy, and to withdraw its support for the Israeli
occupation of our territories. Our demand for the
liberation of our occupied territory is entirely just,
whether or not it suits the representative of the United
States. The United States has been and should always
be a sponsor of peace, not a sponsor of terrorism, and
of invasion of peoples and countries.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now call on
the Observer of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I have thanked those
who voted in favour of the resolutions related to the
question of Palestine. I also want to thank those who
voted in favour of the resolutions as a whole.
With reference to the resolutions concerning
Jerusalem, I just want to place on record our
appreciation and thanks to Costa Rica and El Salvador
for doing what they did, as reflected in the text of the
resolution and in their voting. We appreciate that very
much, and we see it as a step in the right direction.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I call on the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation wishes to express its deep
appreciation and gratitude to the General Assembly for
adopting by overwhelming majority of a resolution on
the Syrian Golan, as it has repeatedly done since 1981,
as well as of the other resolutions on the question of
Palestine.
The positive response of the international
community, which continues to support those
resolutions, reflects the Member States’ dedication to
the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter and their support for our right to recover our
territories occupied by Israel, with United States
backing, for more than 39 years.
The adoption of the resolutions also sends a clear
international message to Israel that occupation, killing,
aggressive expansionist policies, and faits accomplis
will be categorically condemned by the entire

9

A/61/PV.63

international community. We are all interested in
seeing law and justice prevail, implementing the
United Nations Charter in the maintenance of
international peace and security, and rejecting foreign
occupation in any form, aggression, expansionism and
settlement-building on the lands of others.
I should like to repeat Syria’s thanks to all the
sponsors of the resolution on the Syrian Golan and to
all those that voted in favour of it. I reiterate my
country’s appeal for a just and comprehensive peace
and its insistence now more than ever on the liberation
of the Golan from Israeli occupation through all means
consistent with international law. We call on the
international community to support us in achieving that
goal. War can be prevented by pressuring Israel, the
party that is blocking peace, to accept a peace that will
ensure a bright future for the region.
The Israeli occupation of the Golan is a double
crime under international law. That crime involves not
just the Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan, but also
Israel’s illegal annexation of that territory in 1981. In
that year, the Security Council adopted resolution 497
(1981), in which it stated that the occupation is null
and void and has no legal merit. Despite that, we
continue to hear statements from some parties
indicating their desire to prejudge the outcome of
negotiations between Syria and Israel, as though such
negotiations were actually taking place.
Our people are experiencing the bitter reality of
life under the yoke of the Israeli occupation in the
Golan. In accordance with the purposes and principles
of the United Nations Charter, the international
community should categorically condemn the
occupation and annexation, just as, in 1939, it
denounced the Nazi annexation of the Danzig Corridor
and the Czech Sudetenland. The Nazis’ illegitimate
actions towards two independent countries of Europe
led to condemnation by the international community of
the Nazi regime.

10

In our view and the view of many, the Golan is no
less important than the Sudetenland or the Danzig
Corridor. That is why we call Israeli policies Nazi
policies.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to the representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I speak
in the conviction of the right of peoples to recover their
occupied territories and to enjoy their full national
sovereignty. The Government of Lebanon has therefore
always been fully committed to all the relevant
resolutions on that issue.
We believe that the settlement of the Israeli-Arab
and the Israeli-Palestinian conflicts will be brought
about through the commitment of all countries to
respect the relevant international resolutions. Peace in
the Middle East is absolutely necessary and is a goal
that the Group of Arab States has always striven to
achieve on the basis of the principles of the Madrid
Conference or of the Arab Peace Initiative adopted by
the Arab countries at the 2002 Beirut summit.
We thank all those countries that have supported
and continue to support Lebanon in its efforts to
overcome the problems caused by the Israeli
aggression and to recover and extend our sovereignty
and authority throughout our territory. We call on all
countries to commit themselves fully to implementing
all resolutions of international legitimacy in order to
ensure that Lebanon remains a crossroads of
civilizations and a country that embodies the message
that the Middle East can be a region of progress,
prosperity and hope for a better future to all its
peoples.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 13.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

06-63748
