S/PV.7425

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7425th meeting

Thursday, 9 April 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Kawar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Jordan)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Delattre
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. McLay
Mr. Laro
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Letter dated 2 January 2015 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2015/3)
Letter dated 16 March 2015 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2015/187)
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2015/219)

15-10023 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1510023*

The situation in Mali

S/PV.7425

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Concerning the political process, as the SecretaryGeneral explains in his report, in February the Malian
parties held a fifth session of the inter-Malian dialogue
in Algiers. On 1 March, two of the three parties
initialled the draft peace agreement submitted to them
by the mediators in indication of their agreement with
it. The third party, known as the Coordination, asked
for more time to consult its base, while negotiations
continued between it and the mediators. This past
week, the head of the mediation, the representative of
Algeria, and Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Hamdi met with the Coordination leadership in
Algiers. At that time, the Coordination indicated that it
would be initialing the agreement next week. However,
that is just an statement of intent; it has not actually
happened yet.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Letter dated 2 January 2015 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2015/3)
Letter dated 16 March 2015 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2015/187)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2015/219)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representative of Mali to participate in this
meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
African Integration and International Cooperation of
the Republic of Mali.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/219, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali, as well
as to documents S/2015/3 and S/2015/187, containing
letters dated 2 January 2015 and 16 March 2015 from
the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for giving me the opportunity to
brief the Council on Mali at a time that I think it is fair
to call a key moment in the political process. I would
like to complement the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2015/219) by focusing on three points: the dialogue
process, the security situation and the strengthening
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).

2/7

09/04/2015

What we can gather from all this is that the crisis
in Mali can be resolved only through an inclusive
and viable political agreement that can be effectively
implemented. The draft currently on the table provides
a good basis for the resolution of many issues that have
been at the heart of the Malian conflict for so many
years. An agreement is only one step in a long process,
and it is important that all parties fully commit to
following through with the process to its conclusion.
I therefore think that, more than ever, it is important
to urge the Malian parties to continue their dialogue to
address outstanding issues and to commit to the process
that will follow the signing of the agreement, which
we all hope to see. In that context, the international
community has an important role to play in facilitating
and supporting the dialogue. However, allow me to say
that, ultimately, the people of Mali are responsible for
ensuring peace.
I therefore believe this is a historic opportunity to
reach a political settlement. It is historic because, with
regard to previous efforts to resolve the Malian crisis,
this is the first time that the international community
has mobilized to provide its support. There is really
an alignment of the stars, if I may use the expression,
which is a first in the history of Mali, and there is a
desire to support Mali. I therefore think that this
message must continue to be conveyed. All Malians
must take ownership of this process, and that is how we
will be able to move forward.
Of course, one of the crucial aspects now will be
the establishment of a precise and detailed framework
and timeline for the implementation of the peace
process. Clear and robust implementation mechanisms

15-10023

09/04/2015

The situation in Mali

are also necessary because there is a lack of confidence
among the Malian parties. I think peace is attainable,
and intensive efforts to that end should be undertaken
in the upcoming weeks.
Unfortunately,
the
security
situation
is
fragile — not only in northern Mali, but also in other
parts of the country. This insecurity has a direct impact
on civilians’ safety and hinders the re-establishment of
State authority, humanitarian access and stabilization
programmes.
While preparations for the fifth round of talks in
Algiers were under way in January, there were violations
of the ceasefire on the ground by the parties and serious
security threats for civilians. On 19 February, parties
recommitted to upholding the ceasefire, which has
generally been respected. However, I must take this
opportunity to reaffirm that no party should seek to
gain ground by military means. It is essential to comply
with the ceasefire. Peace in Mali will be achieved only
through negotiations, not through military means.
The lack of constructive participation by some of
the Malian parties in the ceasefire management bodies
is an area of concern. In that regard, I am thinking
in particular of the Mixed Technical Commission on
Security and the joint observation and verification
teams. I think it is very important that all parties uphold
their ceasefire commitments and participate in those
bodies, as that is how we will eventually be able to cover
additional ground and gain a better understanding and
a deterrent effect on those who violate the ceasefire.
As I stated, there were serious incidents, not just
in the north of Mali but also in Bamako on 7 March
and in other areas south of the Niger River. Those
incidents demonstrate how extremist and criminal
elements exploit vacuums of law and order in order to
perpetrate their crimes. It is therefore critical that all
Malian parties clearly distance themselves from violent
and illegal activities. That is the reason that last year
we established a cell in MINUSMA tasked with dealing
with issues of transnational crime and helping the
Malian Government develop its action in that regard. I
think that the Security Council’s attention and support
to issues related to illicit trafficking and criminality
are extremely important. It is also important for
the countries of the region and all Mali’s partners to
continue to support MINUSMA and its personnel to
enable the Mission to carry out its tasks, including
with regard to MINUSMA’s supply routes through the

S/PV.7425

territories of neighbouring countries, which are quite
helpful to the Mission.
With regard to the situation on the ground, there
continue to be attacks. Since our last meeting, three
peacekeepers lost their lives. I would like to pay tribute
to them and to the police- and troop-contributing
countries that sent them to Mali.
With regard to MINUSMA, efforts are ongoing to
expand the Mission’s presence and operations in the
northern regions, pursuant to resolution 2164 (2014). As
detailed in the report, the deployment of the Mission’s
military component has reached 80 per cent, and we
are hoping to conclude its deployment with the arrival
in next two months of the two battalions that we have
been awaiting for so long, but who are now almost fully
equipped. I think that the figure of 80 per cent will rise
significantly in the two months to come. At the same
time, the construction of infrastructure continues, but
not under the best conditions because of the ongoing
security challenges. This is therefore a work in progress.
We have also continued and strengthened our
outreach efforts with local populations, who have often
long been polarized as the legacy of intercommunal
tensions and political and criminal violence. In this
regard, since February we have had a tool that, I believe,
will prove to be very useful, and that is MINUSMA
radio, whose broadcasts will be expanded in local
languages.
We will continue to require financial and technical
support from Member States. As discussions on the
MINUSMA budget begin in the relevant committees,
I believe that a strong signal from the Security Council
would have an influence on those upcoming discussions.
In conclusion, I would like to express how much we
appreciate the efforts of our partners in the mediation
team: Algeria, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and other countries.
Their efforts have been commendable.
The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Hamdi, and all of our colleagues in
MINUSMA are carrying out their duties in very
difficult conditions. I would like to briefly express
my great appreciation of the work of Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General David Gressly,
who is concluding his service as Resident Coordinator
and Humanitarian Coordinator and moving on
elsewhere, having accomplished a great deal in his two
and a half years in Mali.

15-100233/7

The situation in Mali

S/PV.7425

Last but not least, I would like to congratulate
Force Commander Major General Lollesgaard, who
took up his functions 10 days ago, taking over from
General Bikimo of Chad, who had served as Acting
Force Commander for several months with great skill.
The President (spoke
Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, African Integration and International
Cooperation of Mali.
Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): Let me convey
to you, Madam, the warmest congratulations of the
delegation of Mali upon the accession of your country,
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, to the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of April. At the same
time, let me say how proud we are to see a woman from
the Middle East presiding over the Security Council. I
would also like to pay a just tribute to France for the
skill with which it guided the work of the Council last
month.
I would also like to express the deepest gratitude of
His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, President
of the Republic of Mali, and the Government and the
people of Mali to our shared Organization, the United
Nations, and its Member States for the ongoing,
multifaceted support they have provided to the peace
process in Mali since January 2012, when the most
serious crisis in the history of our country began.
I take this opportunity to express and reaffirm the
confidence of the Government of Mali in international
mediation, being led by Algeria and comprising the
United Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the European
Union, the Organization for Islamic Cooperation,
Burkina Faso, Mauritania, the Niger, Nigeria and Chad.
I welcome France’s role and contribution in Mali and all
of the sacrifices that have been made.
I take this opportunity to commend the personal
commitment of the Secretary-General to seeking peace
and reconciliation in Mali. I also take this opportunity
to pay tribute to Mr. David Gressley for his great service
in our country and to wish him the greatest of success
in his future endeavours, in Africa or elsewhere.
I extend the heartfelt thanks of the Malian people
to all friendly nations and international partner
organizations that have shown their solidarity with Mali
by sending their children or their experts to defend the

4/7

09/04/2015

values binding us together as humankind. I pay solemn
tribute to the memory of those who lost their lives in the
line of duty in Mali, defending human dignity, freedom
and democracy.
The Government of Mali notes the report of
the Secretary-General of the United Nations on
developments in the situation in Mali (S/2015/219),
which is before the Council for consideration today.
However, we are given pause by the claim that all
Malian parties have violated the ceasefire. In this
regard, I must underscore that the Government of Mali
has never violated the ceasefire. I discussed this very
point with my friend Hervé Ladsous yesterday, and I
think it would be difficult at this point to offer evidence
to support that claim. The verification and observation
mechanisms set up for this purpose, the Mixed Technical
Commission on Security and mobile joint observation
and verification teams, led by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), have never reported any violation
of the ceasefire whatsoever by the Malian armed forces
or security forces to the Malian authorities.
Council members will recall that, on 25 June 2014
in this very Chamber (see S/PV.7210), the Security
Council adopted resolution 2164 (2014), extending
the mandate of MINUSMA. In paragraph 4 of that
resolution, the Security Council:
“Reiterates its demand that all armed groups
in Mali put aside their arms, cease hostilities
immediately, as well as reject the recourse to
violence and urges all such groups that have cut
off all ties with terrorist organizations and who
recognize, without conditions, the unity and
territorial integrity of the Malian State, to engage
in an inclusive dialogue open to all communities of
the North of Mali”.
In addition, in paragraph 3 the Council:
“Urges in particular the Malian authorities
to launch without delay an inclusive and credible
negotiation process with the signatory and adherent
armed groups of the Ouagadougou Preliminary
Agreement, and those armed groups in the North
of Mali that have cut off all ties with terrorist
organizations and committed unconditionally to
the Agreement”.
Finally, in paragraph 7 the Council:

15-10023

09/04/2015

The situation in Mali

“Urges further the parties in this negotiation
process to coordinate with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Mali, with the goal of
securing a durable political resolution to the crisis
and long-term peace and stability throughout the
country, respecting the sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of the Malian State”.
Instead of proceeding with a tedious reading of the
entire resolution, I would like simply to observe that, by
the provisions I have just quoted, the Security Council,
in its great wisdom, essentially entrusted to the Malian
negotiating parties and the international community
the task of playing a three-part symphony on the stage
of peace and long-term reconciliation in Mali.
While the Government of Mali has fully and
completely played its part by engaging in good faith in
the peace process launched on 16 July in Algiers and
initialling, at the same time as the Platform of northern
movements, the agreement submitted to the parties
by the international mediation, the Coordination of
northern movements did not do likewise, instead
refusing to go in that direction, despite numerous calls
from the international community. This attitude betrays
a great defiance of the international community, which
through the mediation had spent eight long months of
intense effort, sacrifice and patience to bring peace and
stability to Mali and the region.
I recall to underscore this fact that, in accordance
with relevant provisions of resolutions and declarations
of the Security Council, the Government of Mali, under
the guidance of the Head of State, President Ibrahim
Boubacar Keita, engaged in inclusive inter-Malian talks
under the auspices of the Algerian-led international
mediation. After eight long months of intense
negotiations, the parties to the inclusive inter-Malian
talks concluded and initialed a draft agreement for
peace and reconciliation in Mali, with the exception of
our brothers from the Coordination of movements, who
asked for additional time to consult with their base.
For its part, the Government of Mali has always
honoured its commitments. Indeed, in initialing the
draft agreement, with full responsibility — and despite
the fact that its memorandum, which included 12
pages of amendments and was distributed to members
of the international mediation, was not taken into
account — the Government of Mali has shown good
faith in seeking a dynamic compromise that would
make it possible to achieve a just and lasting peace to
the crisis affecting our country, in strict compliance

S/PV.7425

with the principles laid down by the President of
Mali — namely, respect for Mali’s territorial integrity,
national sovereignty, and unified, democratic and
secular nature.
Let me recall that, at all stages of the inclusive
inter-Malian talks, the Malian Government has
organized campaigns to raise the awareness of Mali’s
stakeholders, including political parties, civil society,
community leaders, refugees and displaced persons,
armed and security forces, with a view to obtaining
the massive support of the population for the process.
That is why, after initialing the agreement, Malians, in
a broad public movement, formed a national alliance for
peace and unity in Mali, and organized huge marches
in all the major cities of the country to show their
commitment to peace, and to demand the signature of
the agreement by all parties. The Malian Government
initialed the agreement, with the strong support of the
vast majority of Malians, who only aspire to peace.
We have launched a momentum that we should not
squander. Yes, Malians are ready for peace. They are
tired of war. They want to turn this dark page in the
history of our nation, which is united and indivisible.
They want to move forward. They want to be heard.
They want, above all, to be understood and respected.
As I speak, exactly 40 days after the initialling of
the draft agreement, it is clear that the Coordination
still has not initialed the compromise document, in spite
of the commitment made on 9 June 2014 in Algiers, to
peacefully resolve the conflict in northern Mali through
a comprehensive and final peace agreement with the
Government of Mali; but also in spite of the numerous
appeals by this Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council; and moreover, in spite of the
17 March visit to Kidal by the international mediation
to bring the Coordination into the peace process, and
ask it to assume its responsibility.
Members will agree when I say that the refusal
to initial and sign an agreement reached at the end
of an inclusive process carries huge risks for peace
in Mali, throughout the region and beyond. It creates
an atmosphere that is not conducive to building the
confidence so vital to all stakeholders in order to
pursue the peace process; it paves the way for unhealthy
initiatives that could jeopardize what has been so
carefully built over eight long months of negotiations.
The Coordination’s refusal to initial the draft agreement
also promotes the attempts of terrorist groups and
drug traffickers to destabilize northern Mali, the

15-100235/7

S/PV.7425

The situation in Mali

entire Sahel region, and beyond. That can be seen in
terrorist attacks, as mentioned earlier by Mr. Ladsous.
The terrorist attacks perpetrated for the first time in
Bamako on 7 March caused the loss of five lives; there
were also attacks and abuses perpetrated in the towns of
Gao, Kidal, Nampala, Boni, Diafarabé, M’Boullikessi,
Dialloubé, and elsewhere, with numerous casualties
that included Malians and non-nationals, civilians and
members of the military.
I must say that the negotiation process was also
marked by direct and indirect consultations with all
Malian stakeholders, sometimes without the mediation.
Some direct discussions often took place in our hotel
rooms very late at night or early in the morning, as well
as in the corridors. I should point out that it was not
the Government of Mali that put an end to negotiations.
The mediation, after having listened at length to
all the Malian stakeholders, including civil society,
proposed the initialed draft as a dynamic and balanced
compromise to permanently resolve the current crisis
in our country. We welcome the courage and spirit
of compromise of our brothers and sisters from the
Platform of movements and the self-defence groups,
which clearly chose unity and peace for our country.
We believe that many of our brothers and sisters from
the Coordination of movements only want peace.
They have told us as much, and we believe in their
good faith. However, their voices can barely be heard
alongside those few radicals who, for ulterior motives
and through stalling tactics and prevarication, want to
obstruct peace.
The Security Council and good will should help
those who want peace to make their choice with
courage and to make it known. We ardently appeal to
the Coordination of movements to seize this historic
opportunity to make peace. The first step is to initial and
sign the draft agreement for peace and reconciliation
because there is no alternative to peace. Neither is there
an alternative to this agreement, which, after all, is
only a framework for the parties’ ongoing commitment.
It is therefore unacceptable that the peace process in
Mali, the hope of 15 million Malians, should be held
hostage by a group of radical, extremist individuals.
Those who, despite all, choose to obstruct the path to
peace leave the international community no choice but
to isolate them and to treat them as such by imposing
sanctions on them in conformity with the 6 February
statement of the Security Council (S/PRST/2015/5). We
therefore welcome all initiatives intended to encourage

6/7

09/04/2015

our brothers in the Coordination to become part of the
movement and to ensure that in the month of April, the
decision is made to initial and sign the agreement.
In that regard, we are encouraged by the
announcement made by Algeria of the initialling
ceremony by the Coordination of movements, scheduled
for 15 April in Algiers. We hope that it will lead quickly
and without precondition to the signing by all parties
of the agreement for peace and reconciliation in Mali.
I wish to stress that such must take place without prior
conditions.
The status quo raises the issue of national,
subregional, regional and even international security.
We ask that the Security Council not be distracted by
the radical wing of the Coordination, which manipulates
the public to make it seem as if they have rejected
the agreement. Today, the international community,
similarly to what it has done in other regions, should
make every effort to eradicate the terrorists, drug
traffickers and forces hostile to the peace agreement
in Mali. The work already begun in that vain should be
completed.
I have come before the Security Council to make
several requests. First, I call on the Council to endorse
the agreement initialed on 1 March, as the African Union
Peace and Security Council did in its communiqué of
27 March in Addis Ababa, a copy of which has been
circulated.
Secondly, I call on the Council to lend its full
support to the agreement initialed with France at
Algiers on l March in the framework of the mediation.
Thirdly, I would like the Council to continue to
exert the necessary pressure to bring the Coordination
of Movements to sign off on the agreement without
delay, prior to its signing at Bamako in April, and, if
need be, to consider measures including those set out in
the 6 February presidential statement, namely, targeted
sanctions against those who impede the Algiers peace
process. I emphasize that I am referring to obstacles
here, as we are not calling for sanctions for those who
have not signed off on the agreement. That is not the
goal. Those who have not signed off on the agreement
can take their time, and consultations can continue
to convince them to do so before the train leaves the
station, which must then be able to move at a sustained
pace. I am talking about those who have not signed
off and who are going to oppose the agreement’s
implementation — and it is up to Governments, the

15-10023

09/04/2015

The situation in Mali

international community and the mediation to take the
necessary response.
Finally, I came to ask the Council not to condone any
resumption of talks in Algiers — under any guise — for
the simple reason that such an option is unacceptable to
my Government and the international mediation, for it
runs the risk of setting a very dangerous precedent for
the Security Council. I take this opportunity to reiterate
that the Government of Mali has never closed the door
to dialogue with our brothers in Coordination, or with
any of our other brothers willing to extend a hand in
peace. But for us and for the mediation, the negotiations
are completed. One must therefore face reality, and all
efforts must now aim for the implementation of the
agreement. Against that backdrop, the Government
of Mali has begun to take various steps towards
implementation. Regional development agencies have
been set up in the context of the regionalization provided
for in the agreement; the date of municipal elections
has been postponed to ensure the participation of all
communities in the local polls; and awareness-raising
campaigns about the agreement have been conducted in
all regions of the country, as well as in Bamako and in
refugee camps in neighbouring countries.

S/PV.7425

In conclusion, I would like to recall that we are at a
crucial stage of the Algiers process. The Government of
Mali has assumed all of its responsibilities by committing
itself to the peace process in good faith. The Platform
of Movements has done the same. The international
mediation, led by Algeria, has unanimously initialed
the agreement. France has also initialed, as I just said,
and the United States of America has made a statement
in support.
We welcome the unity of action of the international
mediation, which continues to be essential to the
success of the peace process in Mali. In turn, today the
Security Council must face up to its responsibilities.
The eyes of the Malian people are on the Council.
And the countries of the region and those throughout
the world that love peace and justice are watching the
Council as well.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no more
names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

15-100237/7
