UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHT-H

YEAR

245”
NEW

MEETING:

29 JUNE 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. .. ... ... .. .. ... .. .... .. .. ... ... .. ..

1

. ... ... .. ... .. ... ... .. .. ... .. ... ... . .... ... .. ..

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2455)
Adoption of the agenda

Complaint by Lesotho against South Africa:
Report of the Secretary-General (S/15600)

.. .. ... ... .. ... . .... .. ... ..

1

S/PV.2455

,NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfficiaI Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Reso&tions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.
-_

I

2455th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 29 June 1983, at 11 a.m.
President: Mr. Elleck Kufakunesu
(Zimbabwe).

MASHINGAIDZE

of the presidency for the month of June. As the representative of the Republic of Zimbabwe, a country with which
my own country, Lesotho; enjoys warm and friendly reiations, you have proved to be an outstanding and worthy
diplomat.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

6. Similarly, I wish to congratulate your predecessor,
the representative of Zaire, on his able leadership of the
Council last month.
7. I wish also to express my delegation’s gratitude to
the Council for having responded to our request to discuss the matter now before it. This demonstrates the
support and sympathy my country enjoys among the
members oftlie Council, and it is a source of encouragement to us.

Provisional agenda (S/Ag&da/2455)
1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda.

Complaint by Lesotho against South Africa:
Report of the Secretary-General (S/15600)

,8. We appear before the Council not so much to recall
the events of 9 December 1982 as to follow up on the
efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General aimed at
implementing
Council
resolution
527 (1982). My
Government
is highly appreciative of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on assistance to Lesotho, which is now
before the Council, and fully endorses its contents.

The meeting was called to order at 11.45 am.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Lesotho against South Africa:
Report of the Secretary-General (S/15600)

9. Since members of the Council are already familiar
with the contents of the report I shall refrain from
repeating them. I wish .only to highlight some of the,
recommendations
made therein. Obviously it was. not
only on 9 December 1982, when South Africa unleashed
its forces of aggression against Lesotho, that some, if
not most, of the economic projects outlined in the report
became important and urgent. Lesotho has been struggling under difficult economic circumstances to fulfil its
obligation to receive and provide for the welfare of
South African refugees for a long time.

1. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Lesotho, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Thamae (Lesotho)
took a place at the Council table.

10. These projects have acquired an added priority for
a number of reasons. First, South -Africa did apply a
number of economic pressures against Lesotho in an
attempt to force it to close its borders to the victims of
apartheid who found life in their own country intolerable. Secondly, South Africa did indicate that unless
Lesotho changed its policy towards the South African
refugees these pressures would be expanded. And, as the
Council is aware, South Africa has created a dangerous
security situation around its borders with Lesotho
through acts of aggression, economic sabotage and general destabilization.
On 9 December 1982 South Africa
carried out an unwarranted act of aggression against my
country resulting in loss of innocent lives and extensive
damage to property.

2. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them the report submitted by the SecretaryGeneral pursuant to resolution 527 (1982).
3. tiembers of the Council have ah received photocopies of a letter dated 29 June from the representative of
South Africa [S/Z584fl.
4.

I call upon the representative of Lesotho.

5. Mr. THAMAE
(Lesotho): My delegation wishes to
congratulate you most heartily, Sir, on your assumption
1

South Africa insulted the international community which
had gathered for that occasion by attempting to blow up a
donor-funded abattoir project in Maser-u on the banks of
the Mohokare River, which forms part of the border with
South Africa. This was soon to be followed by an attempt
to blow up a water reservoir serving the capital of Lesotho. Not long thereafter a South African army helicopter
was seen dropping rockets, which blew up fuel depots in
Maser-u. The catalogue is long, but more recently an intensification of these attacks has been seen on civilian targets,
particularly in the districts.

11. The Council, in its resolution 527 (1982), condemned the South African act of aggression and called
upon South Africa to declare publicly that it was ‘never
again going to attack Lesotho, either directly or through
its proxies. The Council also demanded that South
Africa should pay full and adequate compensation to
Lesotho for the damage to life and property resulting
from that act of aggression. A,& was also made to the
international community to extend necessary economic
assistance to Lesotho in order to strengthen its capacity to
receive and maintain South African refugees. The Council
is aware that South Africa rejected resolution 527 (1982)
out of hand and has demonstrated through a series of
hostile acts against Lesotho that it has no respect at all for
this Council and its resolutions.

17. The most recent acts of hostility and aggressiveness
occurred only a few days ago, on 26 June, when heavily
armed terrorists crossed from South Africa into Lesotho
and attacked targets in the districts of Mohale’s Hoek
and Qacha’s Nek., I wish to quote the following passage
from a protest note sent by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Lesotho to the Department of Foreign Affairs
of South Africa:

12. My Government is grateful for the support and
assistance it has received so far in alleviating the most
immediate needs of the victims of the South African
attack whose peaceful lives were disrupted.
13. The report that we are considering identifies a
number of areas in which Lesotho could be assisted so as
to ensure the welfare of refugees in a manner consistent
with their security. Security in the context of Lesotho can
be defined broadly as protection of the country and its
people from outside attacks. It entails not only protection
of the State and its citizens and the refugees residing’
within its borders from physical harm but also safeguards
in such vital areas as food, health, education and work
opportunities.

“Yesterday evening, 26 June 1983, attacks emanating from the Republic of South Africa were carried
out by heavily armed men at Taung in the Mohale’s
Hoek district. A second attack was carried out
against a police station and the Lesotho Paramilitary
Force barracks in Qacha’s Nek town.
“In the attack at Taung heavily armed men were
seen to have crossed into Lesotho from the Republic
of South Africa at or near a place called Boesmanskop. In this attack several motorists lost their lives. A
shop owned by Mr. Zwakala, a member of the Lesotho Parliament, and his residence were attacked with
bazookas, resulting in considerable damage to the
said property.

14. It is not surprising, therefore, that the Mission’s
report emphasized the need for vital economic support to
enable Lesotho to receive and maintain refugees and to
help them to be successfully integrated into its own
society. The Mission recommended urgent assistance
totalling $US 46 million for security, maize storage,
employment,
electricity, the new international airport,
emergency medical services and the.establishment of a fire
brigade. These recommendations have been endorsed by
my Government and are being submitted to the Council
so that it may endorse them.

“In the attack at Qacha’s Nek the attackers also
came from the Republic of South Africa and opened
fire on the Lesotho Paramilitary
Force based in
Qacha’s Nek town. They also attacked a Government
garage, causing considerable damage. Two busa
belonging to the Lesotho National Bus Corporation
were destroyed.

15. The members of the Security Council should be
encouraged to note that a good number of countries and
organizations have already shown sympathy and support
for the report, and some have even made their pledges to
the Lesotho Government. For its part, the Lesotho
Government has established a fund to canalize national
efforts in this regard. With the good support that is building up in all sectors of our population and among peoples
of goodwill generally, we are confident that this fund will
make a meaningful contribution.
The fund is also
intended to cover the effects of other similar attacks.

“In both the above-mentioned attacks the attackers
came from the Republic of South Africa, and after
completion of these acts they fled back into South
Africa.
“The Lesotho Government registers a very strong
protest against the South African Government, as the
Lesotho Government
has in the past consistently
affirmed that the country from which attacks are
planned and perpetrated and which further gives
sanctuary to these criminals also bears responsibility
for the attacks.

16. While on this subject, it will no doubt be of interest
to members of the Council to note that following the
Maseru massacre it was not long before it became ap
parent that South Africa was not fully satisfied with its
previous attack. In the early hours of 27 January of this
year, the opening day of the meeting of the Southern
African Development Co-ordinationConferenceinMaseru,

“The Lesotho Government
regrets that these
attacks come at a time when Lesotho is making
efforts to strengthen good-neighbourly
relations with
the Republic of South Africa.*’
2

18. Some of these incidents have formally been
reported to the Secretary-General. Our. intention at this
stage is not to take. up Sheseicases%$th$he Gouncil;.but
merely to bring the Council up to date with evznts which
followed the adoption of resohrtion 527 (1982).
19. Members of the Council are fully aware of the
recent unwarranted action taken by South Africa
against Lesotho. The deliberate slowdown in the flow
of traffic *between Lesotho and South Africa was engineered by the Pretoria authorities in order to exacerbate
the economic difficulties of Lesotho and undermine its
political stability. As a result of the slowdown of traffic,
many innocent people were exposed to inordinate delays
at points of entry between Lesotho and South Africa
under harsh winter conditions, and vital food and medical supplies entering Lesotho have been held up for no
understandable reason. Various perishable goods have
been lost, to the financial detriment of the business community in Lesotho.
20. It is events like these which help to emphasize the
importance my Government attaches to the new Maseru
international airport, which is now under construction, as
it is aimed at providing Lesotho with an alternative route
to the outside world. The people of Lesotho will be highly
grateful and indebted to the international community for
whatever assistance may be rendered in order to make the
international airport a meaningful and viable option in
solving Lesotho’s transportation problems and facilitating contacts with the rest of the world.

21. In the light of these events it becomes even more
necessary that the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to Lesotho be adopted in order to set execution
of its provisions into motion without any further delay.
22. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the understanding reached in the course of the Council’s prior consultations, I shall suspend the meeting now for 10
minutes.
The meeting was suspended at noon and resumed at 12.15
p.m.
23. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them document S/15846, which contains the text
of a draft resolution that has been prepared in the course
of the Council’s consultations. It is my understanding that
the Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution. I shall now put this draft resolution to the
vote.
A vote was taken by show of hana?.
The draft resolution was adopted unanimously [resoIution
535 (1983)].
24. The PRESIDENT:
The Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributor; throughout the
world. Consult your bookstoreor write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT’

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences dCpositairr%
du monde entier. Informez-vous aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous g : Nations Unies.
Section des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
KAK

I-IOJIYYMTb

M3.lIAHMR

OPI-AHM3AUMM

OE-bE,l@iHEHHbIX

HAUMti

M3nawix Opramf3ausn O6%ellHHeHHblX
HauuR MOXKHOKynmb
a liHmcHbiX
5tarawHas
H arettrcTaax no acex paBotiax wfpa. Haaons-re cnpaaxs 06 8i3aawtnx a tautest KHIMHOV
Mara3tfHe HJIWnHuInTe no anpecy: Oprawi3ausr 06den~HeHHbiX
Hannil, CeiiUW4
no
nponane H-JnaHKR,Hbto-MopX
HJIW >KeHeea.
COMO

CONSE&JIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras en
todas panes de1 mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccidn de Vcntas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

al300

904W205-July

1991-2,050
