S/2016/950

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 November 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (covering
the period from 12 August to 25 October 2016)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2304
(2016), in which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) until 15 December 2016 and requested that I report on the
implementation of the mandate every 90 days. It covers developments between
12 August and 25 October 2016 and contains observations on the implementation of
the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and
related tasks. A separate special report will be shared with the Security Council on
the strategic assessment of UNMISS, which will present recommendations on the
future engagement of the Mission in South Sudan (S/2016/951).

II. Political and economic developments
Peace process
2.
Since the adoption on 12 August of Security Council resolution 2304 (2016),
there has been marginal progress towards the implementation of key elements of the
peace agreement. The reconstituted Transitional Government of National Unity
worked to consolidate the current political arrangement that has Taban Deng Gai as
the First Vice-President and head of a Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army
in Opposition (SPLM/A in Opposition) faction, in which capacity he has led the
engagements of the Transitional Government of National Unity with regional
countries and international partners. On 9 September, following a reshuffling of the
Cabinet and the Transitional National Legislative Assembly, the First Vice -President
appointed 15 new members to the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, to
replace those representing SPLM in Opposition in the Commission.
3.
On 11 August 2016, the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
issued a communiqué endorsing the decision of the second extraordinary summit of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development-Plus (IGAD-Plus) group, held in
Addis Ababa on 5 August 2016, encouraging Riek Machar to rejoin the peace
process and welcoming the gesture of Taban Deng Gai to step down with a view to
returning to the status quo ante.

16-19380 (E)

141116

*1619380*

S/2016/950

4.
On 15 August, at the inauguration of the Transitional National Legislative
Assembly, established under chapter I of the peace agreement, the President, Salva
Kiir, stated his commitment to working closely with the new First Vice -President in
the implementation of the peace agreement and outlined priority measures,
including: initiating an inclusive process to unify political parties; expediting
transitional electoral procedures to facilitate elections; planning for security sector
reforms to commence in January 2017; and establishing a commission of inquiry to
investigate the outbreak of violence in Juba in July 2016.
5.
On 4 September, at the conclusion of the visit of a Security Council delegation
to South Sudan, the members of the Council and the Transitional Government of
National Unity issued a joint communiqué, in which the Government expressed its
determination to implement the peace agreement, in particular the reform agenda
(see S/2016/776, annex).
6.
From 20 to 23 September, the Riek Machar-led faction of SPLM/A in
Opposition held a meeting of its political bureau in Khartoum. In the resolution
issued at the end of the meeting, the political bureau, inter alia, condemned the
appointment of Taban Deng Gai as First Vice-President, expressed its commitment
to the resuscitation and full implementation of the peace agreement, called upon the
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission and its transitional institutions to
suspend activities until the Transitional Government of National Unity is
reinstituted and reconstituted and urged the rapid deployment of the Regional
Protection Force, as well as the demilitarization of all the major towns. The
resolution also called for the reorganization of the Sudan People ’s Liberation Army
(SPLA) in Opposition in order to wage an armed resistance against the Government.
7.
Concurrently, on 23 September, on the margins of the General Assembly in
New York, a ministerial meeting was held to discuss the current challenges and how
best to advance the political process in the country, with the participation of the core
regional and international partners of the South Sudan peace process. The partners
unanimously agreed on the importance of an inclusive political process, involving
representatives of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM), SPLM in
Opposition (chosen by the Opposition), as well as other armed and unarmed
opposition and civil society organizations, consistent with the peace agreement, as
the only viable means to end the fighting and return South Sudan to a path of
sustainable peace and stability. The participants encouraged the Chair of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission and former President of Botswana, Festus
Mogae, and the African Union High Representative for South Sudan and former
President of Mali, Alpha Oumar Konaré, to urgently enhance their engagement with
all parties to agree on concrete modalities for inclusive representation in the
institutions and political processes at the heart of the South Sudan peace process,
namely, the constitutional review process, the electoral process, justice,
reconciliation and national healing processes, as well as security sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. The partners called on all
signatories of the peace agreement to engage constructivel y and proactively with the
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission and the African Union, as well as with
the United Nations to support the implementation of the peace agreement. On
19 September, the Peace and Security Council of the African Union also issued a
communiqué in which it stressed that political dialogue was the only path to the
resolution of the conflict in South Sudan (see S/2016/868, annex).

2/19

16-19380

S/2016/950

8.
On 19 October, at the meeting of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, the Chair and partners reiterated the importance of inclusivity and the
need for the representation of all parties in the political process, as essential to the
implementation of the peace agreement. However, the issue of political inclusivity
is still unresolved at this point and the legitimacy of the institutions of the
transition, as currently constituted, remains in question.
Other political developments
9.
On 18 October, the Presidency decided to increase the number o f states from
28 to 30 and appointed the First Vice-President to chair a committee on state
creation and boundary adjustment, to review adjustments to the boundaries of Lol
and Eastern Nile, both created under Establishment Order No. 36/2015, of
2 October 2015. The creation of states in contravention of the peace agreement
continues to be a source of disagreement.
Economic developments
10. Public revenue streams continued to be hampered, despite a slight increase in
global oil prices, due to continued insecurity in the oil-producing regions and the
rapid depreciation in the monetary value of the South Sudanese pound. On
30 September, the Council of Ministers approved 22.3 billion South Sudanese
pounds in revenue for the national budget, for the 2016 -2017 fiscal year. Although
the revenue estimates were more than double the budget for the previous fiscal year,
in South Sudanese pounds, it is only 10 per cent of that amount in United States
dollars. The Minister of Finance announced a series of stabilizatio n measures,
including freezing all new public service recruitments, except for the new
institutions established under the peace agreement. In its current form, the budget
forecasts only 15.4 per cent net revenue after payments to the Sudan, oil company
advances and payments to oil-producing states and communities, which is
insufficient to cover salaries, estimated to represent 42 per cent of total spending.
Inflation, currency depreciation and persistent salary backlogs have continued to
greatly undermine government functions and household purchasing power. The
annual consumer price index increased by 682.1 per cent from September 2015 to
September 2016, according to the National Bureau of Statistics of South Sudan.

III. Security situation
11. The security situation continues to be volatile in Juba and its environs since
the outbreak of violence in July, while the overall security situation during the
reporting period continued to deteriorate, most significantly in Central Equatoria,
where Government forces pursued members of SPLM/A in Opposition. SPLA
reportedly fought armed opposition groups in Greater Equatoria and Western Bahr
el-Ghazal regions. Many of those events involved significant casualties and the
targeting of civilians. Insecurity increased also in northern Unity, Upper Nile and
eastern Jonglei, where SPLA and SPLA in Opposition forces clashed often as a
result of shifting alliances among local commanders. The increasingly heinous acts
of violence perpetrated against civilians in the Equatorias have exacerbated existing
tenuous relations between ethnic communities throughout the country. The rise in

16-19380

3/19

S/2016/950

ethnic rhetoric and hate speech in October risks increasing incitement and
polarization and further compounding the insecurity in the coun try.
Greater Equatoria region
12. The security situation remained tense, with SPLA forces conducting offensive
operations against Opposition elements. In early September, SPLA reportedly
launched aerial bombardments near the Yei area, as well as large -scale attacks
against Opposition elements near Yei, Lainya and Wonduruba, in Central Equatoria.
The Government forces deployed to the area reportedly burned down houses in
Lainya. In Lobonok, in Central Equatoria, confrontations involving Dinka Bor cattle
keepers backed by SPLA and local youths with Opposition elements resulted in the
displacement and destruction of civilian property. According to local residents,
SPLA soldiers shot and killed civilians who attempted to flee Yei town and harassed
civilians in Kaya town, in Morobo County. UNMISS patrols to the conflict -affected
areas in Central Equatoria have been hampered by ongoing fighting and restrictions
on movement imposed by Government security forces. During the reporting period,
seven patrols were delayed or denied access in Central Equatoria.
13. In Eastern Equatoria, on 27 August, SPLA conducted major military
operations on Opposition elements in the Ifwotu Mountains area, which resulted in
the reported fatalities of 11 SPLA soldiers and at least o ne Opposition soldier. On
9 October, following the attack on the convoy of the Lafon County Commissioner,
in which 10 people were killed, including six SPLA soldiers, the Governor of
Imatong (created by Establishment Order No. 36/2015) allegedly ordered the
detention of 14 state officials and community leaders, who were later released.
14. Insecurity along major roadways in Greater Equatoria remained a concern. On
10 September, two oil tankers were burned by unknown armed men, on the Nimule
to Juba road, 7 km north of Nimule town in Pageri County. Between 7 and
10 October, ambushes of passenger buses and vehicles along the Juba to Yei and
Juba to Nimule roads resulted in a number of fatalities, reportedly targeting
members of the Dinka community. On 10 October, one staff member of a
non-governmental organization was killed in the compound of the organization,
during fighting around Budi, in Eastern Equatoria; 10 aid workers were
subsequently evacuated from the area, the following day. On 14 October, an atta ck
against a clearly marked vehicle of a non-governmental organization killed one aid
worker.
15. On 19 October in Juba, during a speech to mark the registration of SPLM as an
official political party, the President attributed the insecurity occurring in the
Greater Equatoria region to political incitement. He threatened to go and conduct
military operations himself to quell the violence in the area.
Greater Upper Nile region
16. In Upper Nile, intermittent fighting continued between SPLA and SPLA in
Opposition in Nasir in August and September. On 14 October, SPLA and SPLA in
Opposition exchanged heavy gunfire, including mortars and rocket -propelled
grenades in Warjok and Lelo on the west bank of the Nile. Conflicting reports were
received regarding who started the fighting.

4/19

16-19380

S/2016/950

17. In Unity, since 9 October, the security situation in Leer town, in Leer County,
has deteriorated significantly, with the fighting between Opposition forces and
SPLA resulting in several civilians fleeing from nearby villages into surrounding
swamps. A substantial number of internally displaced persons from the conflict affected areas have sought protection and medical treatment at the protection of
civilians site of UNMISS, in Bentiu. Fighting between SPLA and the pro -Machar
Opposition has been ongoing in several locations throughout Leer County, leading
to an unknown number of casualties. The Governor of Southern Liech has
acknowledged that the Opposition is now in control of Pilling and Adok. As a
consequence, a large number of civilians, mostly women and children, have been
seeking refuge in the area adjacent to the temporary operating base of UNMISS in
Leer town. As of 23 October there were over 700 internally displaced persons at the
base.
18. The resignation of Bapiny Monytuil as SPLA Deputy Chief of General Staff
for Moral Orientation, on 7 October, led to mounting tensions in his native county
of Mayom, in Unity, most notably within the ranks of SPLA Special Forces, which
had been initially created by Mr. Monytuil as the South Sudan Liberation Army, but
are currently under the command of Major General Matthew Puljang. These
tensions could affect intercommunal and intracommunal relations in Mayom and
Rubkona counties, as political and military leaders re -evaluate their affiliations, and
could lead to a fragmentation in the Bul Nuer community.
19. In Jonglei, in Pajut, Duk County, on 19 August, Nuer youth, with support from
SPLA in Opposition elements, attacked SPLA positions, resulting in the reported
deaths of approximately 130 Opposition elements, with the SPLA sustaining 23
casualties. As a result of the fighting, several thousand civilians reportedly fled from
Pajut to the swampy areas of Poktap, Padiet, Payuel and Ayueldit in Duk County.
Meanwhile, in Pibor, the former Deputy Commander of the Cobra faction of the
South Sudan Democratic Movement/Army, Khalid Boutros, announced the
defection of his faction to the Opposition, on the basis of the Government failing to
implement key provisions of the 2014 peace agreement, which i ncluded the full
integration of Cobra faction soldiers into SPLA. The Government had already
commenced the integration process, with 200 former Cobra Faction soldiers in Pibor
being integrated into SPLA. This development has the potential to jeopardize
ongoing intercommunal reconciliation initiatives recently launched by Pibor
authorities.
Greater Bahr el-Ghazal region
20. The security situation remained tense in Western Bahr el-Ghazal, with reports
of armed, uniformed men killing, harassing and intimidating civilians. Clashes
south and southwest of Wau town, in Western Bahr el-Ghazal, between SPLA and
Opposition-aligned elements led to severe harassment of civilians by security
forces. Despite assurances from the Governor of Wau (created by Establishment
Order No. 36/2015), UNMISS and humanitarian organizations continued to face
access restrictions in Wau County. On 17 Septe mber, local authorities informed
UNMISS that Opposition elements operating in and around Wau town had attacked
SPLA positions in Bazia Payam, approximately 75 km south of the town. According
to local authorities, the Opposition and aligned groups had taken over Bazia and
Bussere, approximately 16 km south of Wau town. The fighting has caused further

16-19380

5/19

S/2016/950

displacement of civilians. On 23 September, further clashes were reported in the
areas of Baggari and Bringi, southwest of Wau town, while SPLA in Opposition
forces and aligned groups reportedly clashed with SPLA forces in Bussere.
Meanwhile, the Director of the National Security Service in Wau accused UNMISS
of hosting armed Opposition elements in the protection area adjacent to the
Mission’s base in Wau. The Director had temporarily withdrawn access for
UNMISS patrols to some areas in Wau County owing to ongoing hostilities.
Furthermore, the State Security Committee revoked the earlier decision granting
freedom of movement to UNMISS, citing the fact that the state government could
not guarantee the security of UNMISS patrols.
Transitional security arrangements
21. On 21 and 22 September, the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
organized a Permanent Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements works hop,
as mandated by Security Council resolution 2304 (2016). The workshop focused on
possible tasks for the Regional Protection Force, on the review of the transitional
security arrangements, on plans for cantonment sites and on the unification of forces
and developments towards a strategic defence and security review. However,
discussions did not cover the maximum number, type and armaments of the security
forces that would remain in Juba under the new security arrangements. The meeting
of the Presidency, held on 18 October, agreed to the establishment of the four
cantonment sites for SPLA in Opposition forces in the Equatoria region.

IV. Humanitarian situation
22. During the reporting period, the humanitarian crisis in South Sudan continued
to deepen and spread owing to armed conflict in several parts of the country,
worsening food insecurity and the escalating economic crisis. Tens of thousands of
civilians across the country were forced to flee their homes as a result of the
fighting, mainly in the Greater Equatoria and Unity regions. As of mid -October, an
estimated 100,000 people were confined in Yei due to the presence of checkpoints
and armed actors around the town, according to local church leader s. Renewed
fighting in parts of Unity also forced people, many of whom travelled long distances
on foot, to seek sanctuary in swampy areas.
23. Since the violence in July, more than 323,200 people, mostly women and
children, fled to neighbouring countries, including Uganda, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Ethiopia, to escape escalating violence in South Sudan.
In August, an average of 1,600 South Sudanese arrived in Uganda daily, a figure
that rose in September to 2,800 and remained high at approx imately 2,400 in
October. Since 3 September, nearly 42,700 South Sudanese asylum seekers and
refugees arrived in Ethiopia, citing renewed fighting, forced recruitment and food
insecurity as their primary reasons for flight. This movement brought the total
number of South Sudanese refugees to more than 1 million, making South Sudan the
fourth country in the world, after the Syrian Arab Republic, Afghanistan and
Somalia, in terms of the largest number of refugees.
24. Levels of food insecurity remained alarming in the country. In August, staple
food prices were at record high levels in Juba, Wau and Aweil, reaching nearly

6/19

16-19380

S/2016/950

10 times the five-year average. Spiking food prices were due largely to renewed
conflict in and around Juba that disrupted trade, reducing s upplies in most markets.
That came in the wake of the lean season, which peaked between June and July,
when some 4.8 million people, more than one in every three people in South Sudan,
were estimated to be severely food insecure. The global acute malnutrit ion rates
were above the 15 per cent emergency threshold in 7 out of 10 states and
approximately double the emergency threshold in Unity (26.2 per cent) and
Northern Bahr el-Ghazal (33.3 per cent). In three years, severe acute malnutrition
among children under five years of age has increased by more than 150 per cent.
25. Ongoing outbreaks of cholera, malaria, measles and kala -azar continued to
spread, frequently causing death. As of 9 October, more than 1.74 million cases of
malaria had been recorded and continued to be the main cause of morbidity and
mortality among children under five years of age across South Sudan. The number
of cases of cholera recorded was also higher than in the previous year, and the
disease had spread to new locations. There have been more than 2,400 recorded
cases of kala-azar, a deadly tropical disease. Since the beginning of the year, more
than 1,780 cases of measles, including at least 19 deaths, have been reported
countrywide.
26. Humanitarian actors continued to encounter challenges in their efforts to
deliver aid to those most in need. Those challenges included increased insecurity,
active hostilities, access constraints and bureaucratic impediments. Humanitarian
actors reported 89 such occasions in August and 81 in September, significant
increases compared to an average of 63 incidents per month during the first half of
the year. Active hostilities in Unity in September forced humanitarian organizations
to relocate 62 aid workers from Koch and Rubkona counties, affecting the delivery
of life-saving assistance to 65,000 people in the area. Three humanitarian workers
were killed in August, four in September and three in the first half of October 2016.
Two of those deaths occurred while the aid workers were on official duty. The
circumstances of their deaths remain under investigation. At the same time,
increasing ethnically driven rhetoric and hate speech had a significant impact on
humanitarian operations in October, particularly in Northern Bahr el -Ghazal, where
more than 90 staff members were relocated for safety reasons, causing humanitarian
assistance to the area to scale down. In Western Bahr el-Ghazal, humanitarian
partners continued to face impediments in accessing areas outside Wau town, where
tens of thousands of people are thought to remain displaced, despite concerted
negotiations with local authorities and security forces. On 15 October, the President
issued two decrees establishing a nine-member humanitarian high-level oversight
committee, headed by the Minister of Cabinet Affairs, to safeguard and guarantee
the unhindered and unrestricted delivery of humanitarian assistance.
27. Humanitarian actors continued to scale up their response despite the
challenges. By the end of August, more than 3.4 million people had been reached
with humanitarian and protection assistance, including more than 2.3 million people
who received food assistance, 1.6 million people accessing improved water sources,
about 164,400 children (40 per cent girls) who received learning materials, while
more than 366,000 children, pregnant women and lactating women were treated for
malnutrition. In conflict-affected and vulnerable areas, 619,000 health consultations
were carried out.

16-19380

7/19

S/2016/950

28. At the same time, funding shortfalls remained a challenge, with the
Humanitarian Response Plan for 2016 just 63 per cent funded, leaving a gap of
$496 million.

V. Implementation of the reprioritized mandated tasks
A.

Protection of civilians
29. In implementing its mandate to protect civilians, UNMISS has continued to
follow a three-tiered approach. Under tier 1, protection through dialogue and
political engagement, my Special Representative has used her good offices to
facilitate the continued support of regional and international partners for the
implementation of the peace agreement and to advocate directly with national
counterparts to promote freedom of movement.
30. UNMISS delivered 11 conflict management workshops to 658 participants
during the reporting period, to address ongoing tensions, build local conflict
resolution capacities and explain the mandate of the Mission, including the planned
deployment of the Regional Protection Force. State and county officials, traditional
leaders, youth, women, local leaders and communities, including those displaced by
conflict, participated. The workshops provided forums where local conflict triggers
were discussed and traditional conflict resolution mechanisms identified. In Yambio,
in Western Equatoria, participants recommended public sensitization on the
importance of peace, the intervention of both state and non -state actors and a closer
collaboration between UNMISS and civil society organizations as strategies to
resolve conflict. In Barmayen, Nyamlel and War-A-War, in Northern Bahr
el-Ghazal, UNMISS, in collaboration with the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), sought to improve public understanding of Security Council
resolution 2304 (2016) and the mediation role of IGAD. In Lakes, UNMISS held a
peace dialogue between the Dinka Ruop section of Mayom payam and the Dinka
Kuei section of Matangai payam. In Unity, UNMISS gathered youth from Bentiu
and Rubkona, together with displaced people living in the protection of civilians
site, to explore opportunities for intercommunal dialogue. As a result, participants
committed to embarking on joint peace initiatives, including peace rallies and
meetings in Bentiu and Rubkona to address conflict drivers such as hate speech,
cattle raiding, rape and tribalism.
31. Under tier 2, protection of civilians under threat of physical violence,
UNMISS continued to protect some 206,842 internally displaced people at six
UNMISS protection of civilians sites nationwide. The largest, in Bentiu,
accommodates 103,494 people, while at the other sites, an estimated 38,874 are
located in Juba, in Central Equatoria; 33,052 in Malakal, in Upper Nile; 700 in
Melut, in Upper Nile; 2,004 in Bor, in Jonglei; and 28,520 in Wau, in Western Bahr
el-Ghazal. The trend of displaced people leaving the sites voluntarily, seen in the
first half of 2016, reversed over the past few months owing to the eruption of
violence in Wau in June and in Juba in July and the resumed fighting in Unity.
During that time, the number of displaced people in those sites has increased by
more than 40,000.

8/19

16-19380

S/2016/950

32. During the reporting period, 637 security incidents were reported at the
protection of civilians sites. There are currently 40 detainees in thre e holding
facilities in the sites in Juba, Bentiu and Malakal. Security and safety within the
Bentiu site, in particular, are increasingly at risk owing to the presence of groups
involved in the mobilization of support for different SPLA in Opposition fact ions in
and around the sites and the arrival of active fighters at the sites from neighbouring
areas. To mitigate risks of violence and communal tensions in the site at Bentiu,
UNMISS bolstered security measures and messaging to inhabitants, including thei r
community leaders, on the civilian character of UNMISS premises and on its policy
of zero tolerance towards political and military mobilization within and around
UNMISS sites.
33. Threats in the immediate vicinity of the camps were mitigated through
outreach by the Mission’s military component and the establishment of new
watchtowers. Internal security was enhanced through a constant United Nations
police presence, reinforced by UNMISS military as necessary, and through regular
searches for contraband, including weapons. In an effort to increase the safety and
security of internally displaced persons seeking refuge at the protection of civilians
sites in Juba as well as that of neighbouring communities, UNMISS resolved to
create a 200m weapons-free zone around the perimeter of United Nations House.
The protracted engagement of, and coordination with, relevant security
counterparts, including the South Sudan National Police Service and SPLA, as well
as communities was a key component for the implementation of this initiative.
34. Under tier 3, establishment of a protective environment, UNMISS continues to
focus on extending protection activities beyond the protection sites, to build
confidence and encourage an environment conducive to voluntary returns. Beyond
the protection sites, the Mission’s military component has increased its outreach
into conflict-affected areas, primarily through sector-based patrolling from
permanent and temporary operating bases. Early warning indicators were also used
to plan patrols to potential flashpoint areas. In Nasir, in Upper Nile, and Leer, in
Unity, since fighting occurred in August, UNMISS has been working closely with
humanitarian protection partners to identify locations in which civilians are at risk
and conducting regular foot patrols in those locations. Night patrols on foot and on
mounted vehicles, mostly in the area around the protection sites, enhanced safety
through the deterrence of violent activities.
35. The influx of displaced people, the majority of whom are women and girls,
caused congestion in and around the camps, which increased the risk of sexual
violence. Women and girls have also been attacked by uniformed men while
fetching food, water and firewood. A special patrol unit was set up in Wau to
counter gender-based violence against women. The patrol unit conducts patrols day
and night and responds immediately to any report of violence towards women. In
addition, on 23 September, UNMISS launched a dedicated series of quick -impact
projects to implement activities with host communities in close proximity to
protection of civilians sites, so as to create favourable conditions of return and
promote conflict mitigation activities in potential flashpoint areas.

16-19380

9/19

S/2016/950

B.

Monitoring and investigating human rights
36. During the reporting period, UNMISS continued to conduct monitoring,
verification and investigation of human rights violations and abuses, as well as
violations of international humanitarian law, including violations that occurred in
connection with the fighting in Juba, in July. Although the majority of the violations
UNMISS documented were allegedly committed by SPLA soldiers, police officers
and members of the National Security Service, the Mission has had limited access to
comprehensively document violations committed in areas in which SPLA in
Opposition and armed groups are active. Violations documented during the
reporting period included killings of civilians, cases of torture, conflict -related
sexual violence, including rape and gang-rape, arbitrary arrest and detention, forced
displacement of populations, harassment and intimidation, pillaging as well as
violations of press freedom.
37. Meanwhile, armed clashes in many parts of the country contributed to a
deteriorating human rights situation. Fighting in Lobonok Coun ty, in Central
Equatoria, in September, between cattle-keepers allegedly reinforced by SPLA and
youth, resulted in at least a dozen deaths and the displacement of more than 5,000
civilians, as homes were torched and livestock looted, particularly in Sindir u and
Morsak villages. UNMISS was also informed of serious violations, including
killings and looting of livestock and property, by SPLA in Leer, in Unity, in August.
In August and September, there were reports of civilians being killed, raped and
abducted and of the forced recruitment of children in areas including Guit in Unity.
38. In late September, sources informed UNMISS that SPLA deployed more forces
to Pajok, Ayaci and Palwar in Eastern Equatoria state. SPLA allegedly looted
property, killed animals, occupied schools, raped women and girls and arrested
several men, who were taken to unknown locations. SPLA forces were also
deployed in Lerwa and Palwar in Pajok Payam, where they occupied Pajok Primary
School. At least one witness informed UNMISS that on 2 October, he saw several
dead civilians, who had been killed during the confrontation between SPLA and
armed groups on 30 September, lying on the road between Pajok and Ayaci.
39. At the start of October, fighting between SPLA and Opposition forces in Yei
reportedly led to similar violations and abuses. UNMISS documented civilian
casualties following the fighting between SPLA and SPLM/A in Opposition in
Upper Nile on 14 October. During the clashes, seven mortar rounds were reportedly
fired into Wau Shilluk town, with four of them hitting civilian areas. Among the
33 injured individuals, five were civilians, including a woman and a child.
40. During the reporting period, UNMISS documented serious human rights
violations allegedly committed by SPLA soldiers, including the killing of civilians,
rape or gang rape and pillaging. UNMISS interviewed six women, who were
allegedly gang-raped by SPLA soldiers in Mayendit county in Unity on 9 August.
Some of them were forced to live with the perpetrators, whi le others were handed
over to other soldiers for repeated rape. UNMISS also received reports of rape and
killings of civilians on 18 August by SPLA soldiers in Bure village, Lainya County,
in Central Equatoria. On 27 September, SPLA soldiers in civilian cl othes allegedly
raped three women in Guit County in Unity. On 30 September, UNMISS also
received information that around 1,000 SPLA soldiers and members of an armed

10/19

16-19380

S/2016/950

militia arrived in Ding Ding, in Unity, and reportedly burned and destroyed crops
and looted properties. Sources also told UNMISS that, on 13 and 14 October, SPLA
soldiers had allegedly attacked six villages in Matangai payam, indiscriminately
fired at civilians, pillaged their property and burned down at least 40 houses.
UNMISS went to Marial-tiit and Meen-Adhiak and confirmed the attack.
41. UNMISS also received information about the attacks, by unknown armed men
on 8 October, on civilians travelling on the Yei to Juba road in Central Equatoria.
Sources reported that over 20 civilians were killed. The majority of the victims were
displaced persons, many of whom were women and children, and the killings were
ethnically motivated. Also in Central Equatoria, armed men allegedly attacked three
buses carrying civilians on the Juba to Nimule road on 10 October. Civilians were
reportedly taken to the bush and robbed and at least one bus was set on fire by the
attackers. On 18 October, the bodies of nine civilians were discovered in Mangala
County, in Central Equatoria, which bore signs of torture, inclu ding machete cuts, as
well as gunshot wounds.
42. UNMISS continued to receive reports of the forced recruitment of civilians,
among them children. A man informed UNMISS that he had been arrested, along
with 25 other youths, in Thokwathnwyotni, Guit County, in Unity, in September by
elements belonging to the pro-Taban Deng Gai faction of SPLM/A in Opposition,
but he had managed to escape the same day. On 21 September, in another incident,
an internally displaced person informed UNMISS that he and three other civilians
were abducted near the protection of civilians site in Bentiu and taken to an
SPLM/A in Opposition camp, also in Guit County, where they were assessed for
military experience. One of the abductees was reportedly taken to Kuergueni for
further military training, while the other three were released on 22 September.
43. UNMISS observed further restrictions on the freedom of expression. On
5 September, the editor of Al-Wehda newspaper was detained by the South Sudan
National Police Service for an article, published on 29 August, that criticized
recruitment practices at the police academy in Rajaf. In Western Equatoria, two
radio journalists in Yambio County were forced to leave the country in September
fearing arrest by National Security Service officers who reportedly accused them of
promoting the agenda of Western governments. On 14 September, the Nation Mirror
daily newspaper was closed by the National Security Service, reportedly for
publishing a story regarding a report that alleged large -scale corruption in the
Government. UNMISS confirmed media censorship prior to publication, including
through the deployment of National Security Service personnel at printing facilities
in Juba. A journalist who worked for the Arabic Al-Mougif newspaper was found
severely beaten in a Juba graveyard, on 10 October.
44. In mid-September, at least three members of civil society informed UNMISS
that they had received threats for having attended a meeting with the Security
Council delegation that visited Juba in early September. On 20 September, a civil
society representative informed UNMISS in Yambio that the National Security
Service was monitoring the bank accounts of some organizations on suspicion that
they were receiving money to promote Western interests, as wel l as those of the
United Nations.
45. During visits to police stations and prisons across the country, UNMISS
recorded hundreds of cases of prolonged and arbitrary detention as well as proxy

16-19380

11/19

S/2016/950

detention, often in dire conditions, some of which involved child ren. UNMISS also
documented seven deaths in custody at Torit Prison in Eastern Equatoria, reportedly
linked to illnesses caused by poor detention conditions. During the reporting period,
UNMISS was denied access to places where violations and abuses report edly
occurred, including in Yei, in September and October. UNMISS was also denied
access to Nzara Police Station in Western Equatoria on 1 September. Access to
National Security Service detention facilities, where several civilians were
reportedly detained, continued to be denied.
46. During the reporting period, a total of 76 incidents, affecting 2,177 children in
South Sudan (1,219 boys and 958 girls), were documented through the monitoring
and reporting mechanism on grave violations against children in situations of armed
conflict. Most of the incidents reported named SPLA and SPLA in Opposition as the
perpetrators. The recruitment and use of children by parties to the conflict to
reinforce their ranks was the most recurrent violation documented during t he
reporting period (60 per cent of incidents), followed by incidents of sexual violence
(11 per cent) and attacks on schools and their use for military purposes (7 per cent).
The other violations affecting children included the abduction of children, the
killing of children caught in the cross fire during fighting, maiming, denial of
humanitarian access and attacks on hospitals. Due to security constraints and
restrictions on access in Bentiu, Malakal and Juba, it was only possible to verify 63
incidents, affecting 852 children (521 boys and 331 girls), of the 76 incidents
reported during the period under review.
47. SPLA harassment of civilians in UNMISS protection sites persists and attacks
on displaced women and girls continue to occur. Incidents of sexu al and genderbased violence, including conflict-related sexual violence, are widespread, with no
accountability or enforcement of the victims’ rights to remedy and reparation.
UNMISS documented incidents of sexual violence, rape, gang rape and attempted
rape involving at least 90 victims, at least 21 of whom were children. The majority
of incidents were reportedly perpetrated by SPLA soldiers, although “unidentified
armed militia” and armed youths were also allegedly responsible for acts of
conflict-related sexual violence. Although the capacity of UNMISS to document and
verify reports was limited due to the lack of access to areas in which the Opposition
is active, in five specific cases, SPLA in Opposition was alleged to be the
perpetrator. Approximately 25 women, including at least two children, were
allegedly abducted in Juba by SPLA in the month of September 2016.
48. On 15 September 2016, the Commission on Human Rights in South Sudan,
established by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 31/20 of 23 March 2016,
concluded a week-long visit to South Sudan. The commissioners released a
statement in Juba referring to their meetings with Government officials, civil
society, community leaders and displaced persons in Juba and Bentiu. In particular,
the commissioners expressed grave concern over the continuing escalation of sexual
violence, the diminishing space for journalists and civil society members, who are
subject to intimidation and harassment, as well as the ongoing impunity and lack of
accountability for serious crimes and human rights violations and abuses.
49. Following mounting concerns over the rise in ethnic hate speech over the
previous two weeks, on 25 October, in a press statement, the United N ations High
Commissioner for Human Rights warned that rising ethnic rhetoric, hate speech and

12/19

16-19380

S/2016/950

incitement to violence against certain ethnic groups in South Sudan is highly
dangerous and could result in mass atrocities if not reined in by community and
political leaders at the highest levels.

C.

Creating conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance
50. The eruption of fighting in many locations across the country undermined
UNMISS efforts to conduct patrols and support the delivery of humanitarian
assistance in hard-to-reach locations, especially in the Equatoria region. Planned
UNMISS patrols aimed at assessing the condition of displaced local populations, in
areas where violence had been reported, were frequently obstructed by local
security authorities. In Unity, humanitarian partners withdrew as a result of the
fighting in key locations, including areas covered by the “Beyond Bentiu” strategy.
However, UNMISS still managed to support responses to pressing humanitarian
conditions by coordinating its long-distance patrols with humanitarian and
protection partners so as to enhance security during the transfer of assistance
materials from humanitarian warehouses and the distribution of lifesaving assistance
to vulnerable communities. In close collaboration with the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in Juba and local humanitarian partners and
representatives in the various sectors, UNMISS military personnel provided force
protection for food drops, convoys and many other humanitarian activities, with a
total of 2,153 force protection activities undertaken during the reporting period.
51. Additionally, on 27 September, the Force Commander of UNMISS met the
Chief of General Staff of SPLA, Paul Malong, and was able to secure his assurance
that the restriction on United Nations helicopter flights in Central Equatoria and
other places would be lifted with immediate effect, in addition to the lifting of prior
restrictions on UNMISS personnel and vehicles.
52. The Mine Action Service was able to focus on its most critical and lifesaving
tasks, with its quick response teams providing technical support and information to
humanitarian actors in order to enable the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
Additionally, an area of 218,465 m2 was surveyed and released, with 157 explosive
hazards and 820 items of small arms ammunition removed and destroyed.

D.

Supporting the implementation of the peace agreement
53. My Special Representative used her good offices, in coordination with United
Nations entities, to support the functioning of an inclusive Transitional Government
of National Unity and Transitional National Legislative Assembly, two organs
mandated by the peace agreement that are operational. She also used her good
offices to urge the political leadership to recommit to the peace agreement as the
only viable vehicle for peace in South Sudan and to stress the primacy of a political
solution. Her efforts included promoting political dialogue among all South
Sudanese stakeholders towards the implementation of the peace agreement,
including the return of all stakeholders to the peace process.

16-19380

13/19

S/2016/950

54. My Special Representative also continued her efforts to facilitate the
coordination of international support for the peace process by convening the
preparatory meetings of the international partners of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission to provide a forum for the formulation of common positions
and coherent recommendations regarding the implementation of the peace
agreement.
55. In support of the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism, UNMISS continued to provide force protection and logistical support
to facilitate its operations and opened an additional team site in Wau. The new
memorandum of understanding between IGAD and UNMISS on support to the
Monitoring Mechanism was concluded in August.
56. On 29 September, it was agreed that the Joint Operations Centre of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission in Juba would resume operations as soon as
possible. The Joint Operations Centre had stopped operating during the crisis in
July. In support of the operations of the Centre, UNMISS has co-located four United
Nations police officers.

E.

Cross-cutting issues
57. In view of the widespread occurrence of gender-based and conflict-related
sexual violence, UNMISS is working to enhance the protection of women and girls,
including through enhanced patrolling by United Nations troops, particularly in
areas where women and girls are most vulnerable. UNMISS urged the Chief of Staff
of SPLA to institute preventive measures to ensure the safety of women and girls
and to bring perpetrators to account. the Mission is also working with community
leaders and protection partners to coordinate peacekeepers’ escorts for women and
young girls leaving protection of civilians sites. Additionally, on 27 and
28 September, UNMISS participated in a two-day high-level dialogue on the South
Sudan National Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security, 2015 -2020. The
dialogue was guided by Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security, with the objectives of outlining responses by the Government to
address impunity and support victims and survivors, developing a common
perspective on challenges and exploring how best to address them and sensitizing
key government ministries on the need to integrate comprehensive measures to
protect women and girls against sexual and gender-based violence during both
conflict and peacetime.
58. UNMISS also worked to enhance public understanding of its mandate and its
support for the implementation of the peace agreement. The Mission drafted
strategic communications documents outlining public messaging and outreach
programming tools, including key messages, press releases, radio segments and
press briefings, to clarify and explain the Mission’s responsibilities, its limitations
and action taken during the crisis in July. Radio Miraya provided daily coverage of
thematic issues, including, but not limited to, the peace process, in order to
underscore that the July crisis would not derail the implementation of peace.
“Women’s Power”, a dedicated radio programme for women by Radio Miraya, has
continued to shed light on women’s leadership in the areas of peace and security.

14/19

16-19380

S/2016/950

Outreach field offices organized sensitization events for civil society a nd local
community members, including among displaced communities.
59. UNMISS continued HIV and AIDS sensitization and voluntary confidential
counselling and testing services, targeting all civilians and uniformed members,
Mission-wide. In collaboration with other United Nations specialized agencies,
funds and programmes, broad sensitization, through Radio Miraya, aimed at United
Nations personnel and the public at large, continued. The weekly live radio
programme “Straight Talk” features HIV and AIDS outreach and awareness
messaging on sexually transmitted infections, prevention and coping mechanisms.
Through that programme, UNMISS raised the awareness of an estimated 308,166
people, including 153,724 women.

VI. Staffing and status of deployment of surge capacity
60. As at 25 October, the strength of UNMISS civilian personnel stood at 2,543,
comprising 832 international staff members, 1,317 national staff members and 394
United Nations Volunteers.
61. The Mission’s military strength stood at 12,304, consisting of 11,743 military
personnel, 367 staff officers and 194 military liaison officers. The total figure is 696
below the authorized strength of 13,000, a gap that will be closed significantly by
the upcoming deployment of up to 379 engineers and medical personnel, many of
whom will support the establishment of a level II hospital in Bentiu.
62. The Mission’s police strength stood at 1,459 of the authorized 2,001 officers,
including 576 individual police officers, 55 corrections officers and 828 perso nnel
in formed police units. Of the 576 individual officers, 43 are part of the 100 planned
to be deployed for Joint Integrated Police activities. However, all individual officers
in Juba are temporarily deployed to the protection of civilians sites, in or der to fill a
personnel shortfall. Preparations for the deployment of two additional formed police
units from Rwanda and Ghana, to Juba and Bentiu, respectively, are under way. It is
expected that 160 Rwandese formed police unit personnel will arrive in De cember
2016. A further 170 Ghanaian personnel are scheduled to be deployed in January
2017. However, the delay in obtaining clearance for new personnel from the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs has interfered with the deployment schedule. Delayed
entry visas resulted in 23 individual police officers being stranded in Entebbe for
more than two months. A total of 60 individual officers were scheduled to arrive
between July and August, but owing to the non-issuance of entry permits, UNMISS
is unable to foresee upcoming rotations of individual police officers. Similarly,
since 18 October, United Nations military personnel have been denied entry to Juba
and are being deported on arrival at Juba International Airport for not having
obtained security clearance from the Ministry of Defence 72 hours prior to their
arrival. The rule is now applied to troop-contributing countries, staff officers,
military liaison officers and troops proceeding on leave from the mission area.
63. With a view to implementing the provisions set out in the report of the
Secretary-General to the General Assembly on special measures for protection from
sexual exploitation and sexual abuse (A/69/779), a dedicated task force and the
Conduct and Discipline Advisory Group of UNMISS continued to enforce the zero -

16-19380

15/19

S/2016/950

tolerance policy for exploitation and abuses in the Mission. UNMISS also
concluded action to launch a new mandatory e -learning programme on the
prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse for all UNMISS personnel, including
managers and commanders.

VII. Violations of the status-of-forces agreement, international
humanitarian law and the security of United Nations personnel
64. UNMISS recorded 46 violations of the status-of-forces agreement during the
reporting period, 29 of which were restrictions on movement affecting UNMISS
personnel and contractors engaged in tasks exclusively related to the Mission ’s
mandate. Incidents included threats to UNMISS personnel and premises, attempted
censorship of Radio Miraya broadcasts, imposition of new immigration conditions
for entry into South Sudan for UNMISS staff members, confiscation of United
Nations property and interference with air and land operations. Other violations
included the arrest, detention and harassment of, assaults on and threats against
UNMISS personnel.
65. Three national staff members of UNMISS, two of whom were arrested in
December 2013 and one in October 2014, remained in detention without charge,
with UNMISS having been denied any access to them. UNMISS was also denied
access to three staff members who have been in detention since December 2015.
Meanwhile, both SPLA and SPLA in Opposition were responsible for threats against
UNMISS personnel and premises during the reporting period. On 5 September, in
Nasir, in Upper Nile, there was an exchange of a barrage of mortars and heavy
calibre weapons fire between SPLA and SPLA in Opposition, as well as small arms
fire. During the exchange of fire, one stray bullet hit the Mission ’s company
operating base water treatment plant. UNMISS continues to notify the Government
of such violations through notes verbales and in meetings with relevant officials.
A monthly matrix of incidents is also shared with the Government.

VIII. Financial aspects
66. The General Assembly, in its resolution 70/281 of 17 June 2016, appropriated
the amount of $1,081,788,400 for the maintenance of the Mission for the period
from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017. As at 24 October 20 16, unpaid assessed
contributions to the Special Account amounted to $168.9 million. Total outstanding
assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations at the same date amounted to
$2,159.3 million. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs has been made
for the period up to 31 July 2016, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent owned equipment has been made for the period up to 30 June 2016, in accordance
with the quarterly payment schedule.

16/19

16-19380

S/2016/950

IX. Observations
67. The Security Council should be deeply disturbed, as I am, by the sharp
deterioration of the situation in South Sudan and the very real prospect of the
country descending into chaos. The security situation is worsening day by day.
Ethnic tensions and the end of the rainy season in November will further exacerbate
the violence. The grim reality is that South Sudan is on the edge of the abyss. The
immediate cessation of hostilities and an unconditional return to the full
implementation of the ceasefire is the only way to avert a ca tastrophe.
68. I have repeatedly warned that South Sudan risks sinking further into conflict.
I have lamented the promises of independence squandered by those seeking power
through violence. I reiterate that the country’s political and military leadership have
a moral and political responsibility to set their personal differences aside in the
interests of the population. There is no military solution to the country ’s political
and military fragmentation. Only an inclusive political process guided by the fu ll
implementation of the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic
of South Sudan can reverse these alarming trends.
69. The participants in the ministerial meeting of core regional and international
partners of the South Sudanese peace processes, held on the margins of the General
Assembly in September (see para. 7 of the present report), were unequivocal in
stressing the paramount importance of an inclusive political process, involving
representatives of SPLM, SPLM in Opposition (chosen by the opposition) and other
stakeholders in bringing South Sudan back to the path of peace. In this regard, there
is an urgent need to ensure that the Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, Mr. Mogae, and the African Union High Representative for South
Sudan, Mr. Konaré, receive the support necessary to fulfil their respective mandates.
70. I welcome the resumption of efforts to implement the peace agreement,
evidenced by the inauguration of the Transitional National Legislative Assembly
and the hosting of the Permanent Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
workshop in Juba by the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission. It is my
hope that all stakeholders, within and outside of South Sudan, will be included in a
peace process that lays the foundations for lasting stability, growth and
development.
71. I welcome the Transitional Government of National Unity’s commitment to
restoring freedom of movement for UNMISS and humanitarian actors. However, I am
alarmed by the number of flagrant access restrictions UNMISS continues to face,
including the obstruction of patrols and humanitarian operations and the denial of
entry into the country of United Nations personnel. I urge the Transitional
Government of National Unity to demonstrate its commitment and good faith by
immediately removing those impediments, which prevent UNMISS from fulfilling its
core mandated tasks. Further to my previous report (S/2016/552), and given the
continued impediments faced by UNMISS in the performance of its mandate,
I reiterate my call upon the Security Council to urgently consider the appropriate
measures cited in resolution 2304 (2016), including the imposition of an arms
embargo.

16-19380

17/19

S/2016/950

72. As the overall security situation continues to deteriorate, it is critical that all
political and military actors immediately de-escalate hostilities across the country
and ensure that their respective forces remain in check.
73. I am alarmed by the rise in the use of ethnic rhetoric and hate speech, which
risks stoking violence and fracturing communities. I call on the Transitional
Government of National Unity to immediately investigate all acts of incitement to
violence against ethnic groups in order to ensure that those responsible are held
accountable, regardless of their political affiliation or military rank.
74. I am appalled by the suffering of the South Sudanese people. Before the
violence that broke out in July 2016, some 6.1 million people, approximately half of
the population, were estimated to be in urgent need of humanitarian assistance.
More than 2.3 million people have been forced to flee their homes owing to conflict,
including more than 1.6 million people displaced internally. UNMISS continues to
host a growing number of displaced people in its protection of civilians sites.
75. Reports of widespread sexual violence, including the rape of women and
young girls, perpetrated by organized forces, affiliated militia and other armed
groups, sometimes in the vicinity of the protection sites, are particularly alarming. It
is an outrage that those charged with ensuring the safety and security of civilians are
the very ones raping and killing them. The Government must hold all perpetrators to
account for these appalling crimes. Sustainable peace can only be achieved if there
is justice.
76. Finally, I wish to express my sincere appreciation and gratitude to UNMISS
and the staff of the United Nations country team, who have worked to protect tens
of thousands of civilians and facilitated the provision of humanitarian assistance. In
particular, I wish to thank my Special Representative, Ellen Margrethe Løj, for her
leadership, courage and compassion, as well as the troop - and police-contributing
countries that provided essential uniformed personnel and assets to the Mission.

18/19

16-19380

16-19380

S/2016/950

19/19
