THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR
th
MEETING:

NEW

1 SEPTEMBER 1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2028)

...........,.......,,.........

Expression of thanks to the retiring President ........................
Adoption of the agenda

1
1

......................................

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 26 August 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12387)
.............................................

1

S/PV. 2028

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/, . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2028TH
Held in New York

on Thursday,

MEETING
1 September

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Christophides
(Cyprus),
Mr. Papoulias (Greece) and Mr. Tiirkmen
(Turkey) took places at the Council table.

President: Mr. Riidiger von WECHMAR
(Federal Republic of Germany).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

3. Mr. HOUNGAVOU
(Benin) (interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, my delegation extends to you its
heartfelt congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of September. My
delegation is convinced that, thanks to your professional
and human qualities which we are all well aware of, you
will effectively conduct the deliberations in the Council.
You can count on our full co-operation.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2028)
a

’

1. Adoption of the agenda

4. I would take this opportunity to express to the outgoing
President, our friend, Ambassador Leprette, the sincere
appreciation of my delegation for the responsible manner in
which he conducted all the affairs of the Council for the
past month.

2. The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 26 August 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12387)

5. My delegation would like to pay a respectful tribute to
the memory of Archbishop Makarios, the eminent head of
State of the Republic of Cyprus. That illustrious man,
throughout his entire career as the head of the Cypriot
State, waged a relentless and just battle to preserve the
non-aligned character of the State of Cyprus. My delegation
requests the delegation of Cyprus to convey to the
Government and people of Cyprus the sincere condolences
of the people of Benin.

The meeting was called to order at 11.30 a.m.
;?

-5

.-’

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT: Before entering into the subject of
discussion, our resumed debate on the situation in Cyprus,
perlnit me to express on behalf of my delegation and on my
own behalf our admiration and gratitude for the skilled and
experienced manner in which my predecessor, our President
for the month of August, the representative of France,
Ambassador Jacques Leprette, discharged his difficult
duties. The President for the current month will earnestly
try his best to match the excellence with which Anibassador Leprette and his predecessors guided our work.

6. The recent steps taken concerning Famagusta are
simply unilateral measures and, as such, are likely further to
complicate an already inextricable situation in the island.
The efforts to impose changes at Famagusta represent, in
the opinion of my delegation, a regrettable escalation which
does not favour a dialogue for the peaceful settlement of
the crisis. So it is quite right for the Government of Cyprus
to sound the alarm and to request the Council to assume its
full responsibilities, We therefore think that the decision of
the Cypriot authorities is quite responsible and wise,
because any other attitude would be tantamount to
political unawareness.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 26 August 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12387)
i

1977, at 10.30 a.m.

7. Furthermore, it is not honest to say that the situation is
either calm or normal on the island so long as external
Powers maintain major military contingents there. My
delegation has several times denounced before the Council
this direct or indirect aggression that the people of Cyprus
are undergoing. The dubious manoeuvres of certain foreign
Powers are unacceptable and must therefore be candemned.
All the measures taken against the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Cyprus seem to be dictated by the imperialist designs of these same Powers.

2. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2026th meeting, I invite the representatives of
Cyprus, Greece and Turkey to participate, without the right
to vote, in the Council’s discussion under the terms of
Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure,
1

14. It is not easy to sift the rights and wrongs of the
situation in the island of Cyprus without going back a long
way in the and considering all the events and actions
wl~icb have created a confrontation between the two
communities whose home it has been for many centuries.
In the atmosphere of hostility and suspicion which unfortunately has come to prevail, each side considers the other
wholly to blame and is disposed to view its every word and
deed h the worst possible light. We are all aware of this
and, wherever their sympathies may lie, members will, we
are sure, not wish to do anything which might provide the
adversaries with fuel further to enflame the situation.

8. The stage of the escalation of faits accomplis which we
arc now witnessing can only further complicate matters. It
is therefore quite wise for the Council, if it really wishes to
work for peace and security, to take sincere stock of the
resolutions already adopted on this subject and consider
effective measures to assist the Government of Cyprus to
recover its territorial integrity.
9. The Cyprus crisis is an internal one that is becoming
increasingly complicated because of the inadmissible interference of external forces. My delegation is still convinced
that the people of Cyprus, if left free and independent, will
be able to find a satisfactory solution for their own
problems. The Council must therefore work for the
unconditional withdrawal of all external military forces
occupying the island. In the light of the recent measures
taken at Famagusta by the Turkish Government, it would
be unwise for the Council not to be concerned over the
dangerous tension deliberately brought about by that
policy of provocation and aggression.

1.5. When the question of the extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus was
debated in the Council last June, my delegation stated
/2013th meeting] that, although the situation in Cyprus
was not normal-as indeed it could not be, under the
circumstances-we
were encouraged by the positive
developments reported by the Secretary-General in the two
comprehensive reports which he presented to the Council at
the time [S/12323 and S/12342], notably reporting the
lessening of intercommunal incidents, the reduction of
cease-fire violations and the stabilization of the security
situation. At the time, we also expressed the view-which
we continue to hold-that the process of intercommunal
talks initiated by the Secretary-General between the two
Cypriot communities offered the best hope for a just and
lasting settlement of the Cyprus problem.

10. My delegation reiterates its condemnation of the
permanent military aggression suffered by the independent
and non-aligned State of Cyprus and demands the withdrawal of all foreign troops from the island in order to
enable the people of Cyprus to settle their internal
problems thanks to the good offices which are being used
by our Secretary-General. This is the only way; no other
exists.

16. As all of us are aware, an immense amount of effort
has gone into getting both parties to agree to the process of
negotiations, for which the Secretary-General deserves our
special praise and thanks. It is, therefore, imperative that
the momentum generated by the recent intercommunal
negotiations should not be lost. There is no alternative to a
negotiated settlement. It would be a matter of regret,
therefore, if the parties, for whatever reason, were to be
distracted from the larger and much more important
objective of finding a peaceful solution to the Cyprus
problem.

11. Mr. AKLUND (Pakistan): Sir, I should like to offer
you my delegation’s and my own warmest congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of September. The long experience,
diplomatic ability and energy which you bring to the task
will stand the Council in good stead in dealing with the
difficult and complex subject which is on its agenda today,
and with others which may come up during the month.
12. I take this opportunity to pay tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Leprette of France, President of
the Council for the preceding month. Although the month
passed largely without event, we are all aware of the
conscientiousness with which, during that otherwise not
very agreeable month, Ambassador Leprette remained at his
post and kept members informed of developments of
interest. We owe him our gratitude, furthermore, for
initiating the present debate in a manner which, we are
sure, will help you, Sir, to carry it to a successful
conclusion.

17. My delegation remains convinced that a peaceful
solution to the Cyprus problem is possible if both communities address themselves to the task in a spirit of mutual
accommodation, with flexibility and good will.

13. My delegation has listened with the closest attention
to the representatives of the parties directly concerned in
the question we are considering. On the one hand, there
have been allegations that Turkey intends to colonize the
city of Famagusta and thereby foreclose the discussions on
the future of the city. On the other hand, we heard
yesterday from the representative of Turkey that

18. At their meeting of 12 February 1977, the late
Archbishop Makarios and Mr. Rauf Denktaa agreed on the
basic guidelines under which the intercommunal talks
should proceed. We are aware that considerable differences
of a political, territorial and constitutional nature still exist
between the two sides. However, only negotiations can
enable the two communities to reconcile each others’
legitimate aspirations so that a just and equitable solution
can be found which would protect the fundamental rights
of the two communities in an independent, non-aligned,
b&communal federal republic of Cyprus-a goal which is
shared by the two communities.

“there had been no changes in the area except for the
opening of the Constantia Hotel, which has been undergoing repairs for the last two years, as a catering
institute” [202&h meeting, para. 791.

19. The Secretary-General played an important and
constructive role earlier this year in bringing the two
communities to the conference table. I should like to
conclude this statement by reiterating our appreciation to
2

the Secretary-General for his persistent and untiring efforts,
and would respectfully urge that these efforts should
continue so that the intercommunal talks can be resumed at
an early date.
20. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
Cyprus, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, who has asked for
the floor,
21. Mr. CHRISTOPHIDES (Cyprus): Judging by the statement of the representative of Pakistan, it may be that the
real facts regarding Famagusta are not clear in the minds of
some Council members. Therefore, if the facts are in doubt,
perhaps the Council might wish to ask the SecretaryGeneral to furnish such information as he may have
available.
22. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): It would be useful for
members of the Council, before taking a decision, to know
any facts about this situation which the President or the
Secretary-General have at their disposal.
23. The PRESIDENT:

I call on the Secretary-General,

24. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
In response to the
request which was just made by the Foreign Minister of
Cyprus and supported by the representative of the Soviet
Union, I wish to give the Council the following information
based on the reports which we received recently from my
Special Representative in Cyprus and the Commander of
UNFICYP.
25. Varosha, the new quarter of Famagusta south of the
Turkish Cypriot-inhabited walled city, was evacuated by its
Greek Cypriot inhabitants and occupied by Turkish troops
during the second military operation, in August 1974.
While the Greek Cypriots and other residents have not been
permitted to return to Varosha, Turkish Cypriots have also
been prevented from settling there. UNFICYP posts and
patrols are being maintained in the town.
26. On 20 July 1977, Mr. Ecevit, while still Prime Minister
of Turkey, stated that his Government had taken steps to

open Varosha for civilian settlement, He rejected the
impression that Varosha was being reserved for purposes of
territorial concessions through the intercommunal talks.
Mr. Ecevit’s suggestion was endorsed by Mr. Denktag. On
23 July the latter also invited foreigners, as Greeks then
were, holding property at Famagusta to reopen theil
businesses there.
27. It was subsequently announced that the Constantia
Hotel, situated on a promontory at the north-east end of
Varosha overlooking Famagusta Harbour, would be opened
as a Turkish Cypriot hotel and catering training centre and
that certain nearby buildings, including a loo-flat apartment building, would be taken over by Turkish Cypriots in
this connexion.
28. In mid-August, the Turkish Cypriot authorities began
changing Greek street names to Turkish names in the
Constantia Hotel area and, in one instance, outside it.
29. In various statements, Mr. DenktaF and other Turkish
Cypriot spokesmen have emphasized the point that Varosha
was an integral part of the Turkish Federated State of
Cyprus, whose status was a Turkish Cypriot internal affair.
However, on 29 August, Mr. Denktag publicly denied that
Varosha was being colonized.
30. The bearing of the Varosha situation on the conduct
of the intercommunal talks was stressed by Mr. PapadopouIos, the Greek Cypriot interlocutor who, on 23 August,
stated that if the colonization of Famagusta should go on
that would be an expansion of the Turkish invasion. As a
result, the object of the intercommunal
talks would
disappear.
31. This latest information is based on reports I have
received from my Special Representative
in Cyprus,
Mr. PBrez de CuBllar.
32. The PRESIDENT: In reply to the question of the
representative of the Soviet Union, I should like to state
that there is no additional information available to me.
The meeting rose at II.55 a.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world. Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en venta dans les librairies
d6positaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
B : Nations Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Genbve.
KAK. HOTIYWfTb

COMO

Litho

in United

Nations,

CONSEGUIR

ZI3,4AHZIB

OPI’AHN

PUBLICACIONES

3A4MEI

DE LAS

UNIES
et les agencea
ou adressea-vous

OG%EAHHEHHhIX

NACIONES

HAI.(lXFi

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas
e&n
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

New York

in other

Price: $U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent

currencies)

77-70001-October

1978-2200
