SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL
RECORDS %
FORTIETH

2596

YEAR

MEETING:

20 JUNE

1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

RovisionaJ agenda(WAgcndai259tVRev.l) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*.................

1

Complaint by Aqgola a&w South Africa:
Letter dated 13 June 1985from the PermanentRepnsentathe of Angola to the
United Nationsaddrcsd co the Resident of the SecurityCouncil (s/17267). . .

I

S/W.2596

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
!Bocuments of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplemenrs
of the Oflcial Recordp
of theSecurity Council.The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it i? given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
andDecisions
of the
Sect&y Coaacii. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on tbat date.

2596th
Held

in New York

MEETING

on Thursday,

President: Mr. Errol MAHABIR

(Trinidad

and Tobago).

den: Mr. D. H. N. ALLEYNE

(Trinidad

and Tobago).

20 June 1985, at 10.30 a.m.
Africa), Mr. Birido (Sudan), Mr. Foum (United Republic of
Tanzania) and Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) took the places
resewed for them at the side of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India. Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland. United States of America.
Prov&IouaI ageda

.
,

.

1. Adoption

2. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council is meeting
today in response to the request contained in a letter dated
13 June 1985 from the representative of Angola to the
President of the Security Council [S/17264. Members of
the Council have before them document S/17286. which
contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by Burkina Faso, Egypt, India, Madagascar, Peru and Trinidad
and Tobago.

(S/AgendaIW6/Rev.l)

of the agenda

3. 1 should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/17263, which contains the text of a
letter dated 12 June 1985 from the representative of
Angola to the President of the Council.

2. Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter &ted 13 June 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17267)

4. The first speaker is my distinguished brother the Minister for Foreign AlTairs of Angola, Mr. Afonso Van
Dunem. I welcome him and invite him to make his
statement.

The meedng was called to or&r at II.30 a.m.
Adoptiard@Peends
Thp agen&
Complalat

5. Mr. VAN DUNEM (Angola): This is the second time
within a few days that my delegation has spoken in the
Council on a matter that concerns regional peace and security and threatens international peace and security.

was a&pted

by Angola agabtti

!3outb Afries:

1. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the Council
that I have recclved letters from the re~esentatives of
Angola, Argentina, the Bahamas, Cuba, the German
Democratic Republic, Liberia, Pakistan, Sao Tome and
Prlncipe, South Africa. the Sudan, the United Republic of
Tanzania and Yugoslavia, in which they request to IX
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s a@.
In conformity with the usual practice. I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
rqresentatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
-A- --_..-.a_.-“1
puxuurc.

6, The records of the Council are swollen because of the
countless times the People’s Republic of Angola has
brought before it the anguish and suITering of the Angolan
people caused by the racist ap7rrheid r@ime of PRtoria.
the death and destruction wrought by the racist troops, the
numerous attempts at destabilisation of the legitimate
Government of Angola by the minority non-representative
r&gime in Pretoria, the constant violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola. To this day, despite all efforts, neither the United Nations nor its supreme
peace-keeping organ, the Security Council, has been able
to do anything to stem South Africa’s designs, policies and
actions, which have caused so much instability in southern
Africa. It appears that the Council is as helpless hefore
South Africa’s racist and brutal might as the innocent civHA* .‘Y”pI
*r--***A
**A IUS*L*I
.ilama..Y*** Am
. ..- .YI..I.
pr-ru..
Y.,”
““UIBC..

At rhe invitation of the Reskient. Mr. Van L&em
(Angola), took ,a p&e al rhe Council table: Mr. Muliz
(Argentina), Mr. Hepburn @hamas), Mr. Oramas Oliva
(Cub@, Mr. Schkgel (German fimocrattc ReJ-wblk), Mr.
Kofa (L&e&), Mr. shah Nawaz (Pakistan), Mr. Branco
(&IO Tome ami R&cipt$
Mr. van Schimding (South

7. My Government has brought our case to the Security
Council on a number of occasions: in March 1976, when
the Council adopted resolution 387 (I976), demanding
that South Africa scrupu1ously respect the independcnop.
sovereignty and territorial integrity of my country and Calling upon the racist r&me to pay full compensation; in
I

national Territory of Namibia as a springboard
perpetrating of armed attacks.

May 1978. when the Council adopted resolution 428
(1978). repeating that demand and demanding also the
immediate and unconditional
withdrawal
of all South
African forces from Angola; in March 1979. when the
Council adopted resolution 417 (1979) demanding that
South Africa cease immediately its provocative armed
invasions against the People’s Republic of Angola and that
it respect forthwith the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of my country; in November 1979. when
the Council adopted resolution 454 (1979), strongly condemning South Africa’s aggression and calling upon the
racist Government to cease immediately all acts of aggression and provocation against the People’s Republic of
Angola and forthwith to withdraw all its armed forces
from Angola; in June l9g0, when the Council adopted
resolution 475 (1980). in which it demanded that the racist
regime withdraw forthwith all its military forces from the
territory of the People’s Republic of Angola, cease all violations of Angola’s airspace and henceforth scrupulously
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Peapie’s Republic of Angola, called upon all States to implement fully the arms embargo imposed against South
Africa in Council resolution 418 (1977) and decided to
meet again in the event of further acts of violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola, in order to
consider more effective measures in accordance with
appropriate provisions of the Charter. including Chapter
VII thereof.

for the

II. Today my delegation is bringing to the Council a
case of a threat not merely to civilian Angolan lives but to
American lives as well. Who threatened the lives and prop
erty of the Americans in Angola? The racist Republic of
South Africa. Who saved the lives and property of the
Americans in Angola from certain death and datruction?
The courageous armed forces of the People’s Republic ot
Angola, FAPLA (People’s Armed Forces for the Liberation of Angola). We can therefore conclude that the
method used by South Africa to defend Western economic
interests is to destroy those sramc interests by staging acts
of sabotage and State terrorism.
12. To recapitulate brielly recent events for the Council,
on 21 May 1985 a patrol of FAPLA armed forces caught a
South African armed forces special commando group that
was ready to launch an attack on one of the oil installations in our Cabinda Gulf Oil compound-l
repeat. Gulf
Oil-at Malongo, in the province of Cabinda, more than
2,tXtO kilometres from Namibian territory and even further
away from South Africa itself. The code name for this
operation was Argon.
13, If the operation had succeeded, the toll would have
been dozens dead, some of them American nationals.
Damage would have amounted to at least $I billion--l
repeat, $1 billion-United
States dollars, including a $216
million reconstruction of the onshore installation. It would
have taken over a year to rebuild the Malongo oil installations. and the halt in production would have caused a less
of at least $770 million, in addition to stock worth $30
million.

8. In August 1981, when my Government and the people
of Angola made an anguished appeal to the Security
Council after a massive invasion of my country and the
military occupation of parts of southern Angola, the draft
resolution before the Council (s/1466d/Rev..l
strongly
condemned the racist r&ime for its premeditated, unprovoked and persistent armed invasion of Angola, &elated
that the armed invasion was a flagrant violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola and constituted a danger to international
peace and security,
demanded the immediate and tmumditional with&awsl of
all South African troops from Angolan tektoty. @rongly
condemned the we of ntercenake bySouthAftkaagainst
the Government and people of Angola, condemned the
aggressive campaign and other hestile iidivb
.3imed at
dcstabilizing the People’s Republic of Angola and called
for implementation of the arms embargo imporcd in 1977
against South Africa and for full and adaqua@ comv
tion by South Africa to Angola. That draft resolution was
vetoed by a permanent member of the Security Council,
although I3 members voted in favour and one other permanent member abstained in the vote.

14. The objectives of the aborted Operation Argon were
obvious: first, to try to damage the credibility of the legitimate Government of the People’s Republic of Angola with
the governments of the Western countries with which
Angola has excellent economic relations, for example, the
United States; second, to destabilize Angola’s economy
and cream misery for the Angolan people; third, to give
credit for the aggression, as has always been done, to the
UNITA (National Union for the Total Independence of
Angola) puppet group, which exists solely because of strategic and operational assistance from South Africa.
IS. My delegation wishes to state once again. firmly and
categorically. that the South African Government is
attempting blatantly to mislead and misinform the international community by pretending that the goal of Operation
Argon was to detect bases of SWAP0 (South West Africa
People’s Organisation)
and the ANC (Afriwn National
Congress of Souih Africaj. i am sure ihe members of ihe
Council will agree when my &legation states that probably never before has the Council heard so ridiculous a
version of recent, documented. facts as that presented just
a few weeks ago by the South African representative on IO
June. I am sorry: allow me to correct my&
I was mistaken, The Council has heard such ludicrous assertions
before from various representatives of the South African

9. In December 1983, the Council adopted resolution
545 (1983). demanding that South Africa should cease all
.1-L.L-.---I---- a-.
fl”IIO”,,J --i--.
P&a’,OL rr,qvko
aiif j--r-+
,+s,Ius,“,k 8 --.-.I
-8 “pw”us~,
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of that
country.
IO. Finally. in January 19% the Council adopted raolution 546 (1984). which strongly condemned South Africa
for its renewed, intensified, premeditated and unprovoked
bombing, as well as its continuing utilisation of the inter2

r6gimc.

both

in the Council

and outside

negotiating the holding of a ministerial level meeting to
find genuine solutions towards the re-establishment of
peace in southern Africa. the preparation of Operation
Argon was in progress, as it had been since January 1985.

it, as they desper-

ately and pathetically tried to whitewash their racist deeds
and misdeeds. The recent South African Government’s
murder of civilians in Gaborone is another example of
South Africa’s lies and machinations. We condemn that
massacre and ask the Council to do the same.

20. However, the resumption of destabilizing actions by
the Pretoria racist forces did not stop with that attempted
sabotage. In the months of March and April, South African Hercules C-130 military transport planes crossed our
country eight times, parachuting a total of 80 tons of military equipment destined to its surrogate army, the puppet
UNITA group, in Lunda and Malange provinces.

16. Furthermore, the South African lies are revealed to
be just that by the statements of the commando captured
alive, Captain Du Toit, who has revealed all the details of
the plan. In addition, the arms seized in the operation
explosives, incendiary bombs. land-mines, and so forthclearly show the inconsistency and the sheer absurdity of
South Africa’s claimed justitication for the attempted
sabotage.

21. The unloading of military equipment in the province
of Malange was aimed, on one hand, at frustrating the
economic development of the province, where the AngoIan Government is in the process of implementing a farming and cattle-raising pilot programme, and, on the other
hand, at alfecting the coffee production-the
third source
of foreign exchange for the People’s Repubhc of Angolain the coffee provinces of Rengo, Cttanza Norte and Uige.

17. How can anyone, even South Africa’s friends, accept
Pretoria’s word? The contradiction in the statements of the
racist South African leaders is clear evidence of the ignoble
lies with which the South African Government intends to
mislead world opinion. May we recall that when the AngoIan Government announced the neutmlization of the racist
commando squad in Cabinda, the South African Minister
for Foreign Affairs started out by denying the facts. A few
hours later, General Viljoen, head of the South African
General Staff, reportedly soon to retire to devote himself
to agriculture, after the aborted aggressive action, and in
flagrant contradiction to the declarations of his Minister
for Foreign Affairs, claimed that the South African armed
forces had a few surveillance groups in the areas north and
south of Luanda, with the alleged objective of detecting
SWAP0 and ANC bases there, and that one of those
groups had lost contact with the South African General
Staff. At that point, this became the version of the racist
Government, which nevertheless continued to acknowledge the presence of the neutmlixed commando unit in the
region of the Malongo oil installations in Cabinda. Tltrae
weeks later, on 10 June, in the face of the then admitted
presence and neutralization of the said commando unit in
Cabinda, the South African representative, to the stupefar+
tiondtheCouncil,OaveaMwwrsionofthef~~
ing to which a small South African army unit had recently
clashed with Angoian military elements. The unit was on a
surveillance mission to a supposed ANC training camp,
near the well-guarded Malongo oil installations, cloee to
the town of Cabinda.

22. Considering that the province of Lunda Norte is
essentially a diamond area, it is easily presumable that the
military qttipment
parachuted into that province was
designed to supply tha UNITA puppet groups with
enough matetial to carry out operations with the objective
of destroying the main diamond mines, thus interrupting
the prodttetion of this precious stone, which is the second
sottzc of fotzigtt exchange for our country.
23. If we add to this the attempted incursion in the
Midongo oil ama4il
being the first source of foreign
exchange for our country-we
can infer that all these acts
of aggmsion on the part of the Pretoria racist r&ime have
as their sofa objective the suffocation of the economic
develo)mtattt of our young Peopk’s Republic in o&r to
f&tar Pretoria% plan to cm&a so-called constellation of
southern African Statea in which the countries of the
region would be &pendant on the economic and military
powerofsouthAfrica.
24, lMorit$lr
~rf~~ae$k,

strategy to stffocate our economy having
the racist Government resumed the
m
it had used earlier against
Angola. Specifiily,
since the beginning of June there has
in South African air reconnaisbeenautddenincnere
sattee operations against the Angolan troops deployed in
the southem part of our country, deep inside the territory
of Angola, Jo0 kilometres away from our border with
Namibia, which Territory is ilkgally occupied by South
Africa as well.

18. As we can see, the racist South African Government
is little by little coming to terms with reality, However, due
to its megalomania and complex of racial superiority, the
abominable regime is unwilling to bow, even when confronted with the bare facts, which were freely presented by
one of its own army offkers, the captain taken p&oner by
A.._
r-as4 .“.-I*
I-L. rlu
*-^- A““. Y)II.cy
Y.
..a. -y.ccN r-L-,.&
.“,,Ib.b‘IH LA.4
I,..” -.a, ILuaINQ
for the international media and also attended by the diplomatic corps accredited to Angola.

25.

From 31 May to 10 June alone. 22 violations of our

pimpnccirpve lm

cccoT(i#i,iriWl&jg p i0tZl Of 2f ai:-

planes. ln addition to those violations. there has bee.1 an
unusual movement of South Attican forces, unseen since
the last big invasion of our country in December 1983.

19. Still worse, this new act of aggression shows the
extent of the racist South African Government’s bad faith
and hypocrisy: some weeks ago. at the very time that an
Angolan delegation and a South African dekgation were

26. The South African racist army at present has a contingent of troop deployed along our border. estimated at
4 motorized brig&s and I5 battalions, making a total of
3

20,ooO men, which, supported by the estimated 80 to 90
planes and helicopters of the South African Air Force
standing at the air bases of Ondangua, Oshakati and Ruacan& may at any moment launch a new invasion into the
People’s Republic of Angola,

32. Mr. KRISHNAN (India): For eight days and 12 successive meetings, the Council has been convened under the
presidency of your delegation, Sir, in the person of the
distinguished Minister for Foreign Alfairs of your country
and now yourself, to consider complaints against South
Africa.

27. The international community is also aware of the
deep embarrassment of South Africa’s friends and allies
over the attempted destruction of the Malongo oil installation. We can, at least, be thankful for all the voices that
have been raised against that aborted action.

33. Until last evening. the Council was seized of the question of Namibia. involving the unrelenting travail of the
people of Namibia struggling against the illrgal and oppressive racist regime of South Africa. Now, we turn our attention to the renewed aggression by the same regime against
the P~npte’s Republic of Angola. Tomorrow, we shall be
confronted with !he complaint that Botswana has brought
before the Council, Yet again against South Africa. It would
indeed be an interesting study to find out how much of the
Court-4’s time and energy have, since its inception, been
spent in dealing with iustances of South African aggression
and belligerence and its persistent defiance of the will of the
international community.

28.. On our part, despite the losses and destruction suffered by Angola over the past IO years, we rernain committed to the re-establishment of peace and coexistence in
southern Africa. Angola will not stop giving its support to
SWAP0 and the freedom fighters of the people of Namibia and South Africa. We consider ourselves in duty
bound to do so, since Angola is part of the United
Nations. The official Angolan position on all outstanding
issues is contained in the global platform presented to the
United Nations by the Head of State of my country, Comrade Jose Eduardo dos Santos. in November I984
[S/16838). The People’s Republic of Angola is prepared to
implement that part of the negotiated plan that concerns
us as soon as the four points referred to already here in the
Council are fulftlled.

34. We take comfort in the thought. Mr. President, that,
as we deal with these new, urgent and grave issues we will
continue to benetit from your own personal diplomatic
skills, impartiality and wisdom, as indeed we have benetited from the infmite patience, quiet dignity and great
wisdom your Foreign Minister has demonstrated over the
last long days in presiding over the Council as it struggled
with the question of Namibia,

29. Despite South Afrisa’s publicity campaign about its
troop withdrawal. its presence in Angola is still very much
alive, not only through its defence forces and surveillance
groups, as General Viljoen himself admitted, but also
through forces of its notorious Buffalo Battalion, operating in the province of Cunene in close connection with
UNITA’s puppet group in the southern part of Angola.

35. The Council was last seized of an Angolan complaint
against South Africa in January 1984, in the wake of
another massive South African invasion of its territory. It
will be recalled that the new escalation of South African
aggression against Angola in the dawn of that new year
came, in characteristic fashion, even before the ink was dry
on Security Council resolution 545 (1983) adopted only
days before, on 20 December. That resolution had strongly
condemned South Africa’s continued military occupation
of parts of southern Angola and demanded that South
Africa unconditionally withdraw forthwith all its oceupation forces from the territory of Angola and respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country. South
Mica, with its customary arrogance, responded with a
ful)-scak otTeMive.

30. This means that while South African troops have
attacked Angola repeatedly since August 1975. prior to the
proclamation of Angolan independence, they have been in
continuous occupation of parts of Angolan territory since
1981 for reasons that are backed not by facts but by
fition-a
f&on produced in the warped minds of the
men who rule South Africa as a slave State in which the
Z-million
majority inbabhants are disenfranchised and
have no protection from the violation of udr human.
civil, political and economic rights. In this connection, the
people of Angola would like to express their appreciation
to all those who have been engaged in the recent moves for
disinvestment in South Africa. However, we all hope that
what is legally taken away through one channel will not
then be replaced illegally through another.

36. On 6 January 1984, the Council adopted rpdolution
546 (1984). which ona again strongly condemned South
Africa for its renewed, intensified. premeditated and
unprovoked bombing, as well as for the continued occupation of parts of the territory of Angola, as a flagrant violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of that
country and a serious endangemtent of international peace
and security. The resolution again demanded that Pmoria
immediately cease all acts of aggression and unconditionally withdraw forthwith all its military forces occupying
Angolan territory. It reaflirmed Angola’s right. in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, in particular Article 51. to take all measures necessary to defend itself. and it renewed its request to
Member States to extend all necessary assistana to
Angola in order to enable it to defend itself against South
Africa’s escalating military attacks and its continuing OCEUpation of parts of Angola.

31. Finally, 1 would like to thank all those friends and
allies who have always supported Angola in its search for a
just peace in southern Africa. a peace which would allow
all to live in dignity and mutual respect, based on the
non-violability
of international
borders. on the nonviolability of the sovereignty of independent States and on
the non-violability of the inalienable rights of peoples,
based on all the rights, duties and principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations, to whose implementation we are all committed as Members of the Organization.
A lula

conlinua?

4

37. Subsequent events are well known, Over the last year
and a half, South Africa has been engaged in an elaborate
attempt to hoodwink the international community by professing to seek to live in peace with its neighbours while at
the same time losing no opportunity to threaten and intimidate them and to carry out further acts of aggression,
subversion and destabilisation against them. In spite of the
unrelenting pressure against the People’s Republic of
Angola-indeed,
the people of Angola have known no
peace since independence-the
Government of that country has demonstrated good will and political and diplomatic flexibility. Its spirit of statesmanship and accommodation, however, has been met with further deceit and
bad faith on the part of Pretoria.
38. Last week [2586rI1 atee&rgJ, when the Minister for
Foreign Affair of Angola addressed the Council, he gave
us full details of the continuing instances of infringement
upon Angolan territory and airspace, the latest of which is
the dastardly military attack against the Malongo oil complex in Cabinda Province. In his address to the Council
today. he further elaborated on those details and presented
us with all the facts telatrrg to the latest military action.
After South Africa’s claim to have withdrawn totally from
Angola, the discovery of a South African commando unit
engaged in a criminal act of sabotage in Cabinda, about
2,ooO kilometres deep inside Angolan territory, has only
provided further evidence of Retoria’s duplicity. These
acts of aggression, in clear violation of the Charter and the
resolutions of the Council, cannot but cause profound concern, and they call for the strongest possible condemnation
by the Council.
39. The Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at New
Delhi in March 1983. had
“strongly condemned the contintied military occupation of part of Angolan territory by the South African
racist troopa in violation of the national sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the People’s
RepubIii of Angola” [S/i5675 and Cm. I ad 2, amex,
WI. I, pma 62.1
andhad
“considered the occupation of Angolan territory as an
act of aggression against the Movement ofNon-Aligned
Countw
[Ibid].
We strongly condemn the continuing aggression against
Angola, the &test instance of which is the military attack
in Cabinda. We radfirm Angola’s right to take all necessary measures to protect and preberve its sovere@ty, indepe&nce
and territorial _ - integrity,
and we reiterate the
__
pled* of solidarity and tutl support of the Movement of
Non-Aligned
Countries towards that end. We firmly
endorse Angola’s right to adequate redress and compmsation for the enormous economicandothertiithas
rufff:red on account of South Africa’s aggression.
40, If so much of the Council’s time and etfort is taken
up in dealing with the recakitrant and arrogant regime in

Pretoria, the fault must lie pattly with the Council itself, *
and more so with those in the Council who seem to look
upon the apartheid regime with a benevolent eye and who
are willing to condone its conduct. South Africa’s policy of
uparrheid, its continued illegal occupation of Namibia, its
continuing acts of aggression against neighbouring States.
and all else that has brought infamy to the racist regime
will come back again and again to haunt the Council until
it is able to act with greater collective resolve.
41. We continue to hope-and
we have said this times
without number-that
the Council will act before it is too
late and take tirm measures against South Africa as provided for by the Charter.
42. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
43. Mr. FOUM (United Republic of Tanzania): Speaking before the Council last week [2383rd meerlng], Sir, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of my country stated how
happy our delegation was to see you presiding over the
Council at a time when it was considering issues of such
importance to our continent. Allow me to reiterate those
sentiments now and to express our highest appreciation for
the exemplary manner in which you handled the debate
which was recently concluded.
44. Once again the People’s Republic of Angola finds
itself compelled to bring to the attention of the Council the
question of the continuing aggression against it and the
occupation of parts of its territory by the murderous forces
of the racist Pretoria r&gime. Resolution 546 (1984). which
demanded that South Africa should cease immediately all
bombing and other acts of aggression and unconditionally
withdmw forthwith all its military forces occupying Angolan territory as well as undertake scn~pttlously to respect
the sovereignty, airspace, territorial integrity and independence of Angola, remains unimplemented.
Aggression
continues, and there are reports that the r&ime is massing
its troops along Angola’s southern botder in preparation
for a fourth fuilgcale invasion.
45. The Council, therefore, is called upon to consider
aggression4n
illegal act which contravenes international
law and violates the Charter of the United Nations. Atticle
2 paragraph 4. of the Charter requires all States to refrain
from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity and political i&pendence
of any State and from acting
in any mamter incomistent with the purpoees of the United
Nations. As a corollary to this, the Council is also called to
consider the implications for international peace and security of the mcist r&gime*s nompliince
with its
resolutions.
46. SouthAfricahasimposedawaronAngolaandother
neighbouring States. Generally in its aggressive schemes
the up7rtkid r6gime ttas sought to achieve its grand design
against its neighbours through a combination of political
manipulation and military force. It has embarked on acts
of destabilisation, sabotage and assassination, It has set up
dissident groups and trained, fManced and armed their

operations against the legitimate Governments of Angola,
Botswana, Lesotho, Mozambique, Seychelles and Zimbabwe. To complement those evil acts it has used direct military aggression against those countries. The invasion of
Angola of 1975. the infamous Cassinga massacre of 1978,
the June 1980 invasion code-named Operation Smokeshell, the equally infar..ous Operation Protea of August
1981, the invasion of December 1983 and countless bombing raids against various towns and cities in Angola and
other countries are all part of this strategy.

the inevitable conclusion that can be drawn from Pretoria’s ,Jolicy of incessant aggression against its neighbours is
that that regime has never been interested in creating the
conditions conducive to peace and stability in the regionfor that is the nature of upmheid,
51. The familiar ridiculous assettions of the aparrkid
regime that its occupation of pa* of Angolan territory is
for the protection of Namibian citizens from SWAP0 are
totally unacceptable and extremely offensive to Africa. The
Council must reject any attempt to justify those criminal
acts against Angola. They constitute a violation of the
Charter and of international law. Besides, Angola, which
shares no common border with South Africa, poses no
threat to that regime. Cabinda is 2.5% kilometres from the
South AfricanDJamibian borderand 1,3!JOkilometresfrom
the Cunene River. the AngolatVNamibian
border. How
can it be explained that oil installations that far removed
from upartheid South Africa pose a threat to its security?
Moreover, it is a fact that, while th,e racist forces have been
carrying out countless air and ground attacks against
Angola, maiming and killing innocent defenceless civilians
and committing acts of sabotage against vital economic
installations and infrastructure, Angolan soldiers have been
concerned only with the defence of their motherland. The
racist r&ime has sought to claim that its criminal attacks
against Angola wereundertaken in hot pursuit of SWAP0
freedom lighters operating from Angola’s southern border.
Unacceptable as that assertion tit was the military operation
in Cabinda also in hot pursuit of SWAP0 combatants?

47. The objectives that the regime intends to achieve
through this combination of tactics are clear. First, as a
primary objective, it s&ks to topple the legitimate Govemments of its neighbours and replace them with bantustans
in which the regime can establish political structures less
hostile to uportlreid, if not sympathetic to it. This the
regime has failed to achieve, and will fail to achieve. As a
second objective, in the event of failure to topple those
Governments-as
has been the case-the r&Lime intends
to intimidate, sabotage and destabilixe those countries into
silent compliance with or submission to unequal treaty or
political arrangements which only seek to minimize the
opposition to u~urrk~idand, in the worst circumstances, to
bolster it.
48. In the case of the aggressive designs against the People’s Republic of Angola, Namibia adds another dimension to the ambitions of the racist r&gime. Through the
unabating aggression against Angola, the upartkti r6gime
intends to prevent Namibia’s independence as long as possible. In sum, therefore, whether in Angola or any other
neighour of ~Ihetd
South Africa, the objective of the
Pretoria r&gime has been the same, namely, to neutralize
opposition to upmrhefd. It follows therefore, as has indeed
been adequately demonstrated, that any so-called overtures of peace by that r@ne are nothing more than
orchestrated campaigns calculated to hoodwink the world.

52. It is a matter of profound regret that Angola should be
asked to make concessions to an vr.
Even more
regrettable is that a responsible member of the Council
should be participating in squeezing concessions out of the
victim of aggression instead of upholding the principles of
the charter and opposing -ion.
This latest manifestation of duplicity and bad faith on the part of that r@jme has
served to illustrate its now quite familiar double-track strategy of falsely talking about peace and inftltratingarmy unite
and preparing inaeased -ion.

49. The announcement of a false witbdrawaf from
Angola only to result in other military incursions deep into
Angolan territory serves to illustrate the duplicity and bad
faith of the upmtMd r&time. Equally, the unprovoked
murderous attack against the Republic of Botswana on the
morning of I4 June, resulting in the death of 12 inncnzent
South African refugees and Botrwana citixcns, as well as
many hounded, further points to the fact that, irrespective
of that regime’s pronouncement,
its objectives remain
unchanged. It is equally clear that the Maseru raid and the
incessant acta of aggre&on against the People’s Republic
of Mozambique,
Zimbabwe
and Swaziland are all
intended to achieve the same objective.

53. llte qpmkidr&in+s

w

anno lmementofdiscn-

pgment of its murderous form should deceive no one.
Accordingly, we join the L%o~le’s Rep&Iii of Angola in
demandingthcCoundl’sotrongcondtmnationofchc~krifr&imeandtbatitrequinitunconditkmallytocease
hostile acts forthwith. Moreover, in view of the massive
losses of human lives and prm
caused by the incessant
acts of aggression. the Council must require the opmrheld
r&time to pay full txmpmation
to Angola.
54. But it is no coineidenee that the current spate of
rerud
hu
n9mlt*rU*A.-e..*. c. .. . ..-- a-t.
--- nf
-- POmuuiAn
----.Y..
-, rkr
..,- “y”‘.*wWV...” irII.
the wake of frantic efY&ts by tbe proponents of “constructive engagement” to pamper and masmge the ego of the
racist regime. For how can it be explained that, despite
being a party to the Lusaka understanding on the with
dnwal of the qpatrlrrldaccupation
fo ~nunderstanding which the regime has violated-those
proponents of
“constructive engagement” still find it appropriate to seek
repeal of the Clark amendment?

50. That the qt#tkbf

r@hne has attacked and will conrinw to attack and generally seek to destabilize and
aggress neighbouring i-t
States because of their
opposition to uprrk&i is not unexpected. But it is unexpected that, in its campaign to commit those senseless and
dastardly acts, the regime shoukl find solace and support
from some States Members of the Organisation. Angola
has been aggres@ but in its desire to seek peace it has
been prepared to concede to unwarranted demands. Thus
6

60. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the reprcsentative of Liberia, who wishes to make a statement in his
capacity as Chairman of the Group of African States for
the month of June, I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

55. The Symm amendment is not only a direct attempt to
complement the sustenance of aggression but also a clear
signal that there exists, in a way, a mutuality of interest
with South Africa as far as the destabilisation of and
aggression against Angola’s sovereignty is concerned.
Indeed, any action that does not directly censure the
aggressive apartheid regime and conform to action against
it is directly against upholding Angola’s sovereign rights.
Africa rejects and condemns the renewed attempts to topple the legitimate Government of the People’s Republic of
Angola.

61. Mr. KOFA (Liberia): I have already had the opportunity during this month, Sir. to express my delegation’s
congratulations concerning your assumption of the presidency of the Council and our confidence in your ability to
conduct the affairs of the Council. I simply cannot fail at
this time to register my appreciation to you and to the
other members of the Council for allowing me to make a
statement in my capacity as Chairman of the Group of
African States on the matter now before this body.

56. In a letter addressed to the Secretary-General on 17
November 1984 [S/l~sJsl, the President of the People’s
Republic of Angola outlined the elements of a political
platform presented by his Government. The platform
embodies a political commitment by Angola to!heelaboration of a comprehensive political framework which would
bring about the requisite conditions for assurances. As
pointed out in that letter, the proposal is proof of Angola’s willingness to seek peace. The Organisation of African
Unity (OAU) h.as firmly supported Angola’s position not
to accept an arrangement which is inconsistent with elements of that political platform or which does not respond
to all the issues related to the apeedy implementation of
resolution 435 (1978). to the cessation of aggression by the
apurrheld r@ime and to the cessation of support by the
Qpurfheid regime of th? UNITA puppets. Consistent with
that position, the OAU has repeatedly reaffirmed its full
support for the measures taken by the Angolan Govemment in accordance with Article 51 of the charter to gnarantee and safeguard its territorial integrity and national
sovereignty.

62. The Council is obliged to meet again to consider the
latest military operation by the racist South African
regime, which occurred last month when notorious individuals, who were members of South African commando
units, were discovered by the Angolan People’s Army in
the province of Cabin& as they were preparing to destroy
an oil complex in that province. Along with that abortive
raid, we have witnessed in recent months an escalation of
South Africa’s aggression against the People’s Republic of
Angola. A South African cargo aircraft penetrated into
Angolan territory, in violation of its airspace, and
unloaded 80 tons of military mur&ie/ intended for use by
its puppet group, UNITA, to which tlte operation would
have been attributed had it had been successful. Since
then, there has been an increase in reconnaissance flights
by the South African Air Force inside Angolan territory.
63. The commando units failed to accomplish their
vicious and criminal plan, which would have not only
caused heavy material damage but also resulted in the loss
of human lives. The ptnpose of that clandestine operation
~8s to discredit the legitimate Government of the People’s
Republic of Angola and to have the international community perceive UNIT.$ as a viable party in the search for
peace in southern Africa.

57. It is a sad commentary on history that this year,
when most of the world is commemorating the defeat of
fascism in Europe, racist supremacy of the utmost Fascist
kind is running roughshod over southern Africa and the
African is asked to be patient, to be tolerant and to wait
while most of tlte very Powers that bravely fought fascism
inEuropearefee&ngandstm@eningtbeeconomicand
political machinery of -heid
South Africa. Hundreds
of tbousa~
of Africans and other third-world peoples
paid heavily for the defeat of fascism in Europe and other
areas. The price paid notwitbsmndin~
the African
demands that nascent fascism and crponlrrld be dealt with
directly, forcefully and universally, as was done in Europe.
Munich must not be repeated. Appea~men t can only light
the Ilames of a holocaust.

64. Angola discovered that the purported withdrawal of
South African troops from southern Angola was a cynical
diversionary tactic designed to dupe Angola into believing
that there were no longer South African troops in its territory. But, to no one’s surprise, South African commando
units were, in fact, still in Angola with the intention of
d&roying
that country’s economic inft?S?JNCtUrc.

58. Angola has come before the Council to seek jnstice.
We ask the Councrl to act lirmly to put an end to South
African aggression against its neigbboun. Procrastination
or vacillation by the Council in acting in the interest of
peace and security would be a tragic abdication of its
responsibility.

65. The lack of sincerity on tbe part of the racist regime
of Pretoria regarding the search for a genuine peace in the
region is increasingly manifest. South Africa continues to
use the Territory of Namibia as a military base from which
to launch armed aggression against neighbouring States in
order to force them to desist from supporting the campaign against qwrrheid and the legitimate struggle of the
Namibian pcoplc for freedom and independence.

59. Finally, I take this opportunity to express our appreciation to all those States wttich have taken step to expre%s
indignation and to deplore the acts of aggression committed by the o~f~tiregime.
We hope, as I have stated, that
more molutc and decisive measurea will be adopted.

66. The member States of the African Group view the
present deteriorating situation in southern Africa as a
gross violation of the territorial integrity of Angola and
7

deplore South Africa’s intensification and constant escalation of tension and military intimidation in the region and,
in particular, its arrogating to itself the right to transgress
the borders of the front-line States to commit acts of destabilization with impunity. We reject and condemn the
unprovoked manoeuvres not only as a violat;on of the
principles of international law regarding respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States but also as
an affront to the spirit and letter of the Lusaka accord of
16 February 1984, under which Pretoria was supposed to
have withdrawn its troops from Angola by March of that
year.

72. In fact, since Angola’s independence the South African authorities have never ceased their acts of aggression
and sabotage against Angola. In August 1981. South African troops flagrantly launched a massive invasion of
Angola and occupied by force a large area of territory in
the southern part of that country, causing enormous loss
of life and property and grossly violating Angola’s
national sovereignty and territorial integrity.
73. In February last year, faced with resolute opposition
by the Angolan Government, and under strong pressure
from the world community, the South African authorities
were forced to sign the Lusaka understanding
with
Angola, promising a total troop withdrawal from Angola
within months. However, it was not until April this year
that they formally announced the troop withdrawal, and in
fact they have not completely pulled their troops out of
Angola.

67. In this respect, we request the Council to take strong
action in response to South Africa’s act of aggression,
which exposes Pretoria’s duplicity and bad faith. The
Council should also cdl1 upon the international community to give, as a matter of urgency, maximum political and
moral support.
including economic and military assistance. to the front-line States to enable them to exercise
their tight to self-defence against South Africa and to sup
pan the Southern African Development Co-ordination
Conference with a view to reducing the economic dependence of those countries on the racist r@me.

74. Furthermore, less than a month after that announcement the South African authorities again dispatched commandos, who penetrated into Cabinda, northern Angola,
to carry out harassment and sabotage. South Africa has
recently been massing troops on the Namibian border in
preparation for a new invasion of Angola.

68. The time has come for the Council to take decisions
that will reflect, through the application of Chapter VII of
the Charrer, its resolve to exert maximum pressure on the
South African regime and to compel it to comply with the
principles of international law. The Council has a duty to
contribute to a peaceful resolution of the worsening situation in southern Africa so that the peoples of Angola,
Namibia and the front-line States can live in peace and
build their future on the basis of their own options.

75. All the above facts make it clear that not only have
the South African authorities gone back on their commitment but they have accelerated their intensitied acts of
aggression, displaying no good will at all in favour of a
negotiated solution to the issue of southern Africa.
76. The international community has repeatedly condemned South Africa’s flagrant criminal acts of aggression
against Angola, which constitute a gross violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and of international law.
The Council has adopted a number of resolutions to that
e&et, calling on South Africa immediately to put an end
to its acts of aggression. However, the South African
authorities have turned a deaf ear to the just voice of the
worki community and have totally ignored Council resolutions. On the contrary, they have intensified their acts of
aggression against Angola-something
about which the
Council cannot fail to express its grave concern.

69. Mr. HUANG Jiitta
(China; (Inrerprefur~
porn
Chinese): Having just finished iv consideration of thequestion of Namibia, the Cotuteil is now beginning its consideration of the situation in Angola and Botswana, which once
again proves that the South African r&time remains the
mot of the trouble in southem Africa.

70. While cartying out a battxarous policy ofumhetdat
home, the South African authorities continue their illegal
oecupatia of Namibia and rrpcatedly perpetntte frenzied
armed provazatiorts and invasions against Angola, Botswana and Mozambique, upeetting the tranquillity of the
whole of southern Africa and seriously threatening international peace and security. The atrocities of the South
African authorities cannot fail to arouse the strong indignation and unanimous condemnation
of world public
opinion.

77. The Chinese delegation considers that the Council is
duty-bound once again sternly to condemn the repeated
acts of aggression. subversion and sabotage carried out by
the South African authorities against Angola; solemnly to
warn South Africa that it should immediately and unconditionally withdraw all its troops from Angolan territory
and immediately cease all its acts of aggression and sabotage against An&a; and to appeal to the world community to give the Angolan Government and pcode
moral and material support.

71. A short time ago we heard the statement of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Angola, in which he exposed
with irrefutable facts the acts of aggression committed by
the South African authorities. He repudiated the lies concocted by South Africa and pointed out the danger to
peace and security in southern Africa and the world as a
whole posed by the actions of the South African
authorities.

78. If the South African authorities continue to refuse to
implement the Security Council’s resolutions, the Council
should, in keeping with the relevant provisions of the
Charter, adopt effective measures to force the South African authorities to change their intransigent attitude and
stop their acts of aggression.
8

79. The Chinese Government and people express their
strong indignation over, and stern condemnation of, the
South African authorities* acts of aggression and sabotage
against Angola, and will continue, as always, resolutely to
support the Angolan Government and people in their just
struggle to defend their national sovereignty and territorial
integrity.

subject thorny issuej to constructive and fruitful debate,
Speaking on behalf of my own Government, as well as in
my capacity as Chairman of the Group of Asian States for
the month of June, I express our full trust and confidence
in your ability, Mr. President, to guide the Council
towards taking appropriate action against South Africa
for its series of recent aggressive actions against neighbcuring States.

80. Mr. GRUNNET
(Denmark): Since Dealmark has
already commented on the events in Cabinda during the
Council’s debate on the situation in Namibia, I shall be
very brief. However, I should like to take this opportunity
to reiterate the Danish position and to make it quite clear
to South Africa.

88. According to direct evidence offered by a captured
South African commando leader, the South African Special Forces began planning the raid in the northern province of Cabinda in January of this year in order to cause
what he called a considerable economic setback to the
Angolan Government. His men, he said, had been sent to
plao= mines at the American Gulf Oil depot, with the aim
of destroying the storage tank. His statement belies the
offtcial South African claim that its soldiers were looking
for members of SWAP0 and the ANC-as if that version,
if true, could lend legality to its illegal aggressive action.

81. There is no excuse for South Africa’s action in
Cabinda, and the South African explanation totally lacks
credibility. Even the captured South African captain from
the Special Forces openly admitted that his mission in
Cabinda was one of sabotage and of continued destabilization of Angola. Thus the international community has witnessed yet another blatant and arrogant violation of
Angola’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.

89. These developments, which are closely linked with
South Africa’s aggressive actions in Botswana and its political games in Namibia, fully justify the present complaint
by the Government of Angola, which has a clear percep
tion of the thmat to regional and international peace and
security from the continuous acts of aggression and violence by the !3outJt African armed forces and the resulting
violation of the territorial integrity and national sovereignty of the PeopIe’s Republic of Angola. fndeed, the
reptesetttative of Botswana has already sought an urgent
meeting of the Council to consider the serious situation
resulting from South Africa’s military attacks of I4 June
on the capital of his country (s/17279)

82. Not least in this perspective, the reports about a
renewed concentration of a considerable number of South
African troops in northern Namibia along Angola’s southem border must give rise to the most serious concern. All
of us remember all too vividly South Africa’s earlier
attacks on Angola and the delayed withdrawal of South
African troops in spite of a firm commitment to th3t end.
83. ‘Hte Council must in no uncertain terms condemn
South Africa’s continued aggression against Angoh and
do its utmost to diiurage
any future violation by South
Africa of Angola’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence.

90. It is a matter of profound concern to the Security
Council and the international community at large that
South Africa can continue to indulge with impunity in
illegal acts inside South Africa and wanton aggression
against its sovereign neighbours, thmatetting both regional
and in-1
peace and security.

84. Even South Africa must by now find it increasingly
diflicult to dispute titat its conduct not rutty threatens stability in the region but has wider implications for interttatiomtl peace and rccurity.

91. Only a week ago [2Jg&h ate&tgJ, the Minister for
Foreign Main
of AttgoR apprised the Council of the
escalation of aggressive acts against his country by the
South African r@htte. In a detailed exposition of South
Africa% acts of aggmsion against Angola, he described
how, since January 1985, the South African military
machine had been planning Operation Argon, aimed at
destroying the Malongo oil complex in Cabin&t Province.
‘Ilw CIutncil heard, in th’ connection, the horrifying
details of the use by South Africa of its Speciil Forces to
carry out a deliberate act of sabotage deep inside Angolan
territory. The Minister also cited incidents of violation of
Angolan airspace by South Afrkzan aircraft, stating that
after the Cabinda sabotage attempt, the South African
dgime had increased its reconnaissance flights over Ango).an territory, penetrating more than 200 kilometres inside
that country.

85. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker .ne repr=ntatk of Pakistan, who wishes to make a sta: men1 in his
capacity~111innandthcOloupofAsien~ta,for~
month of June. I invite him to take a place at the Count4
table and to make his statement.
86. Mr. SHAH NAWAZ (Pakistan): Mr. President, I
have had the privilege of addressing the Council on an
eariier occasion under the presidency of your distinguished
Minister for Foreign Affairs. I wish to thank you and the
other memhen of the Councii ior this opportunity to
address the Council once again.
87. May I expras deep appreciation of the manner in
which the Minister for For&n Affairs of Trinidad and
Tobago has guided the work of the Council this month,
making available to it his dynamic leadership and rich
experience as a diplomat and statesman and enabling it to

92. In a statement befon the Council today, the Minister
for Foreign Atfain of Angola drew the attention of the
9

Council once again to South Africa’s aggressive activities
and violations of Angola’s national sovereignty and territorial integrity. His statement has made the Council aware
of the magnitude of the political and economic damage to
Angola and the crippling consequences of South African
incursions in Cabmda Province that would have occurred
if the South African commando forces had been able to
carry out a successful operation.

the region neighbouring on South Africa may live in peace
and be able to devote their energies to building their economies and promoting the well-being of their peoples, rather
than spending their meagre resources in bolstering their
defences against the ever-present threat of South African
aggression.
99. Mr. WOOLCO3T
(Australia): It is a damning indictment of the Government of South Africa that the Council
has been called into session to deal consecutivelv with
South Africa’s unacceptable policies and actions in Namibia, Angola and Botswana.

93. Two days before the Minister for Foreign Atlairs ot
Angola made his first statement, the Council heard a statement made by the representative of the South African
rkgime casting aspersions on the legitimacy of the Angolan
Government and calling for exercise of the right of selfdetermination by the Angolan people. The South African
representative then proceeded to justify the abonive
Cabinda raid as being necessitated by the need ‘*to gather
intelligence on the activities of the ANC and SWAP0 terrorists in Angola and to consider appropriate counteractions” [258Jfd meeling, pore. 2J0l.

100. We have jr;st had an exhaustive debate on the situation in Namibia, arising out of South Africa’s tifusal to
implement the United Nations plan for Namibia’s independence and its determination to proceed with the installation of a socalled interim government. During that
debate, many delegations, including my own, condemned
South Africa’s policies of regional destabilization,
its
actions in southern Angola, its linkage of Namibian independence to the withdrawal of Cuban tro.)ps from Angola
and its most recent raid into Cabinda.

94. The South African r&me stands condemned before
the Council by its own revealing statements, which flout
the important and invio!
principle of international law
and conduct embodied in Article 2 of Chapter I of the
Charter of the United Nations. Article 2, paragraph4,
states that:

101. We heard also in the statement of the South African
representative on 10 June an apologia for South Africa’s
policies. This amounted to an arrogation by South Africa
of the right to intervene at will, through the exercise of
military superiority. in the affairs of neighbouting States,
presumably in an attempt to force them to pursue policies
acceptable to South Africa.

“All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integfity or political independence of any state, or in
any other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the
United Nations.”

102. Such policies are indefensible in international law.
They are also futile, because they are likely to be unproductive in the long term. ‘IlIe disregard shown by South
Africa for the independence of its neighbours is, sadly, all
too consistent with the attitude its has displayed since 1978
tow&s the United Nations plan for the independence of
Namibia,

95. The Council has been s&cl of the question of South
Africa’s aggression against the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Angola since the very independence of that country in 1975. l?te Council has adopted
several resolutions that have condemned South Africa for
its premeditated, persistent and sustained acts of aggression against Angola. It has repeatedly called upon South
Africa immediately to cease these hortile activities against
its neighbour. The only responoc from South Afrka has
beenoneoftotaldeBranccatKlnjoctionofthedeciaiorJsd
the C4Xmcil.

103. Many of the iseues which are relevant to our prclrent
debate have been extensively discussed over the last IO
dayp, and I shall not dwell on them at length. But brevity
should not k interpreted as a lack of concern for the
gravity of South Africa’s actions. We listened with close
attention and sympathy to the statement by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Angola this morning. We share his
concerns. We consider South Africa’s actions pose grave
and unacceptable risks to peace in the region. Let there be
no doubt about Australia’s attitude to these actions. We
condemn them unreservedly.

96. The South African r&e
must not k allowed to
destroy the credibility of the Council by its dcfiint actions
and lawless behaviour inside and outside its territory.
South Africa must be made to refrain from pursuing policies and objectives that strike at the very root ofthe principles and objectives enshrined in the Charter.
97. The overwhelming majority of Ihe deprived citiz.eRs
of South Africa itself, as well as the people of the neighbounng States which arc victims of South African aggression, are entitled to conditions of peace and stability in the
region and the opportunity to achieve peaceful progress,
which immunity from -South African interference and freedom from fear of South African aggression can provide.

104. My delegation welcomed the negotiations involving
Angola, South Africa and the United States aimed at seeuring the withdrawal of South African troops from southern Angola. We believed that this co&l contribute to the
improvement of regional relations. restore stability to the
hard-pressed civilian Population of southern Angola and
contribute 10 a climate of confidence in which the negotiations for the implementation of the United Nations plan
for the independence of Namibia could proceed.

98. It is the Council’s responsibility to adopt the necessary measures to ensure conditions in which the States of
10

105. We accepted at face value South Africa’s assurances
on 17 April that it had withdrawn its troops from Angola.
We were in fact deceived. One month later, we and the rest
of the international community were presented with irrefutable evidence of South Africa’s continued military actions
in Angola after the interception by Angolan troops of a
South African force in Cabinda. The explosive devices
found with the South African troops suggest that their
incursion was for much more sinister purposes than intelligen&e gathering-as
South Africa claims-and
is consistent with an intention of sabotaging oil installations.

sive nature of racist South Africa. As we can see, racism
and aggression go hand in hand.
I I I. This armed aggression by Pretoria against Angola,
Botswana and other African States is a serious and a growing threat to the peoples of southern Africa, and also to the
peace and security of States not only in that region but
beyond it.
112. The provocative conduct of the South African
regime, which took the form of attacks against neighbouring countries at a time when the question of Namibia was
being taken up in thr- Security Council, and the challenging
statements made by the South African representative at
Council meetings are the result of the support and patronage given the South African racists by individual Western
countries, particularly the United States and the United
Kingdom. They are the result of the alliance between the
South African racists and the authors of the policy of
soallIed constructive engagement. Statements by those
Western Powers of purp0rted regret at South Africa’s
aggressive actions do not mislead anyone, because them is
absolutely no proof, no proof whatsoever, of the willingness of those Western Powers to take effective action to
curb the aggressor or to halt it1 &&it-like
raids into
neighbouring independent countries.

106. We have never accepted that South African forces
had a right to te in southern Angola, and we welcomed
their reported withdrawal. We certainly do not accept that
South Afrir;l has a right to dispatch or station forces anywhere e!se on Angolan territory without the consent of the
Angoran Gowmment.
107. In addressing this matter before the Council today
there is, it seems to us, only one correct and just conclusion: South Africa’s actions in Cabinda were illegal, in
violation of the Charter and in violation of international
law. They deserve the condemnation of the international
community.
108. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (Inrerprerarion/rom RIB&~): The Council once
again-and
indeed for the umpteenth time-is considering
the question of aggressive actions by the racist regime of
South Africa against a sovereign independent State, the
People’s Republic of Angola. Now the Council is discussing another act of aggression by the Pretoria regime
against Angola, namely, the sending in May of this year of
a commando group from the South African Army into the
Angolan province of Cabinda to destroy the oil installations there. ‘This bold-faced act of sabotage is far from
being a chance occurrence or an isolated act by the regime
in Pret0ria. On the contrary, it is part of the policy 0f
aggression that racist *me has constantly been pursuing
against the People% Republic of Ang0la. beginning from
the time when that country won its independrnce in 1975.

113. Members of the Council saw this in action just two
days ago when the non-aligned countries members of the
Council submitted proposals calling for the application of
sanctions against South Africa under Chapter VII 0f the
Charter. Not only did the Western Powers not support
those prop0sals, they even threatened to vet0 them and
were thus able to make the provisions for sanctions in the
Rsolution as weak as possible. In 80 doing, they were
coming out in defence of the racist aggrass0r. fhat is the
true policy of the Western Powers with mpeet to the Pmtoria regime. on the one hand, and to the other African
States, on the other,
114. On many 0ecaaions in the past few years-indeed,
on no leas than five uzasi0ns-tbe
Cmutcil has cztndemned South Africa fos its 0eeupation of Angerlan territory and for its premed&cd
and repeated acts 0f
aggresskm against the people’s Republii of Ang0la. The
Council has described thoee actions by Pretoria as a
serious thnat t0 internatkmal peace and security. It has
ealled upon South Africa to respect the rover&my and
territorial integrity of Ang0la and has warned South
Africa that in the event of further attacks on Angola the
Council would once again prepare to e0mider the question
of taking more effective measures, including those provided under Chapter VII OF the Charter.

109. Ten years of independence for Angola have meant
IO years 0f repelling S0uth African aggmssi0rt. These
aggressive acts by the Pretoria regime have taken various
forms, but they have not halted for a single minute. There
was the invasion and the occupation of the territory, the
bambing of towns, the dropping of military commando
parachutist units, the use of the terrorist bands of
UNITA-the
henchmen af the racist r&gime of Pretoriaand. finally, the sending out of the military commando
grow.

hB rm.4
::5. lx11&c0,..,A,
-cu,*I* :,u ..w,
.rvn CL.+&4
.-I-Y ..*.*
“.,a. lY..
.YW.nf“I Pn.-dw.
. . ..“I.._.
violation by South Africa of the sovtrcigrtty and territorial
integrity of Angola, another act of aggression by South
Aftica against that country,

110. If anybody in the West recently tried to create the
impmsion that the racist regime of South ARti had
stopped being an aggressor because it supposedly had
withdrawn its troops from Angola and started negotiations, then these recent actions by Pretoria-the
continuing occupation of Angolan territory and the invasion of
northern Angola and Botswana-have
completely unmasked this falsehood and once again exposed the aggres-

116. !n uur view, the Covncil should, in extihncly strong
terms, condemn South Africa and, at last, adopt measures
that would force the racist &time to halt its outrages
II

against neighbouring African States. In this connection,
we support the draft resolution submitted by the nonaIf@ countries members of the Council on the question
we are now considering [s/172&J We support it because
it strongly condemns South Africa for its recent act of
aggression against the territory of Angola in the Province
of Crrbinda, as well 89 for its renewed premeditated acts of
aggression, which constitute a flagrant violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola and seriously
endanger international peace and security. We support the
demands in the draft resolution that South Africa should
unconditionally withdraw forthwith all its occupation forces from the territory of Angola, cease all acts of aggression against that State and scrupulously respect the

sovereignty and territorial
lic of Angola.

integrity of the People’s Repub-

117. The Peonle’s Renublic of Annola. whiih is in the
vanguard of the s&t&e against col&iahsm, imperialism
and
-_~~racism.
~.-.~. is entitled. like other indewndent African
countries, to be able to rely on the Security Council to
discharge the duties incumbent upon it under the Charter
and come out in defence of its sovereignty and territorial
integrity. thereby contributing to the maintenance of international peace and security in southern Africa.
llte

12

meeting

rose at 1.03 p.m.

--
