United Nations

A/RES/64/188

General Assembly

Distr.: General
9 February 2010

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 51 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 21 December 2009
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/64/418/Add.1)]

64/188. International trade and development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 56/178 of 21 December 2001, 57/235 of 20 December
2002, 58/197 of 23 December 2003, 59/221 of 22 December 2004, 60/184 of
22 December 2005, 61/186 of 20 December 2006, 62/184 of 19 December 2007 and
63/203 of 19 December 2008 on international trade and development,
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 1 as well as the
outcomes of the International Conference on Financing for Development, 2 the World
Summit on Sustainable Development, 3 the 2005 World Summit Outcome 4 and the
Doha Declaration on Financing for Development, 5
0F

1F

2F

3F

4F

Recalling further the Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and
Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development, 6
5F

Reaffirming the value of multilateralism to the global trading system and the
commitment to achieving a universal, rule-based, open, non-discriminatory and
equitable multilateral trading system that contributes to growth, sustainable
development and employment generation in all sectors, and emphasizing that
bilateral and regional trading arrangements should contribute to the goals of the
multilateral trading system,
Stressing the importance of open, transparent, inclusive, democratic and more
orderly processes and procedures for the effective functioning of the multilateral
trading system, including in the decision-making process, so as to enable developing

_______________
1

See resolution 55/2.
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
3
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex,
and resolution 2, annex.
4
See resolution 60/1.
5
Resolution 63/239, annex.
6
Resolution 63/303, annex.
2

09-47311

*0947311*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/188

countries to have their vital interests duly reflected in the outcome of trade
negotiations,
Reiterating that development concerns form an integral part of the Doha
Development Agenda, which places the needs and interests of developing and least
developed countries at the heart of the Doha Work Programme, 7
6F

Noting that agriculture lags behind the manufacturing sector in the process of
the establishment of multilateral disciplines and in the reduction of tariff and nontariff barriers and that, since most of the world’s poor make their living from
agriculture, the livelihood and standards of living of many of them are seriously
jeopardized by the serious distortions in production and trade in agricultural
products caused by the high levels of export subsidies, trade-distorting domestic
support and protectionism by many developed countries,
Takes note of the report of the Trade and Development Board 8 and the
1.
report of the Secretary-General; 9
7F

8F

2.
Reaffirms that international trade can be an engine for development and
sustained economic growth, underlines the need to fully harness its potential in that
regard, and stresses the importance of upholding a universal, rule-based, open,
non-discriminatory and equitable multilateral trading system that contributes to
growth, sustainable development and employment, particularly in developing
countries;
Notes with deep concern that the world financial and economic crisis has
3.
severely impacted international trade, particularly affecting developing countries,
including through the fall in exports and loss of export revenues, restricted access to
trade finance and reduced export-oriented investment, which have resulted, in many
cases, in lower fiscal revenues and balance-of-payment problems;
Notes that the shortage and the high cost of trade finance for developing
4.
countries contributed significantly to the reduction in trade flows during the crisis,
also notes the efforts of the international community, including through the World
Bank Global Trade Liquidity Programme, to ensure additional resources at
affordable rates, and calls upon bilateral and multilateral donors to redouble their
efforts to increase the availability and affordability of trade finance for developing
countries;
Underlines in this regard the need for greater coherence in the trade,
5.
financial and monetary systems, with a view to promoting growth, sustainable
development and employment;
Stresses the need to resist all protectionist measures and tendencies,
6.
especially those affecting developing countries, particularly tariff, non-tariff and
para-tariff barriers to trade, and to rectify any such measures already taken,
recognizes the right of countries to fully utilize their policy space, consistent with
World Trade Organization commitments, and calls upon the World Trade
Organization and other relevant bodies, including the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, to continue monitoring protectionist measures and assess
their impact on developing countries;
_______________
7

See A/C.2/56/7, annex.
A/64/15 (Parts I-IV). For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 15.
9
A/64/177.
8

2

A/RES/64/188

7.
Encourages Member States to refrain from adopting any measures or
restrictions related to trade and transit that affect the access by developing countries
to medicines, especially generic medicines, and medical equipment;
Expresses serious concern at the lack of progress in the negotiations of
8.
the World Trade Organization Doha Development Round, reiterates the call on
developed countries to demonstrate the flexibility and political will necessary to
make meaningful progress in the negotiations, with a view to concluding the Round
by 2010, and calls upon all members of the World Trade Organization to adhere to
the development mandate of the Doha Ministerial Declaration,7 the decision of
1 August 2004 of the General Council of the World Trade Organization 10 and the
Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration, 11 which places development at the heart of the
multilateral trading system;
0H

9F

10F

9.
Takes note of the New Delhi informal ministerial meeting on
re-energizing Doha, held on 3 and 4 September 2009, which led to the resumption of
the negotiations of the Doha Round with the objective of concluding the Round by
2010;
10. Stresses the importance of accelerating the negotiations, with a strong
reaffirmation that development remains at the heart of the Doha Round, building
upon the progress already made, particularly with regard to modalities, and based on
the World Trade Organization agreed workplan on agriculture, non-agricultural
market access, services, rules, trade facilitation and other remaining issues, with a
view to concluding the Round by 2010;
11. Also stresses that, in order for the Doha Round to be concluded
satisfactorily, the negotiations should strengthen the rules and disciplines in the area
of agriculture, eliminate agricultural export subsidies, substantially reduce the
domestic measures of support by developed countries and promote enhanced market
access to developed country markets, in a balanced and development-oriented
outcome, while adhering to the development mandate of the Doha Ministerial
Declaration, the decision of 1 August 2004 of the General Council of the World
Trade Organization and the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration;
12. Further stresses the need for negotiations of the World Trade
Organization in non-agricultural market access to fulfil the development mandate of
the Doha Ministerial Declaration, the decision of 1 August 2004 of the General
Council of the World Trade Organization and the Hong Kong Ministerial
Declaration;
13. Stresses the need for negotiations of the World Trade Organization to
make substantial progress in all areas under the single undertaking, such as services,
rules and trade facilitation, so as to ensure that the development concerns of
developing countries are fully reflected in any outcome, consistent with the
development mandate of the Doha Ministerial Declaration, the decision of 1 August
2004 of the General Council of the World Trade Organization and the Hong Kong
Ministerial Declaration;
14. Reiterates its call for accelerating work on the trade-related aspects of
the World Intellectual Property Organization development agenda, as well as the
development-related mandate concerning the Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of
_______________
10
11

World Trade Organization, document WT/L/579. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.
World Trade Organization, document WT/MIN(05)/DEC. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.

3

A/RES/64/188

Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement) 12 in the Doha Ministerial
Declaration, especially the examination of the relationship between the TRIPS
Agreement and the Convention on Biological Diversity, 13 the protection of
traditional knowledge and folklore and the issues related to the full implementation
of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, 14 affecting
developing countries, including the least developed countries, especially those
issues arising from HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and other diseases;
1F

12F

13F

15. Reaffirms the commitments made at the Fourth Ministerial Conference of
the World Trade Organization7 and at the Third United Nations Conference on the
Least Developed Countries, 15 in this regard calls upon developed countries that have
not already done so to provide immediate predictable, duty-free and quota-free
market access on a lasting basis to all products originating from all least developed
countries, calls upon developing countries that are in a position to do so to extend
duty-free and quota-free market access to exports of these countries, in this context
reaffirms also the need to consider additional measures for progressive improvement
in market access for least developed countries, and reaffirms further the need for
members of the World Trade Organization to take additional measures to provide
effective market access, both at the border and otherwise, including simplified and
transparent rules of origin so as to facilitate exports from least developed countries;
14F

16. Also reaffirms the commitment to actively pursue the work programme of
the World Trade Organization with respect to addressing the trade-related issues and
concerns affecting the fuller integration of small, vulnerable economies into the
multilateral trading system in a manner commensurate with their special
circumstances and in support of their efforts towards sustainable development, in
accordance with paragraph 35 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration and paragraph 41
of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration;
17. Expresses its deep concern at the imposition of laws and other forms of
coercive economic measures, including unilateral sanctions, against developing
countries, which undermine international law and the rules of the World Trade
Organization and also severely threaten freedom of trade and investment;
18. Recognizes the special problems and needs of the landlocked developing
countries within a new global framework for transit transport cooperation for
landlocked and transit developing countries, calls, in this regard, for the full and
effective implementation of the Almaty Programme of Action, 16 and stresses the
need for the implementation of the São Paulo Consensus 17 and of the Accra
Accord 18 by the relevant international organizations and donors in a
multi-stakeholder approach;
15F

16F

17F

19. Reaffirms that developing countries should play an increasing role in the
formulation of, inter alia, safety, environmental and health standards, calls for the
_______________
12

See Legal Instruments Embodying the Results of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations,
done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994 (GATT secretariat publication, Sales No. GATT/1994-7).
13
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.
14
World Trade Organization, document WT/MIN(01)/DEC/2. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.
15
See A/CONF.191/13.
16
Report of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and
Donor Countries and International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport
Cooperation, Almaty, Kazakhstan, 28 and 29 August 2003 (A/CONF.202/3), annex I.
17
TD/412, chap. II.
18
TD/442 and Corr.1, chap. II.

4

A/RES/64/188

full and fair representation of developing countries in the relevant international
standard-setting organizations, and in this regard also calls for additional financial
resources and technical capacity-building to ensure the adequate participation of
developing countries;
20. Recognizes that South-South trade should be strengthened, notes that
enhanced market access between developing countries can play a positive role in
stimulating South-South trade, and calls for acceleration of the work of the ongoing
third round of negotiations (the São Paulo Round) on the Global System of Trade
Preferences among Developing Countries;
21. Calls for facilitating the accession of all developing countries that apply
for membership in the World Trade Organization, in particular the least developed
countries, including countries emerging from conflict that are least developed
countries, bearing in mind paragraph 21 of resolution 55/182 of 20 December 2000
and subsequent developments, and also calls for the effective and faithful
application of the World Trade Organization guidelines on accession by the least
developed countries;
22. Emphasizes the need for further work to foster greater coherence between
the multilateral trading system and the international financial system, and invites the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in fulfilment of its mandate,
to undertake the relevant policy analysis in those areas and to operationalize such
work, including through its technical assistance activities;
23. Takes note of the holding of the second Global Review on Aid for Trade,
on 6 and 7 July 2009, aimed at reviewing progress achieved and identifying
additional measures needed to support developing and least developed countries in
building their supply and export capacities, and stresses the urgent need to
implement the aid for trade commitments, especially with regard to the mobilization
of additional, non-conditional and predictable funding;
24. Welcomes the efforts made to operationalize the Enhanced Integrated
Framework for Trade-related Technical Assistance to Least Developed Countries,
aimed at promoting the export and supply capacities of the least developed
countries, as well as the establishment of the Enhanced Integrated Framework Trust
Fund, and urges development partners to increase their contributions, with a view to
ensuring increased additional, non-conditional and predictable financial resources
on a multi-year basis;
25. Reiterates the important role of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development as the focal point within the United Nations system for the
integrated treatment of trade and development and interrelated issues in the areas of
finance, technology, investment and sustainable development, and calls upon the
international community to work towards the strengthening of the Conference in
order to enable it to enhance its contribution in its three major pillars, namely,
consensus-building, research and policy analysis and technical assistance, especially
through increased core resources;
26. Invites the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in
accordance with its mandate, to monitor and assess the evolution of the international
trading system and of trends in international trade from a development perspective,
and, in particular, to analyse issues of concern to developing countries, supporting
them in building capacities to establish their own negotiating priorities and
negotiate trade agreements, including under the Doha Work Programme;

5

A/RES/64/188

27. Urges donors to provide the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development with the increased resources necessary to deliver effective and
demand-driven assistance to developing countries, as well as to enhance their
contributions to the trust funds of the Integrated Framework for Trade-related
Technical Assistance to Least Developed Countries and the Joint Integrated
Technical Assistance Programme;
28. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the secretariat of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to submit to the General
Assembly at its sixty-fifth session a report on the implementation of the present
resolution and on developments in the multilateral trading system, including with
regard to the implementation of the World Intellectual Property Organization
development agenda, under the sub-item entitled “International trade and
development” of the item entitled “Macroeconomic policy questions”;
29. Also requests the Secretary-General to transmit the present resolution to
the Director-General of the World Trade Organization for circulation as a document
of the World Trade Organization.
66th plenary meeting
21 December 2009

6
