A /ES-11/PV.9

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Eleventh Emergency Special session

9th plenary meeting

Thursday, 24 March 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)
President:
In the absence of the President, Mr. Blanco Conde the number of internally displaced persons, combined
(Dominican Republic), Vice-President, took with the number of those who have fled to other
the Chair.
countries, amounts to more than 10 million — nearly
a quarter of the population of Ukraine. That number is
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
still increasing.
Agenda item 5 (continued)
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/136)
Draft resolutions (A/ES-11/L.2 and A/ES-11/L.3)
The Acting President: Today we will hear from
the remaining speakers on the list carried over from the
8th plenary meeting, held yesterday (see A/ES-11/PV.8).
Mr. Beleffi (San Marino): The Republic of San
Marino aligns itself with the statement delivered
yesterday (see A/ES-11/PV.7) on behalf of the European
Union, and I will now add some remarks in my
national capacity.
San Marino condemns Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine and is deeply worried about the ongoing
conflict as well as the ensuing humanitarian crisis. San
Marino is a sponsor of draft resolution A/ES-11/L.2,
entitled “Humanitarian consequences of the aggression
against Ukraine”. The ongoing military offensive,
which has regrettably been escalating, has already
caused more than 2,000 civilian casualties, including
women and children. The suffering of civilians is
growing hour by hour. According to data from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,

San Marino strongly condemns the indiscriminate
and disproportionate attacks on civilians, including
through indiscriminate shelling, air strikes and the use
of explosive devices in densely populated areas. The
international humanitarian law in this area is clear.
Civilians and civilian objects must be protected. We call
on the parties to respect the principles of international
humanitarian law and firmly condemn the attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure, including hospitals
and schools. We reiterate that the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas has a devastating and
indiscriminate impact on civilians, putting children at
risk in particular.
With the ongoing hostilities, many people remain
trapped in areas of escalating conflict, and thanks to the
disruption of essential services are unable to meet even
their most basic needs. Civilians have been enduring
terrible conditions, living underground without water,
food, heat, electricity or medicine for weeks. We stress
the importance of protecting humanitarian corridors
to enable the safe passage of civilians fleeing their
homes in search of safety and security. We also ask
for the protection of the humanitarian actors who
are risking their lives to deliver their assistance and
essential services to the population, especially its most
vulnerable members, such as women and girls, the
elderly, the disabled and people with serious medical

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-29872 (E)

*2229872*

A/ES-11/PV.9

conditions. We are particularly worried about the
situation of those vulnerable groups. Women and girls
need our immediate attention, as they are particularly
at risk of becoming victims of violence and exploitation
in these circumstances.
San Marino stands in deep solidarity with the
people of Ukraine and asks all the parties involved in
the hostilities to put humanitarian imperatives first. We
stand ready to contribute to mitigating this humanitarian
emergency and addressing the unprecedented levels
of displacement. Since the beginning of the conflict,
San Marino has welcomed almost 300 refugees from
Ukraine, and our Government, together with civil
society, private entities and sport federations, is
working to facilitate the integration and inclusion of
those refugees, who are mostly women and children,
in our territory. The Government has created a subsidy
that San Marino families hosting Ukrainian refugees
can access to support basic expenses. Also, we have
begun fundraising with the aim of partially financing
the activities necessary to enable a sustainable stay in
our country. The fund has already received generous
contributions from the citizens of San Marino and
public and private entities. The citizens of San Marino
have also contributed to the collection of medical
equipment to be donated to Ukraine.
The Republic of San Marino feels the tragedy that
people living under attack have to endure. We hear
the intolerable and constant noise of war. We see the
destruction of buildings, houses and entire cities. All
that must stop. San Marino continues to call for an
immediate cessation of hostilities. We do not and never
will accept the use of arms to settle disputes that must
find their resolution in international law, the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and political
mediation. Only through political dialogue will we find
a durable and peaceful solution to this crisis, which
is deeply wounding to all peoples and nations that
believe strongly in the values of peace. We encourage
all the parties to recommit to diplomatic negotiations.
That is the only way to stop this tragedy and the only
way forward.
Mr. Ke (Cambodia): On behalf of the Royal
Government of Cambodia, I would like to express my
sincere condolences to the people and the Government
of the United States on the passing of former Secretary
of State Madeleine Albright. May her soul rest in peace.
2/25

24/03/2022

Cambodia is gravely concerned about the
increasing gravity of the situation and the worsening
humanitarian consequences of the ongoing military
hostilities in Ukraine, including civilian casualties,
the displacement of persons and a growing flow of
refugees to its neighbouring countries. Draft resolution
A/ES-11/L.2, which is being considered by the
General Assembly, calls on Member States and the
international community to address the humanitarian
crisis in Ukraine. In this dire situation, it is critically
important that all parties ensure safe and full access for
humanitarian relief to the people in need in and around
Ukraine. Attacks must not target civilians or civilian
infrastructure. All parties must respect international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
In its statement on Ukraine issued on 3 March,
the Foreign Ministers of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations called for a ceasefire or armistice and
a continuation of political dialogue aimed at leading
to sustainable peace in Ukraine. They underlined
the importance of a ceasefire in creating an enabling
environment for negotiations to address the current
crisis and avoid exacerbating the suffering of
innocent people.
As a nation that is friendly to both countries,
Cambodia encourages Russia and Ukraine to resolve
their conflict through diplomacy and dialogue and
other peaceful means in order to end the humanitarian
crisis and achieve a long-lasting peace between the two
nations. Cambodia has sponsored the draft resolution
and will vote in favour of it.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Like
others before me, I would like to offer my delegation’s
sincere condolences to the Government and the people
of the United States on the passing of Ms. Madeleine
Albright, former Secretary of State and Ambassador of
the United States to the United Nations.
My delegation also welcomed the resumption of
the eleventh emergency special session of the General
Assembly, on the humanitarian situation in Ukraine. We
commend the tireless efforts of the Secretary-General
in working for a peaceful and lasting resolution to the
crisis there.
Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its commitment to respect for
the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence
of States and for the peaceful settlement of disputes, as
prescribed by the Charter of the United Nations. It is
vital that we respect the texts that regulate our shared
22-29872

24/03/2022

life and that we have freely endorsed. That is why my
country remains deeply concerned about the escalation
of violence that unfortunately continues to cause
terrible damage, with significant numbers of victims
and massive destruction of critical infrastructure,
making it desperately urgent to immediately implement
resolution ES-11/1 of 2 March, which we adopted in a
democratic vote.
According to recent figures provided by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Organization for Migration,
more than 10 million people have been forced to
leave their homes in search of safety and security, of
whom 3.5 million have found refuge in neighbouring
countries. My country strongly condemns all violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights
perpetrated in Ukraine. We call for strict respect for
international humanitarian law as well as respect for
the legal provisions that govern it, in particular the
1949 Geneva Conventions and its Additional Protocol
of 1977.
Côte d’Ivoire also calls for safeguarding the
security and safety of civilians in the conduct of military
operations and respecting the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution, as recommended by
international humanitarian law. We further urge for
the protection of civilians fleeing violence and the
facilitation of rapid, safe and unimpeded access for
humanitarian assistance to those in need in Ukraine
and neighbouring countries. This is also a moment
for my delegation to reiterate its call for fair and
non-discriminatory treatment of all affected by this
crisis, including Africans and people of African descent.
My country welcomes the mobilization and
solidarity of the international community in support
of the thousands of people affected by this conflict.
We echo the Secretary-General’s continued calls for
funding a contingency plan for a robust humanitarian
response in Ukraine, as well as the regional refugee
response plan for Ukraine and neighbouring countries.
Finally, Côte d’Ivoire urges for an immediate cessation
of hostilities, in order to give peace a chance through
dialogue and diplomacy.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The current developments in Ukraine have caused
widespread concern among the international community
and are something that China does not wish to see.
Regarding the issue of Ukraine, it is China’s consistent

A/ES-11/PV.9

position that the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of all countries should be respected. The purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations should
be upheld and the legitimate security concerns of all
countries taken seriously. Furthermore, we should
support all efforts conducive to a peaceful resolution
of the crisis.
The humanitarian situation in Ukraine is becoming
increasingly serious. The civilian casualties and
massive displacement caused by the conflict are deeply
regrettable. The most urgent task now is to urge the
parties to exercise maximize restraint, avoid any
more civilian casualties and reach a ceasefire through
negotiations as soon as possible, with the particular
aim of preventing a greater humanitarian crisis. China
attaches great importance to the humanitarian issue in
Ukraine. We have put forward a six-point initiative in
that regard and have already delivered several shipments
of humanitarian aid to the Ukrainian Red Cross
Society. We welcome any initiatives and measures that
can help to alleviate or resolve the humanitarian crisis
in Ukraine. China’s fundamental starting point is that
we urge the international community and the United
Nations to focus on the importance of the humanitarian
situation in Ukraine and call on the parties concerned
to strengthen their coordination on humanitarian issues
in order to effectively protect the safety of civilians,
especially vulnerable groups such as women and
children, and to facilitate the evacuation of people
and humanitarian relief operations. We also support
the United Nations and relevant organizations in their
active execution of relief operations.
In view of the situation as it regards the humanitarian
issue in Ukraine, the principles of humanity, neutrality
and impartiality established in resolution 46/182
should be strictly observed and there should be no
politicization of humanitarian issues. China agrees
with the purpose of draft resolution A/ES-11/L.2,
proposed by France, Mexico and other countries, and
appreciates the efforts by the countries concerned to
promote consensus. At the same time, it is clear that
some parts of the draft resolution go beyond the scope
of humanitarian considerations. There are issues that
are very complex and can be resolved only through
political negotiations between the parties concerned.
Draft resolution A/ES-11/L.3, proposed by South
Africa, focuses on humanitarian issues and addresses
many important aspects of the situation in Ukraine,
while emphasizing that a cessation of hostilities is

22-298723/25

A/ES-11/PV.9

a crucial step towards improving the humanitarian
situation. We believe that under the current complex
circumstances, South Africa’s draft resolution is more
conducive to promoting the unity of Member States and
further opening the door to dialogue and negotiation
and a diplomatic solution. China has therefore joined
the sponsors of the South African draft resolution.
The world today is facing many serious challenges.
The spillover factor of the Ukraine crisis is having
global repercussions. The world has not yet emerged
from the shadow of the coronavirus disease. The
ever-expanding
implementation
of
sweeping,
undiscriminating sanctions has battered and will
continue to batter the global economy, trade, finance,
energy, food and industrial supply chains, seriously
affecting the normal lives of people everywhere and
exacerbating the problems of an already struggling
world economy. Developing countries, which form
a majority around the world, are not parties to this
conflict. They should not be drawn into these tensions
or forced to suffer the consequences of geopolitical
conflicts and major power struggles. Sanctions and the
use of force cannot be the only options for dealing with
international and regional hotspot issues. In the face of
complex situations, all countries have the right to make
independent and autonomous decisions for their foreign
policies. The countries concerned should not adopt
simplistic approaches limited to friend or foe, black or
white, and nor should they force any country to choose
a side. Respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of all countries is a basic norm of
international relations and applies to all countries in all
situations. There should be no exceptions in that regard,
much less double standards.
Dialogue and negotiation are the only way out of
the crisis in Ukraine. China appeals urgently to the
international community to show reason, strengthen
solidarity and work relentlessly to achieve a ceasefire
and peace. China will continue to play a constructive
role in facilitating peace talks.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): The delegation of Pakistan
joins others in expressing condolences to the people and
the Government of the United States on the sad demise
of former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright.
She was an outstanding diplomat who contributed
to multilateralism, the post-Cold War order and the
advancement of the rights of women.
4/25

24/03/2022

Yesterday the forty-eighth session of the Council
of Foreign Ministers of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC) issued its Islamabad Declaration, in
which the Ministers stated the following with regard to
the situation in Ukraine.
“We express deep concern at the deteriorating
security and humanitarian situation arising from
the conflict in Ukraine. We reaffirm unequivocal
support for the universal and consistent application
of the principles of the United Nations Charter,
including non-use of force, respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States,
non-interference in their internal affairs, and
pacific settlement of disputes, to preserve and build
international peace and security, to ensure equal
security for all States and respect for international
humanitarian law.
“Having deliberated on the ongoing conflict
between Russia and Ukraine at the forty-eighth
session of the Council of Foreign Ministers, we call
for an immediate cessation of hostilities to prevent
further loss of life and ensure that the humanitarian
crisis does not worsen in Ukraine. We stress
the need for the establishment of humanitarian
corridors to ensure safe movement of civilians
from active conflict zones and the provision of
humanitarian supplies. We urge both sides to
engage in meaningful dialogue with the purpose
of finding a solution to the present conflict. We
express the willingness of OIC member States to
support and facilitate the dialogue process between
all sides, if requested.”
Pakistan appreciates the various efforts made by
some countries to facilitate an end to this war and
promote a negotiated solution. They include Turkey
and China. Pakistan has supported those efforts
and contributed to them within its capacity. We also
appreciate the endeavours in the United Nations by
South Africa, the European Union, Mexico and others
to agree on a draft resolution to provide adequate and
expeditious humanitarian assistance to the people so
gravely affected by the conflict in Ukraine. Even at
this late stage in our deliberations, we hope that we
can arrive at an agreed outcome that can facilitate the
promotion of humanitarian help to civilians in Ukraine
and to refugees and the displaced, including foreign
nationals and students, on the basis of humanitarian
principles and without discrimination. Such an outcome
should not be impeded by political considerations. A
22-29872

24/03/2022

divided outcome in the Assembly will not yield the
humanitarian results we all desire.
Mr. Tun (Myanmar): The delegation of Myanmar
would like to express its deepest condolences to the
people and the Government of the United States on the
passing of Ms. Madeleine Albright, former Secretary
of State and Permanent Representative of the United
States to the United Nations. May she rest in peace.
I would like to thank the President for convening
this meeting. Myanmar has sponsored draft resolution
A/ES-11/L.2, on “Humanitarian consequences of the
aggression against Ukraine”, which was introduced
by the country most concerned, Ukraine (see
A/ES-11/PV.7), and will vote yes. We always value the
position of the country concerned first and foremost
and respect the voices of its people.
As Ukrainians continue to face the catastrophic
situation resulting from the aggression and its
indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks, the timely
provision of humanitarian assistance to the people in
need is crucial. Any unnecessary suffering for anyone,
especially women and children, the elderly, people
with disabilities and other vulnerable groups, must end
completely and immediately. It is vital to ensure the
protection of all civilians, along with humanitarian and
medical personnel, journalists and people in vulnerable
situations, including women and children. We welcome
the continued efforts of Member States, the SecretaryGeneral, United Nations agencies and international
organizations to deliver humanitarian assistance as well
as aid and protection for refugees. We also welcome the
Secretary-General’s appointment of a United Nations
Crisis Coordinator for Ukraine.
We fully share in the sufferings of the people of
Ukraine and stand firmly in solidarity with them. The
people of Myanmar are experiencing similar man-made
tragedies and humanitarian crises as a consequence of
our military’s atrocities, crimes against humanity and
indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks against its
own people. According to the United Nations, to date
in Myanmar almost 900,000 people are still displaced
and 6.2 million are in need of humanitarian assistance
due to the military’s indiscriminate attacks across the
country. At the same time, our people are encountering
food insecurity.
Myanmar would therefore like to reiterate its
appeal for an immediate and complete cessation of
hostilities and attacks in Ukraine. We call for assuring

A/ES-11/PV.9

humanitarian access and the provision of humanitarian
assistance to everyone in and around Ukraine. We also
urge the international community to provide transparent
and inclusive humanitarian assistance to those in need
in Myanmar and to help the people of Myanmar in our
efforts to end these military atrocities and the military
dictatorship in a timely and effective manner. Saving
lives is a noble task for us all.
Mr. Rae (Canada): I appreciate this opportunity
to address the General Assembly today. Like many
others, I would like to express the deep condolences of
the Government of Canada, our delegation, and many
of us personally for the loss of Ms. Madeleine Albright.
She was truly an outstanding public servant and a great
leader for the United States. She was a great friend of
Canada and indeed of our Minister for Foreign Affairs,
who was with her when she was Secretary of State. We
shall miss her presence on the world stage. It is a loss
for all of us.
This is now a defining time for the United Nations.
The Russian Federation is continuing its illegal invasion
of Ukraine in an unprovoked act of aggression against
its neighbour. Russia has so far expressed no repentance
and has carried on its aggression unabated since we last
met to condemn its actions as a serious violation of the
Charter of the United Nations. In the last few days,
the International Court of Justice has also ordered that
Russia immediately suspend its military operation in
Ukraine. And yet Russia, a permanent member of the
Security Council, a creator of the Nuremberg process
and a signatory to the creation of the International
Court of Justice and to the Geneva Conventions, carries
on as if there is no law and no rules apply to it.
We know now how serious the humanitarian
situation in Ukraine really is. Scores of innocent
civilians, including children, have been killed and
injured, and the situation not only is not getting better,
it is getting worse by the hour. We are witnessing before
our very eyes the premeditated destruction of entire
cities. What is happening in Mariupol right now tells
us everything we need to know about this particularly
cruel war of aggression. Russia is laying siege to that
city and to others, to its people, bombing hospitals and
schools and flattening entire apartment complexes.
Expectant mothers, children and the medical staff at a
children’s hospital and maternity ward were slaughtered
in a particularly gruesome attack on 9 March. That
is part of a horrific trend. In just 25 days the United
Nations has verified 52 attacks on health-care centres in

22-298725/25

A/ES-11/PV.9

Ukraine. Medical personnel and facilities are supposed
to be protected under international humanitarian law.
Those attacks, and all attacks on civilians and civilian
areas, must stop. There is no justification for them,
and there is nothing “special” about Russia’s military
operation in Ukraine. It is directed at whole cities, at
people’s homes. But we also have to remember that
like any armed conflict, this one immediately creates
obligations under international humanitarian law for all
the parties involved. Those laws are designed to protect
civilians, limit suffering and ensure that those in need
of aid receive it. Those obligations cannot be willed or
bargained away. They apply to Russia, and they apply
to Ukraine. They must be observed.
Canada is proud to join more than 80 countries
in sponsoring draft resolution A/ES-11/L.2, entitled
“Humanitarian consequences of the aggression against
Ukraine”, which is before us. We are affirming that
by demanding full compliance with international
humanitarian law and appealing for desperately needed
humanitarian access. If the draft resolution is passed
there will be no delay in the provision of humanitarian
assistance and no division about it, either.
More than 10 million Ukrainians have been forced
to flee their homes — 10 million. Let us think about
that number for a minute. Ten million people forcibly
displaced by Russia’s military in Ukraine in four
weeks. That is more than the entire population of more
than 100 of the States represented in this Assembly. Ten
million people displaced in four weeks. Of those, three
million are refugees that have fled Ukraine since the
start of this war. That is creating enormous strain on
neighbouring countries — and that is not an accident
either. It adds unnecessarily to the already record
numbers of refugees and displaced persons globally
who have fled Afghanistan, Venezuela, the Sahel
region, Syria, Myanmar and so many other conflicts.
While we are focused today on Ukraine, we cannot
neglect those and other situations. Humanitarian needs
everywhere deserve just as much care and attention.
Canada will continue to respond to those needs, just as
we are responding to the catastrophe that is unfolding
in Ukraine.
It is important to remember that the effects of this
war of aggression by Russia on Ukraine are of course
devastating Ukraine. That is what they are intended to
do. That is what Russia has set out to do — to destroy
and undermine the economy, the structure, the people,
the cities and the humanity of Ukraine. However, those
6/25

24/03/2022

effects are also felt outside of the region, as many
people have said. They are felt in the least-developed
countries and by vulnerable populations around the
world. They include rising energy prices, supply-chain
disruptions, food insecurity issues and food shortages
that lead to higher prices, hardships, instability,
malnutrition, starvation and, yes, famine. Those are the
effects of Russia’s war of choice. This war has had all
of those effects. They threaten the hard-won progress
on development that we have made over the past
decade, distract the world from its recovery from the
coronavirus disease pandemic and undermine efforts
to combat climate change and achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals.
(spoke in French)
But let us be clear. The impact and the crises, no
matter how severe, could be lessened tomorrow if
Russia ended its war of aggression. Russia must end
this war before more damage is done.
In its first resolution of this emergency special
session (resolution ES-11/1), the General Assembly
deplored Russia’s actions as a violation of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Russia’s war is not just against Ukraine. We must
remember that. Ukraine is not the only victim of this war.
It is in contravention of the principles and commitments
that we collectively made when we signed the Charter.
It is a war against peace, progress and the freedom of
nations and peoples to choose their own destiny. We are
the United Nations, not warring empires.
This is a war that President Putin cannot win. It
bears repeating that this is a war he cannot win. Russia
has prevented the Security Council from carrying out
its fundamental duty to protect international peace
and security. Through the threat of a veto, it has also
prevented the Council from adopting a humanitarian
resolution. It is therefore once again up to the General
Assembly to defend the rules-based international order
in which the United Nations and its Charter play a
central role. In our view, the draft resolution before
us today deserves the support of all countries. Canada
urges everyone to support it.
We have listened very carefully, in the Assembly
and in our conversations, to the concerns expressed by
all Member States.
22-29872

24/03/2022

(spoke in English)
We were asked to address concerns about the effects
on least-developed countries, discrimination against
any refugees fleeing Ukraine, the safety of foreign
students, food security and the need to fully fund the
United Nations Humanitarian Response Plan 2022.
The draft resolution submitted today does just that, in
addition to demanding the protection of civilians and
safe and unhindered humanitarian access.
There has been a suggestion — and we have
heard it again today — that a humanitarian resolution
should not say anything about the cause of the crisis
or ascribe responsibility to any particular party. With
great respect, Mr. President, we disagree. This is not
a natural disaster. A humanitarian crisis of this type
is not a spontaneous event. It did not just happen. It
happened because one country deliberately, without
provocation, attacked another country. It is the direct
result of a deliberate decision by the Russian Federation
to invade Ukraine. To put it in the simplest terms, we
cannot talk about Moby-Dick without mentioning that
it is a whale. We cannot do it. We cannot pretend it did
not happen. We cannot just set it aside and say that it
is of no importance. If we do not identify the aggressor
and insist that it uphold its obligation to fully respect
international law and comply with the legally binding
order of the International Court of Justice, then, I would
argue, we have failed to do our job. A ceasefire and a
withdrawal of the occupying troops are necessary so
that we can take the next steps.
(spoke in French)
Henri Dunant, the Swiss founder of the International
Red Cross, was so deeply affected by the human
devastation on the battlefield at Solferino that it drove
him to begin his exemplary work, which led ultimately
to the founding principles of humanitarian aid and
the obligations of all in time of war. It is said that the
last words he spoke before his death were “Where is
humanity?” Today we must answer, “We are here”.
(spoke in English)
We are going to be voting yes today on this draft
resolution for this reason, for humanity. We will vote
yes for humanity, not in the name of being able to solve
all the problems of the world, because we cannot do
that, but rather because we have to take steps designed
to lead to peace, truth, justice and reconciliation. And
sometimes we have to say difficult things. We cannot

A/ES-11/PV.9

avoid the facts and the reality of this situation. The
Canadian poet Leonard Cohen put it this way:
“Forget your perfect offering
“There is a crack, a crack in everything
“That’s how the light gets in”.
Let us keep our eyes on the light and let us face
the time ahead in love and solidarity with one another.
Despite our differences, we will get there. We will do it
with honesty, courage and solidarity.
Mr. Marschik (Austria): I would like to express
my thanks to the Permanent Representative of Canada.
Mr. Rae is the best warm-up support act one can have
here at the United Nations.
Before I begin, let me express Austria’s heartfelt
condolences and sympathies to Mrs. Linda ThomasGreenfield and to our United States colleagues on the
passing of former Secretary of State Madeline Albright.
She was a strong advocate for multilateral diplomacy
and a role model for us here at the United Nations and
for the world.
I also want to assure the Assembly that Austria
aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of
the European Union (see A/ES-11/PV.7).
Today we are meeting for the second time here in
the General Assembly to discuss the unprovoked, illegal
and unjustified act of aggression of Russia against
Ukraine. We are doing so to discuss the devastating
humanitarian consequences of the aggression. Thanks
to reports and briefings by the United Nations and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
we have a clear picture of the terrible humanitarian
situation. People are suffering unimaginable horrors in
cities such as Mariupol, Kharkiv and Kherson. Mr. Rae
mentioned many. Children are suffering, as are the old,
the sick and the disabled, those in health-care centres,
institutions and orphanages. We hear reports of attacks
on civilian infrastructure with explosive weapons and
of the use of cluster munitions in populated areas.
We hear about shelling of health-care facilities and
schools, about hunger and lack of medicine. We hear
about acts that constitute war crimes, war crimes that
must be condemned in the strongest terms by all of
us. International humanitarian law is not optional. We
insist on its strict implementation by all of us. I have not
heard a single voice here arguing that the suffering in
Ukraine is necessary or justified.

22-298727/25

A/ES-11/PV.9

While the humanitarian conditions in Mariupol,
Kharkiv and Kherson seem outside the scope of the
imaginable, for many they are unfortunately all too
familiar. In parts of the Middle East, the Gulf and
Africa, civilians are suffering. In many instances the
Security Council has taken action. Even in politically
difficult cases the Council has found compromises, but
not so regarding Ukraine. Here, the Security Council
has been unable to act, failing in its role as the guardian
of peace and security under the Charter of the United
Nations. Clearly, when we start discussing the proposal
on the new Agenda for Peace in Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982), this predicament will have to be addressed.
Until then, it is up to us here in the General Assembly to
address the situation in Ukraine. In view of the tragedy
on the ground, that should be quite straightforward.
We need an immediate ceasefire. The Russian attacks
must stop. We need the safe and secure evacuation of
civilians, including through humanitarian corridors
or safe passage. We need access for humanitarian
personnel and aid. All those points are reflected in draft
resolution A/ES-11/L.2, which we will adopt shortly
and which Austria will support. Hopefully, most other
Member States will support it as well.
There is a second draft resolution that has been
put forward (A/ES-11/L.3). That is the right of every
State, and there is a lot in that second draft resolution
that Austria also supports. However, there are glaring
omissions, and we already have a draft resolution,
presented by Ukraine, that covers all the relevant
points. Moreover, it is unusual that during the drafting
process there were no consultations with the country
that the draft deals with. I hope that its sponsors will
not put it forward for action before ensuring that it
meets with the approval of the country concerned.
This is after all a draft humanitarian resolution. We are
uniting here to support the suffering people in Ukraine,
not to antagonize them.
We have heard about some of the consequences
of the war of aggression against Ukraine. There
are many concerns. Because Ukraine is the world’s
breadbasket, the war there threatens food security,
particularly in vulnerable countries, including leastdeveloped countries, landlocked developing countries
and small island developing States. There are also
very real concerns about the possible consequences
of a potential nuclear fallout caused by an attack on
nuclear facilities. All international norms in the area
of nuclear security must be fully respected. We support
8/25

24/03/2022

all efforts, especially those of the International Atomic
Energy Agency and its Director General Mr. Rafael
Mariano Grossi, to ensure nuclear safety around
Ukraine´s nuclear facilities. We must make the best
possible use of the upcoming Conference of the Parties
to the Amendment to the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material, which we have worked
hard to strengthen.
Yes, we must all do our part to help. We have heard of
many humanitarian efforts and initiatives by the United
Nations and Member States, and we commend them.
Austria has allocated more than €17.5 million to support
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, UNICEF, the International Committee
of the Red Cross and non-governmental organizations,
and we have deployed a crisis team to Moldova to
provide additional consular support and humanitarian
assistance to Ukraine’s immediate neighbours.
When we think about what we can do, let us also be
frank and factual here in the Assembly. Like Mr. Rae,
I am puzzled when I hear colleagues arguing that we
should avoid politicization, that we need to balance
the text or that we need more neutral language. This
is a humanitarian resolution, for goodness’ sake. This
is about human suffering caused by armed attacks and
war crimes. How can that require balance and neutral
language? Should we seek equidistance between victim
and aggressor? Austria is a neutral State. We are
not party to any military alliances. Our neutrality is
embedded in our Constitution. Believe me, we know
about neutrality. Neutrality does not mean neutrality of
values. Nor does it mean taking no position when faced
with unprovoked, unjustified violations of international
law. Like other neutral States, we take a clear stance.
We speak up against violations of the law and
humanitarian law and against violations of the Charter.
We support efforts to hold those responsible for crimes.
We support clear language in our humanitarian draft
resolution — Ukraine´s draft resolution — language that
differentiates between victim and aggressor. Austria
therefore urges Member States to vote in favour of this
humanitarian draft resolution to show the world once
again that the General Assembly continues to protect
civilians, defend the rule of law and uphold the Charter.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Sovereign Order of Malta.
Mr. Beresford-Hill (Sovereign Order of Malta):
The Sovereign Order of Malta would like to convey
22-29872

24/03/2022

its condolences to our colleagues at the United States
Mission to the United Nations for the loss of former
Ambassador and Secretary of State Madeleine Albright.
It is salient that as a refugee herself, she should be
remembered here and at this moment. We also offer
our condolences to our colleagues at the Mission of
the Republic of Ireland to the United Nations on the
passing of Ambassador Jim Kelly. Our national symbol
is an eight-pointed cross, representing the beatitudes.
One in particular is apposite in remembering those two
distinguished diplomats and public servants — blessed
are the peacemakers.
Sharing in its humanitarian spirit and mindful
of the pain and anguish of the Ukrainian people, the
Sovereign Order of Malta, as a permanent observer
and therefore not casting a vote today, does however
express its support for the humanitarian focus of a
draft resolution that is under consideration today.
The Sovereign Order of Malta condemns any form of
unwarranted aggression against sovereign States and
is deeply concerned about the suffering of the people
of the Ukraine, the suffering of civilians, especially
women and children, the suffering of the sick and the
unbearable suffering of the elderly. We reiterate our
call for a cessation of hostilities against the innocent
and for a strengthened purpose through dialogue to
find a pathway to peace.
The current fighting in Ukraine has caused the
death of countless innocent civilians, destroyed civic
infrastructure, ripped apart families, forced nearly
4 million people to flee the country and caused
the internal displacement of as many as 6 million
individuals. We, an independent, neutral, sovereign
entity State providing global humanitarian aid in more
than 120 countries, have given considerable support,
advice and material help to the Ukrainian people,
particularly during the past eight years of conflict.
At this moment our staff are currently serving in
Ukraine and in neighbouring countries, with more than
5,000 personnel and tens of thousands of volunteers.
They are doing everything from serving hot food and
drink to caring for victims of injury and accident,
providing first aid, medical assistance, counselling
and emotional support and securing short- and longterm accommodation. Volunteers from locations
away from the border, many of them from other
countries and representing faith-based and community
groups, have travelled to the region with supplies and
humanitarian equipment, in some cases putting their

A/ES-11/PV.9

own lives in danger. Our crisis-response arm, Malteser
International, along with our national associations and
relief corps, is coordinating activities with regional
and local Government agencies, particularly within
Hungary, Poland, Slovakia, Slovenia, Romania, the
Czech Republic, Lithuania, Germany and Austria, and
with international aid organizations such as the Red
Cross, the Order of Saint John, among others, and such
United Nations agencies as the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
We are also engaged in an international fundraising
programme to ensure that adequate resources continue
to be available. However, the dire humanitarian
situation in Ukraine continues to deteriorate rapidly, as
densely populated areas such as the city of Mariupol
are shelled incessantly, with scenes of devastation
reminiscent of the Second World War. The civilian
populations affected, from women and children to
journalists, together with humanitarian and medical
personnel, all deserve the right to safety, along with
secure, voluntary and unhindered passage. Those who
have been able to escape the escalating violence in their
homeland tell our volunteers on the ground that all they
want is to go home in peace and security and resume
their lives, send their children back to school, care for
their aging relatives and pets and sit and breathe the air
of freedom and peace. But millions more are waiting
inside Ukraine in an atmosphere of uncertainty, even
terror. They are the rural populations, the workers, the
farmers, the agriculturalists, those whose efforts in
wheat production in better times help feed millions of
the world’s starving. Now they too face the prospect of
starvation. They need our help, while the World Food
Programme and millions across Africa and in other
nations of the world desperately wait for a solution that
will provide life-giving sustenance to the hungry.
Refugees and internally displaced persons are
especially vulnerable, and the Order of Malta is
seriously concerned about the heightened risk of sexual
violence, especially trafficking in persons, which
has already been observed from border locations and
reported by numerous non-governmental organizations,
the media and local police officials. To reduce the risk
of human trafficking, effective assistance, protection
and clear advisories must be provided to refugees
without discrimination. Adequate training should be
provided to those giving advice and assistance so that
these vulnerable women, children and young people do
not fall victim to that scourge. We appeal to all people

22-298729/25

A/ES-11/PV.9

of goodwill to assist in the protection of all refugees,
internally displaced persons and people in need,
inside and outside Ukraine. We ask the United Nations
community for compassion on behalf of the innocent.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker on this item.
Before we proceed to take action on draft
resolutions A/ES-11/L.2 and A/ES-11/L.3, delegations
wishing to make statements in explanation of vote or
position before the voting on either or both of these draft
resolutions are invited to do so now in one intervention.
Before giving the floor for explanations of vote, I would
like to remind speakers that explanations are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I give the floor to the representative of South Africa.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): South Africa is deeply
concerned about the humanitarian crisis in Ukraine and
its neighbouring countries. It is vital to ensure that the
General Assembly adopts a draft resolution responding
to this humanitarian crisis and affirms the international
humanitarian principles by which the parties must
abide. Addressing the humanitarian situation should
be our immediate priority. Unfortunately, rather than
putting the humanitarian crisis and our response at
the centre of our deliberations, the political divisions
in this Assembly suggest that in the minds of some
delegations the humanitarian response is perhaps
secondary to geopolitical objectives. While we should
not ignore the context that gave rise to this crisis or
any violations of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law, that should not distract us or our
focus from what we ought to be doing right now. What
we should be doing, as a matter of urgency, is working
as a global community to end the war by calling for a
cessation of hostilities, because that is the first step in
a comprehensive humanitarian response and will create
the environment necessary to a political process that
can lead to sustainable peace.
Let us be clear. War has no winners. The real
heroes are those who work for peace. Over the past
few decades, the world has continued to experience
debilitating conflicts. Many of those wars have
contravened the provisions of the Charter and
international law. As an example, as a result of one of
those conflicts, the devastating war in Iraq, more than
2.4 million people are reported to have died since 2003.
Many more civilians across the world have died and
10/25

24/03/2022

been displaced. Making this point in our discussion on
the humanitarian situation in Ukraine is not a form of
whataboutism. It is underscoring the point that many
countries and their peoples suffer the consequences of
wars that are not of their own doing. They have had
no role in starting or ending those wars. In fact, we
must make the point that in most cases the vast majority
of countries in the Assembly have never invaded or
colonized other countries and yet have suffered the
consequences of those invasions and colonizations.
There are a few powerful countries that have been
party to most of those conflicts, often in the form of
proxy wars in other countries or regions. Africa has
experienced its fair share of those proxy wars and their
destructive outcomes. We therefore empathize with the
people of Ukraine, who find themselves caught up in a
conflict not of their making.
War and the use of force are never solutions to
international disputes, irrespective of the countries that
are involved. Once war has begun, it is imperative that
we all work towards peace. That is why South Africa is
of the view that right now we should be more concerned
with ending the war and addressing the humanitarian
plight of those who are affected by it. South Africa
remains steadfast in its belief that an atmosphere of
dialogue, mediation and diplomacy represents the only
path to de-escalating the current conflict. In that regard,
we reiterate our call for employing the good offices of
the United Nations in mediating and pursuing the quest
for a sustainable solution and for us as Member States
to facilitate an enabling environment for dialogue.
Against a backdrop of a deepening humanitarian
crisis and with peace not in sight, we ought to ask
ourselves what matters most. The objective of the
Assembly must be to find a constructive outcome
that is conducive to the creation of sustainable peace
in Ukraine and that addresses the humanitarian
plight of those affected by the conflict. Draft
resolution A/ES-11/L.2, submitted by a cross-regional
group, unfortunately does not address that. South
Africa supports several of its aspects, including an
immediate cessation of hostilities, an affirmation of
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine
and the establishment of humanitarian corridors. We
support the full protection of civilians, humanitarian
personnel and vulnerable people, including women and
children. We support the call to all States and parties to
the conflict to fully respect international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. We support the
22-29872

24/03/2022

voluntary, safe and unhindered passage of civilians,
including foreign nationals, without discrimination.
However, there are elements in draft resolution
A/ES-11/L.2 that make attaining a consensus in the
General Assembly difficult. At this stage it remains
imperative to ensure that all parties to the conflict are
committed to humanitarian principles and a United
Nations humanitarian response and are part of the
outcome that we adopt. It was for that reason that South
Africa saw the need to put forward a text that focuses
specifically on the humanitarian plight of the people
affected. Political issues that may result in Member
States failing to agree on a text should be addressed
elsewhere. We believe that an impartial humanitarian
resolution should focus purely on addressing
humanitarian needs. It is in that context that we have
proposed a text that will first and foremost focus on
calling for a cessation of hostilities as the first step
towards ameliorating the humanitarian situation.
A crucial aspect of our draft resolution
(A/ES-11/L.3) also calls on all the parties to abide by
international humanitarian law and all the Additional
Protocols to the 1949 Geneva Conventions. It is pivotal
to ensure that a draft resolution, aside from addressing
the humanitarian needs of the people, also lays a
foundation for the parties to engage in constructive and
meaningful dialogue. It is South Africa’s view that in the
current context of the conflict in Ukraine, it is essential
that the United Nations adopt a draft resolution on the
humanitarian situation affecting the people of Ukraine
that is based on the principles that govern humanitarian
assistance — humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence. Those principles provide the foundations
for humanitarian action and are central to establishing
and maintaining access to the people affected. It is
important that the draft resolution express concern
about the humanitarian situation and call on all parties
to abide by international humanitarian law.
South Africa has explained to Ukraine the
rationale for introducing its own draft resolution. South
Africa will abstain in the voting on draft resolution
A/ES-11/L.2. We have submitted draft resolution
A/ES-11/L.3, which we believe is more conducive to
a comprehensive humanitarian response. Regarding
the action we will take this morning, it is crucial
that all voices be heard and given an equal chance.
There should be no attempt to muzzle those we see as
different from us. That would be attacking the core of
what the United Nations is about, undermining its basic

A/ES-11/PV.9

tenets and setting precedents we will regret for years to
come. Following the action by the Assembly on draft
resolution A/ES-11/L.2 this morning, South Africa
therefore formally requests that the Assembly should
vote on draft resolution A/ES-11/L.3.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote before taking action on
the draft resolutions.
Before the Assembly takes a decision on draft
resolutions A/ES-11/L.2 and A/ES-11/L.3, I would like
to address the question of the majority required for their
adoption. In the light of paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article
18 of the Charter of the United Nations, if there is no
objection to taking action on those draft resolutions, a
two-thirds majority of members present and voting is
required for their adoption.
As indicated by the President at the 7th plenary
meeting yesterday morning (see A/ES-11/PV.7), the
Assembly will consider the two draft resolutions it has
before it, taking into account rule 91 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, which states that
“[i]f two or more proposals relate to the same
question, the General Assembly shall, unless it
decides otherwise, vote on the proposals in the order
in which they have been submitted. The General
Assembly may, after each vote on a proposal,
decide whether to vote on the next proposal.”
The Assembly will therefore consider the draft proposals
in the order in which they have been submitted, which
means that the draft proposal contained in document
A/ES-11/L.2, which was submitted first, will be
considered first.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolutions A/ES-11/L.2 and A/ES-11/L.3, one by
one. We turn first to draft resolution A/ES-11/L.2,
entitled “Humanitarian consequences of the aggression
against Ukraine”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/ES-11/L.2, and in addition to the delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors: Afghanistan, Andorra, Argentina,
the Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Cambodia, Chile, the

22-2987211/25

A/ES-11/PV.9

Democratic Republic of the Congo, Grenada, Guyana,
Haiti, Israel, Jamaica, Kiribati, Liberia, Malawi,
Myanmar, the Niger, Papua New Guinea, Peru, the
Republic of Moldova, Samoa, Singapore, Suriname,
Switzerland, Timor-Leste, Tonga and Tuvalu.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Chad,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Montenegro, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Sudan, Spain, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Yemen, Zambia
Against:
Belarus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Eritrea, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab Republic
12/25

24/03/2022

Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Armenia, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi,
Central African Republic, China, Congo, Cuba,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
Guinea-Bissau, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic,
Madagascar,
Mali,
Mongolia,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nicaragua, Pakistan,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Tajikistan, Togo,
Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan,
Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Draft resolution A/ES-11/L.2 was adopted by 140 votes
to 5, with 38 abstentions (resolution ES-11/2).
The Acting President: The representative of South
Africa has requested that the Assembly also take action
on draft resolution A/ES-11/L.3.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine,
who wishes to speak on a point of order.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I would like to request
clarification on a point of order from the Secretariat.
According to rule 91 of the rules of procedure, South
Africa could not request a vote on draft resolution
A/ES-11/L.3 until after the voting on resolution ES11/2 was completed. I would like to know when South
Africa requested the vote.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): South Africa requests
that a vote be taken on draft resolution A/ES-11/L.3.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine on a point of order.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): This is an attempt to
confuse the General Assembly and a failure to follow
the rules. I would like to explain my reasons for asking
for a procedural motion.
The General Assembly is already perceived by the
peoples of the world to be inconsistent in thoughts,
beliefs, attitudes and courses of action, especially with
regard to decisions and changes in attitude. It is called
cognitive dissonance. We see the similarities between
draft resolution A/ES-11/L.3 and its twin brother — the
defunct Russian draft resolution (S/2022/231)proposed
in the Security Council (see S/PV.9002), which received
just two votes in support. This draft is a ticket to a
public perception of defeat for the Assembly. Anyone
22-29872

24/03/2022

who thinks that draft resolution A/ES-11/L.3 is about
Ukraine is totally wrong. Its text has never been a
product of consultations with Ukraine or of crossregional consultations, unlike resolution ES-11/2,
which we just adopted by an overwhelming majority.
Draft resolution A/ES-11/L.3 is a text promoted
unilaterally by one country, prompted by another that
did not even care to hide it. Whatever the ultimate result
of the Assembly’s action is, if there is action on draft
resolution A/ES-11/L.3 it will certainly mean that the
Assembly’s authority is further undermined if not lost
altogether. If that is not compelling enough for some,
because maybe the Assembly’s authority and image is
not that important to them, I can offer another analogy.
Imagine holding a dying child. Imagine that instead of
administering to that child the proper medicine — albeit
bitter and with many side effects, but at least offering
a chance to save the child — the choice is made to take
a nameless, generic, inexpensive placebo handed over
by a big supplier. Will we choose that option? Will
we leave the dying child with no chance at all just
because the nameless, generic pill was so easy to get
and to swallow? Let us think about it. That is exactly
what document A/ES-11/L.3 is. It is fresh paint on the
mouldy, rotten structure of the Assembly. But it is not
paint, it is actually the blood of Ukrainian children,
women and defenders. Let us spare the Assembly that
shame. Let us prove that the Assembly is still a solid
structure and that we are the United Nations, wise
enough to avert imminent disaster.
Pursuant to rule 91 of the General Assembly’s rules
of procedure, we propose that the Assembly decide
not to vote on the draft resolution proposed by South
Africa. We urge all delegations to vote against the
proposal of South Africa to go ahead with a vote on
draft resolution A/ES-11/L.3. Before that, I would like
to ask the President to explain very carefully to all of
us what the votes mean, so that there is no confusion,
because the entire aim of what is going on right now is
to spread confusion in the General Assembly.
The Acting President: The representative of
Ukraine has objected to the proposal that the General
Assembly consider draft resolution A/ES-11/L.3,
taking into account rule 91 of the rules of procedure.
Before putting the motion to a vote, I want to inform
the Assembly that a vote against is a vote against
considering draft resolution A/ES-11/L.3.

A/ES-11/PV.9

I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): We have
two proposals. The representative of South Africa has
proposed that after the General Assembly’s adoption
of resolution ES-11/2, the Assembly should take action
on draft resolution A/ES-11/L.3. That was what the
representative of South Africa said, including in her
explanation of position — that the Assembly should
take action on draft resolution A/ES-11/L.3.
The representative of Ukraine has just objected to
the proposal that the Assembly should consider draft
resolution A/ES-11/L.3 and so we have to go to a vote.
Those who believe that the Assembly should take action
on draft resolution A/ES-11/L.3 will vote yes. Those
who consider that the Assembly should not proceed to
take action on draft resolution A/ES-11/L.3 — in other
words, should put A/ES-11/L.3 aside — should vote no.
The Acting President: I thank the representative
of the Secretariat for the clarification.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Australia on a point of order.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): Judging by some of the
chatter in the Hall, I think it may be of assistance to
delegations if the Secretariat would again explain the
motion that is currently before the General Assembly
and what voting in favour of it or against it would result
in. This is a significant vote, and I therefore think it
would benefit delegations to hear again precisely what
it is we are voting on.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation on a point
of order.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Sir, I would like to point out that you
announced a vote. The representative of the Secretariat
explained to us what that vote meant. As we know,
according to the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly, nobody can interrupt a vote after it has been
announced by the President.
The Acting President: Let us move forward with
the voting.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

22-2987213/25

A/ES-11/PV.9

24/03/2022

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): The General
Assembly is now voting on a motion to take action on
draft resolution A/ES-11/L.3. Those who consider that
the Assembly should take action on the draft resolution
should vote in favour of the motion. Those who consider
that the Assembly should not proceed to take action on
the draft resolution should vote against the motion.
Those abstaining should press the button for abstention.

Abstaining:
Argentina, Belize, Bhutan, Burundi, Chile,
Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Ghana, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Libya, Malaysia, Mexico,
Nepal, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Qatar, Sao Tome
and Principe, Serbia, South Sudan, Sri Lanka,
Switzerland, Togo, Tunisia, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Zimbabwe

The Acting President: I shall now put to the vote the
motion submitted by the representative of South Africa
that action be taken on draft resolution A/ES-11/L.3. A
recorded vote has been requested.

The motion to take action on draft resolution
A/ES-11/L.3 was rejected by 67 votes to 50, with
36 abstentions.

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Central African Republic, China, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, GuineaBissau, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mongolia,
Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, South Africa,
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, Yemen
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Myanmar, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, North
Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Papua New Guinea,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
14/25

The Acting President: Since the motion for the
General Assembly to take action on draft resolution
A/ES-11/L.3 was not adopted, the Assembly will take
no action on that draft resolution.
Before giving the floor for explanations of vote
after the vote, I would like to remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): India remains deeply
concerned about the ongoing situation in Ukraine,
which has continued to deteriorate rapidly since the
beginning of the hostilities. The conflict has resulted
in civilian deaths and nearly 10 million people have
either become displaced internally or have moved to
neighbouring countries. We have consistently called for
a cessation of hostilities.
The humanitarian situation continues to worsen,
particularly in conflict zones in urban areas. Women,
children and the elderly are disproportionately affected
as the conflict is prolonged. We reiterate our call for
an immediate ceasefire. Addressing the humanitarian
needs of the population affected is urgent. In that regard,
we support the initiatives of the United Nations and its
agencies. We hope that the international community
will continue to respond positively to the humanitarian
needs of the people of Ukraine, including by extending
generous support to the United Nations humanitarian
flash appeal launched by the Secretary-General and
the Ukraine Regional Refugee Response Plan. India
has already sent more than 90 tons of humanitarian
supplies to Ukraine and its neighbours as part of the
nine separate tranches of humanitarian assistance
delivered so far. The supplies have included medicines
and other essential relief materials. We are in the
process of sending further supplies in the coming days.
22-29872

24/03/2022

A/ES-11/PV.9

India ensured the safe return of about 22,500
Indians from Ukraine through Operation Ganga, which
involved 90 evacuation flights. In that process, we also
assisted nationals from 18 other countries. We deeply
appreciate the efforts of the Ukrainian authorities
and those of neighbouring countries to ensure their
safe return. I want to underscore that it is important
for humanitarian action to always be guided by the
principles of humanitarian assistance — humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence — and that
it should not be politicized. We firmly believe that the
efforts of the United Nations should contribute to a
de-escalation of the conflict, facilitate an immediate
cessation of hostilities in order to promote dialogue
and diplomacy and bring the parties together to seek
an immediate end to people’s suffering. We continue
to underline the need for respect for the Charter of the
United Nations, international law and the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States.

waves of refugees and internally displaced persons.
In that regard, I should not fail to thank Ukraine’s
neighbours for their efforts to alleviate the suffering
caused by this crisis and facilitate safe passage for
students and others residing in Ukraine.

India abstained in the voting on resolution ES-11/2
because what is required now is to focus on a cessation
of hostilities and delivering urgent humanitarian
assistance. Resolution ES-11/2 did not fully reflect our
expectations regarding those challenges.

In that context, we also stress how important it is
that the international community not remain silent about
the human suffering of the millions of refugees and
displaced and besieged people in other areas of conflict
in the world, especially in the Middle East and on the
African continent, where decades-long conflicts still
persist. The international community should address
them with the same commitment, based on the same
standard and the same humanitarian values, in line with
the purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and
the principles of international law.

Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Tunisia
voted in favour of the General Assembly’s adoption of
resolution ES-11/2 today based on the high importance
that we attach to addressing the humanitarian situation,
as well as the need for all the parties to uphold the
provisions of international humanitarian law. Our
decision was also based on our firm commitment to
preserving life, ensuring the right to life, providing
protection and access to humanitarian assistance and
putting an end to the humanitarian suffering of innocent
civilians, above all children, women, the elderly and
people with disabilities. They are the primary victims
in any conflict and pay the highest price in wars through
various kinds of suffering, with effects that can have
repercussions for multiple generations.
The worsening humanitarian crises have become
a hallmark of the various conflicts happening around
the world today, including in Ukraine. As much as
we commend the efforts of the United Nations and
humanitarian relief organizations to alleviate their
impact, we also reaffirm the importance of focusing
efforts on stopping this war and helping the parties
concerned reach a peaceful settlement that can ensure
a restoration of security and stability while also halting
the deterioration of the humanitarian situation and the

The driving force behind the establishment of
the United Nations was the desire to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. More than seven
decades later, millions of people in many conflict areas
around the world are still being subjected to killing,
humiliation, starvation, sieges and every other kind
of violation of their basic rights. While we appreciate
the eagerness of Member States to bring an end to the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Ukraine, we
had hoped that the international community would be
more united and more willing to speak with one voice
regarding that humanitarian situation, which cannot be
a matter for contention.

In conclusion, my country calls for intensifying the
international efforts to urge the parties to the conflict
to reach a peaceful settlement of this war, whose
repercussions have extended beyond the region to
include the rest of the world, especially the developing
countries whose food and energy security is under threat
and that are still suffering from the economic and social
consequences of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Mr. Vongnorkeo (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic): The Lao People’s Democratic Republic is
gravely concerned about the humanitarian situation
in Ukraine. My delegation welcomes and supports all
the humanitarian efforts to assist the Ukrainian people
and all the foreign nationals who are affected. We
commend all the countries and organizations that have
extended swift humanitarian assistance to Ukraine. We
are also hopeful that all the parties and organizations
concerned will continue to ensure the safety of refugees
and provide secured passage for them in and around

22-2987215/25

A/ES-11/PV.9

24/03/2022

the conflict zones. The top priority now is to prevent
the situation from escalating further, while salvaging
every glimmer of hope for an immediate and possibly
permanent cessation of the hostilities.

account the concerns on both sides. In addition, the
parties to the conflict should not use civilians as human
shields against gunfire, which amounts to a violation of
international law.

My delegation abstained in the voting on resolution
ES-11/2, entitled “Humanitarian consequences of the
aggression against Ukraine”, because we believe that
a humanitarian resolution of the General Assembly
should be adopted by consensus and that its language
should be well-balanced, non-politicized and conducive
to easing tensions and creating favourable conditions
for all humanitarian operations on the ground, in
line with the fundamental principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence, as affirmed
in resolutions 46/182 and 58/114. What is urgent now
is to seek a political and diplomatic solution to the
conflict, and we welcome all the ongoing efforts and
peace negotiations between the parties concerned.
Refraining from any action that could escalate tensions
or hamper diplomatic efforts is therefore vital. Only
diplomatic means can lead to a ceasefire agreement and
permit unhindered humanitarian action, because we
are already witnessing negative consequences that are
liable to have long-term effects for innocent people in
the region and the global community at large.

Finally, Rwanda calls for a sincere commitment
to protecting civilians. The ongoing crisis is causing
grave harm to innocent civilians, whose future is now
uncertain. We encourage the parties concerned to give
peace a chance. We want to reiterate that a lasting
solution to the current crisis lies primarily in the hands
of both the Russian Federation and Ukraine. They have
the key and the padlock, and they can unlock it.

Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): I am taking the floor
to explain Rwanda’s vote on resolution ES-11/2, which
the Assembly just adopted. We voted in favour of the
resolution in order to reiterate firmly our position
expressed previously in this emergency special session
(see A/ES-11/PV.5).
We need to ensure that there is a major focus on
achieving three main objectives: protecting civilians,
providing humanitarian support and ensuring dialogue.
In that regard, Rwanda very much wanted to see all
Member States unite around a humanitarian resolution
of the General Assembly. It is unfortunate that there is
such division when the lives of innocent civilians are at
stake. There is no guarantee that the ongoing war and
the resulting crisis will bring peace. Rather, they are
causing human suffering. Rwanda therefore joins many
other delegations in calling for an immediate cessation
of hostilities. We fully support the international efforts
to de-escalate the war, as well as any mechanism that
can bring peace. The diplomatic options represent the
best solutions for achieving sustainable peace. In that
regard, we call for open dialogue and negotiations in
good faith. A lasting solution can be achieved only
through dialogue between both parties, taking into
16/25

Mr. Abd Aziz (Malaysia): Malaysia voted in
favour of resolution ES-11/2. We are deeply concerned
about the humanitarian situation in Ukraine and have
been closely monitoring the developments in and
around the country, including what is happening on
the ground. We strongly urge all the parties concerned
to take immediate steps to de-escalate and continue
dialogue and negotiations in order to prevent further
devastation and loss of life. We call for safe and
unhindered access to humanitarian assistance for those
affected in and around Ukraine. We call for respect for
and the protection of civilian lives and infrastructure.
Malaysia urges all the parties to fully comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
We also want to address the issue of what happened
in the General Assembly today, when the Assembly
had to consider resolution ES-11/2 and draft resolution
A/ES-11/L.3, both on the same topic. We saw similarities
between the texts and merit in both, and we would have
voted in favour of both had they both been put to a vote.
Malaysia is disappointed that the authors of the two drafts
did not work together to reach agreement on a single
text. We believe deeply in the importance of having a
focused and balanced resolution that addresses the dire
humanitarian situation on the ground. The submission
to the Assembly today of two draft resolutions on the
same issue and the need that resulted to consider a
procedural motion does not convey the notion that the
United Nations — and the international community
itself — is united in its solidarity with those affected by
the humanitarian crisis, and that is unfortunate. There
was also a glaring absence of open-ended discussions
among the wider United Nations membership. We feel
that more open-ended consultations should have been
conducted because they would have enabled the authors
to engage the wider membership and hear their views
22-29872

24/03/2022

on the matter, especially since there were two draft
resolutions on the same issue.
We reiterate the inviolability of the fundamental
principles of the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of countries and the peaceful settlement of disputes in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We will continue to support the international efforts to
seek a peaceful and amicable solution to the conflict in
the interests of maintaining regional and international
peace and security and promoting greater prosperity.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I am not going to address the issue of the
wars that have been started by the countries that today
are demanding a cessation of hostilities and claiming
to be peacemakers. For eight years those countries said
nothing about the crimes committed by the Kyiv regime
against its own citizens, both in Donbas and throughout
the entire territory of Ukraine. But I would like to
discuss one particular date. It has been noted today
that 24 March marks a month since the special military
operation began. However, it is also the anniversary
of 24 March 1999, the day the United States and its
NATO allies launched an armed aggression against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia that continued for 78
days and nights.
The NATO forces flew more than 35,000 sorties,
launched approximately 3,000 cruise missiles and
dropped more than 10,000 tons of explosives. It was
the equivalent in TNT of five times that of the atomic
bomb the United States military dropped on Hiroshima
in 1945. More than 2,000 Serbs died in the bombing,
including women, children and the elderly. They
were later referred to cynically as collateral damage.
Thousands of civilian objects in dozens of cities were
destroyed. The autonomous province of Kosovo was
separated from the country by force. NATO’s aggression
against Yugoslavia in 1999 was the first armed attack
on a sovereign State in Europe since 1945. That was
the tragic contribution to European history made by
the “strictly defensive” NATO bloc, as it calls itself. I
could have cited more examples that others have also
mentioned here today.
I do not think it is worth dwelling on the reasons
why Russia voted against resolution ES-11/2, the
pseudo-humanitarian resolution submitted by Western
countries and Ukraine. Why pseudo-humanitarian?
Because its authors needed it solely so that they could
once again condemn Russia, hang various labels on my

A/ES-11/PV.9

country and conduct a kind of roll call of all who were
willing to subscribe to a one-sided interpretation of the
situation. We are grateful to all who found the courage
to consider all of this with an independent mind.
Resolution ES-11/2 is also pseudo-humanitarian
because if our Western colleagues really cared about
humanitarian issues, they would have supported draft
resolution S/2022/231, the genuinely humanitarian text
that Russia submitted to the Security Council yesterday
(see S/PV.9002). However, political considerations
prevailed. The result was that crucial decisions
concerning humanitarian workers on the ground were
not taken, and the resolution that the General Assembly
has just adopted cannot make up for that in any way.
Besides that, we should not fail to point out that under
unprecedented pressure from the Western countries,
the Assembly has once again exceeded its remit in
attempting to issue instructions on questions relating
to the maintenance of international peace and security,
in violation of paragraph 2 of Article 11 of the Charter
of the United Nations. Such instructions, adopted ultra
vires, are null and void and have no legal implications
ab initio.
We also regret the procedural hassle, unworthy
of the United Nations, that Western countries started
to prevent a vote on draft resolution A/ES-11/L.3,
submitted by our colleagues from South Africa. Our
Western colleagues were too afraid of encountering
a situation in which their self-appointed monopoly
in the General Assembly on advancing anti-Russian
draft resolutions on the situation in Ukraine would be
undermined. The initiators of this row gave the game
away when they acted as they did. We thank our South
African colleagues for their initiative and resolve,
as well as the countries that were willing to support
their draft resolution. I think the Member States will
remember this lesson from our Western colleagues on
the manipulation of their humanitarian principles.
Mr. Larbaoui (Algeria): First of all, on behalf of
the Permanent Mission of Algeria to the United Nations,
I would like to express my deepest condolences and
sincere sympathy to the United States Government
and to our colleagues at the United States Mission for
the sad loss of former Secretary of State Madeleine
Albright, who was very close to my country, Algeria,
and with whom we worked closely to finalize the
Algiers Agreement of December 2000, which brought
an end to the war between our brother countries of
Ethiopia and Eritrea.

22-2987217/25

A/ES-11/PV.9

I would now like to return to the explanation of
Algeria’s vote on resolution ES-11/2.
(spoke in Arabic)
Algeria is deeply concerned about the deteriorating
crisis in Ukraine and its repercussions for the
humanitarian situation, a tragic reality that more than
ever demands that we all abide by the basic rules and
principles of international humanitarian law that define
international humanitarian obligations, especially
the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Additional
Protocol of 1977, and international human rights law.
In that regard, Algeria urges the Security Council to
assume its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security and to cooperate in
working for world peace in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations. Algeria reaffirms its firm
attachment to the purposes and principles of the Charter
and the rules of international law, based on respect for
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of States, along with mutual respect for international
obligations and security guarantees.
Algeria also stresses the importance of stepping
up diplomatic efforts in order to end the current
humanitarian crisis in Ukraine, and reiterates its
support for all efforts aimed at easing tensions by means
of dialogue and negotiations, which represent the only
way to resolve the crisis, prevent further bloodshed
and address the tragic humanitarian situation, without
discrimination, and which would help to restore security
and stability and the safety of the countries and peoples
of the region.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Brazil voted in favour of
resolution ES-11/2 because it is urgent that the United
Nations sends a strong message on the humanitarian
situation in Ukraine. The General Assembly cannot
remain a bystander while the world is witnessing
once-peaceful cities rapidly turning into war zones, as
well as the shocking images documenting the conflict
and the desperation of thousands of civilians trapped in
battle zones with no food, water or electricity. Indeed,
the dire situation on the ground demanded a swift
reaction from us.
However, we deeply regret that the Assembly was
not able to speak with one voice today. Promoting
compliance with international humanitarian law,
protecting civilians and calling for peace are objectives
that should unite rather than divide us. Brazil would
have much preferred a consensus text resulting from
18/25

24/03/2022

effective, transparent and inclusive negotiations rather
than a fait accompli on a draft resolution that was not
open to negotiation and whose language contained
clearly divisive elements, many of which went beyond
the humanitarian aspects of the conflict. We would
have preferred a resolution with strictly humanitarian
messages that called for an immediate cessation of
hostilities and respect for humanitarian law. Essentially,
today was a moment for a constructive resolution, one
that could influence the behaviour of the parties on the
ground, promote effective humanitarian arrangements
and create the space so desperately needed for
negotiations in order to end the hostilities. We have
doubts as to whether the resolution that we adopted
today will have that effect.
The text adopted also fails to address a pressing
concern arising from the ongoing crisis — the
humanitarian consequences of indiscriminate economic
sanctions, which will inevitably affect every country,
particularly developing nations. They will not only
add to the hardships of economies that are already
strained as they recover from the pandemic, but will
probably also hit their most vulnerable populations. In
attempting to correct a wrong, these broad economic
sanctions may in the end create more harm than they
were intended to prevent.
This is a watershed moment for the United Nations
and multilateralism in general. The gradual erosion of
the rules prohibiting the use of force has culminated in
what is one of the greatest challenges to our collective
security system since its inception. And we are now
at risk of further jeopardizing the basic tenets, norms
and institutions that the international community
has built, with enormous effort. We should not
politicize humanitarian messages or selectively apply
international humanitarian law, which was created
precisely in order to safeguard minimum standards of
human dignity regardless of how inexcusable the causes
of a war may be.
It is commonly said that war begins when diplomacy
fails. We are concerned about the possibility that we may
have missed an opportunity to use diplomacy to create
bridges and facilitate effective humanitarian actions
that could represent a first step towards peace. There
can be no military solution to the conflict in Ukraine.
It is our responsibility in the General Assembly to keep
the paths of dialogue open and contribute effectively
to a lasting solution to this crisis. Brazil would have
also voted in favour of draft resolution A/ES-11/L.3,
22-29872

24/03/2022

submitted by the South African delegation, and we are
grateful to South Africa for its efforts to synthesize
the most pressing issues of the humanitarian situation
in Ukraine. The draft text focused appropriately on
humanitarian aspects, thereby complementing the
strong political message conveyed in resolution ES-11/1,
adopted by the Assembly in its emergency special
session on March 2 (see A/ES-11/PV.5).
Draft resolution A/ES-11/L.3 reaffirmed the
international community’s commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of all States, including Ukraine, within
their international recognized borders. It called for an
immediate cessation of hostilities, which is the most
effective way to address the humanitarian situation in
any armed conflict. It also demanded full respect on
the part of all parties for international humanitarian
law, in line with the spirit that guided the creation and
development of the rules of war. It addressed issues
regarding humanitarian assistance, which is urgently
needed in Ukraine.
Brazil fully subscribes to the messages conveyed
in South Africa’s draft resolution. Some may argue that
it competed with resolution ES-11/2, which the General
Assembly just adopted. As I said previously, we would
have indeed preferred to have had only one consensus
text before us today, negotiated with the entire
membership in a transparent and inclusive manner.
However, both texts contain important humanitarian
messages. They do not contradict each other, and Brazil
sincerely regrets that the Assembly declined to take
action on a draft resolution submitted by a Member
State that took nothing away from resolution ES-11/2
and could have enabled a greater number of members
to coalesce around the humanitarian needs in Ukraine.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
would like to emphasize the following points regarding
resolution ES-11/2, on the humanitarian situation in
Ukraine, which was just adopted, and which we voted
for, based on our firm belief in the rules of international
humanitarian law on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
First, all parties should be committed to refraining
from politicizing international humanitarian action and
any relevant resolutions. Egypt was uncomfortable with
the rigidity displayed by some Member States in the
negotiations on resolution ES-11/2 and the humanitarian

A/ES-11/PV.9

draft resolution A/ES-11/L.3, undermining the
prospects for achieving the consensus we all desire.
Secondly, Egypt reiterates its rejection of the
approach that has employed economic sanctions outside
the framework of the mechanisms of the multilateral
international order. Their serious consequences are
resulting in suffering for civilians and damage to the
global economy, which has not yet fully recovered from
the repercussions of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Thirdly, Egypt would like to note that the continuing
conflict has already increased the costs of food and
energy imports and is threatening international trade
flows and the stability of global food markets. It is
therefore urgent that we address the issue internationally
in order to ensure that food-importing countries do not
face unequal burdens.
While we emphasize the importance of ensuring
that all the parties assume their responsibilities in this
crisis, directing the flow of humanitarian assistance to
all in need and enabling foreign residents of Ukraine
to cross borders without discrimination and across
all lines, we also stress that it is imperative to find a
speedy political solution that can end the crisis as soon
as possible, in a manner that addresses the concerns and
interests of all the parties involved as well as the root
causes of the crisis itself. That should be a top priority
for the entire international community, especially the
United Nations system.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
country, Iraq, has suffered in wars over the past few
decades. The Iraqi people know very well what it means
to be in dire need of humanitarian aid in times of war
and crisis. The United Nations and our partners and
friends have provided us with the humanitarian support
we needed to overcome the effects of those crises. Out
of our sense of responsibility towards the Ukrainian
people, we supported resolution ES-11/2, which aims
to provide and enhance humanitarian assistance for
those in need in Ukraine. Had we had the opportunity,
we would also have supported draft resolution A/ES11/L.3, submitted by South Africa.
Mrs. Sulimani (Sierra Leone): The delegation of
Sierra Leone would like to add its voice to those of
previous speakers to convey our deepest sympathy and
sincere and heartfelt condolences through the United
States Mission to the United Nations to the people
and the Government of the United States for the death
yesterday of former Secretary of State Madeleine

22-2987219/25

A/ES-11/PV.9

Albright, who was a good friend of Sierra Leone. I
say so because in 1999, when war was raging in my
country, Ms. Albright, then Secretary of State, visited
Sierra Leone in support of peace and reconciliation and
to speak with our leaders. That will never be forgotten,
and we are eternally grateful to her. May her soul gently
rest in perfect peace.
My delegation is taking the floor to explain
Sierra Leone’s vote on resolution ES-11/2, which we
just adopted.
In our explanation of our vote on resolution ES-11/2
of 2 March (see A/ES-11/PV.5), we expressed our grave
concern about the deplorable and serious situation that
has unfolded in Ukraine, with regional and international
ramifications for peace and security. We expressed
our serious concern about the worsening refugee
and humanitarian situation in and around Ukraine.
Today we reiterate our call for equal treatment for all
seeking safety and refuge and for taking meaningful
action to ensure that all who are fleeing or are directly
affected by the conflict to be treated equally, without
discrimination, particularly with regard to race or
immigration status.
Sierra Leone is gravely concerned about the dire
humanitarian situation in Ukraine and therefore voted
in favour of resolution ES-11/2. Our vote on resolution
ES-11/1 of 2 March was based on our fundamental belief
in the sanctity of the Charter of the United Nations
and the purposes and principles of our Organization.
We emphasized the need for consistent and goodfaith application of the principles of the Charter
and international law, while at the same time not
absolving the United Nations for any action or inaction,
particularly with regard to addressing questions of
peace and security in Africa.
Similarly, we recognize as a matter of principle
that humanitarian resolutions are meant to enable the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, in accordance
with the principles of humanity, neutrality and
impartiality. In that regard, we were guided in our vote
by the framework agreed by the General Assembly
in resolution 46/182 of 1991. We gave appropriate
consideration to the principle of respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and national unity of
States, in accordance with the Charter, and the need for
humanitarian assistance to be provided with the consent
of the State concerned. We therefore voted this morning
out of consideration for the accepted principles for the
20/25

24/03/2022

delivery of humanitarian assistance. Let me conclude
by calling once again for an immediate cessation of
hostilities and urging for a continuation of the ceasefire
talks, which would establish a path for the good-faith
diplomatic efforts needed to resolve the conflict.
Mr. Nasir (Indonesia): Indonesia expresses its
deep condolences to the people and the Government of
the United States for the passing of former Secretary of
State Madeleine Albright. May her soul rest in peace.
We thank the delegations of Ukraine, France
and Mexico, along with the core group, as well as
the delegation of South Africa, for their initiatives.
Indonesia voted in favour of resolution ES-11/2 because
action is needed to address the dire humanitarian
situation in Ukraine. However, we deeply regret that
the General Assembly was not able to speak with a
strong and united voice, which is currently urgent and
vital to reflecting our commitment to saving lives.
However, consensus has become increasingly difficult
to reach and seems to be a luxury in the Assembly,
even on matters as important as humanitarian issues.
Indonesia deeply regrets that the world had to see today
how divided we are in the United Nations on a matter of
such great importance.
We were presented with two draft resolutions,
A/ES-11/L.2 and A/ES-11/L.3, which addressed
identical issues. This kind of situation is usually the
result of an absence of political will, but that was
not the case in this regard. Indeed, we saw strong
political will on the part of all Member States with
regard to addressing the humanitarian situation in
and around Ukraine. What was at fault was a failure
or unwillingness to have inclusive consultations and
dialogue among ourselves. Indonesia believes that it
is always imperative for all the parties to sit together
to try to iron out differences and achieve a delicate
balance. Considering the importance of the issue at
stake, we were ready to vote for both draft resolutions,
based on our belief that regardless of our differences,
our ultimate objective must be to save people’s lives.
We regret that today events unfolded that prevented
the proposals from being considered equally. We hope
we can do better to uphold the democratic spirit of the
Assembly going forward.
Every day we continue to witness the humanitarian
situation worsening in and around Ukraine. Its impact is
also now being felt by innocent civilians in many leastdeveloped and developing countries as a result of the
22-29872

24/03/2022

rising prices of basic food commodities. We may have
a larger-scale humanitarian crisis on our hands if that
trend persists. We therefore reiterate our call to stop
the war. It will be crucial to de-escalate the hostilities
without delay, allow access for humanitarian assistance
and facilitate safe passage for civilians fleeing Ukraine.
But most importantly, we believe it is urgent that
we push for a lasting peace. To that end, we need to
focus on rebuilding trust rather than sowing discord,
in order to enable a political settlement conducive to
a positive outcome that could pave the way for ending
this perilous war.
Mr. Giorgio (Eritrea): My delegation is taking
the floor to deliver Eritrea’s explanation of its vote
on resolution ES-11/2. Regrettably, resolution ES-11/2
contains references to resolution ES-11/1, adopted
on 2 March, which my delegation voted against
(see A/ES-11/PV.5).
Eritrea is disappointed that the humanitarian issue
is being politicized. We reject any politicization of
humanitarian issues, as it undermines action geared
to addressing the core humanitarian situation of the
peoples and countries affected. Had resolution ES11/2 focused solely on humanitarian priorities, it would
have been possible to adopt it by consensus, resulting
in a much stronger and more united voice on the
humanitarian principles that matter most in the context
of the agenda item we have been discussing for the past
two days (see A/ES-11/PV.7 and A/ES-11/PV.8).
Eritrea appreciates South Africa’s initiative and
was prepared to support draft resolution A/ES-11/L.3,
the text it submitted. In considering humanitarian
assistance, it is important that the principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence be upheld and
all humanitarian actions guided by full respect for those
principles. Despite the geopolitical differences between
the United States-led NATO countries and Russia,
which are having grave humanitarian consequences for
Ukraine, Eritrea would like to stress the importance
of ensuring that all of the parties take concrete steps
to respect their obligations under the international
humanitarian principles in order to see that all civilians
of all nationalities, including African nationals, are
fully respected and protected.
It is important to make every effort possible to
minimize the humanitarian consequences for the
civilian population. The humanitarian situation
unfolding in Ukraine demands agreement on a ceasefire

A/ES-11/PV.9

and the establishment of a humanitarian pause to
ensure the safe, rapid, voluntary and unhindered
evacuation of civilians. While the task of providing
humanitarian assistance is ongoing, there should also
be an earnest effort on the political track to end the
conflict, and in that regard, Eritrea reiterates its call for
the peaceful resolution of the conflict through dialogue
and diplomacy.
Finally, on a more serious political note, the
current campaign or drive to return to a unipolar world
order by tightening the noose on Russia, as Eritrea’s
Ministry for Foreign Affairs has put it, is becoming an
increasingly dangerous and risky military confrontation
that runs counter to the fundamental pillars of robust
multilateralism and the lofty aspirations of the majority
of the world’s peoples and nations. We must remain
guided by the Charter of the United Nations, in full
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of States, if we are to establish
a peaceful world order. In this tumultuous period of
great uncertainty, Eritrea wishes peace to Ukraine and
Russia and to the rest of the region.
Mr. Prongthura (Thailand): Thailand joins others
in expressing its deep condolences to the Government
and the Permanent Mission of the United States for the
sudden passing of former Secretary of State Madeleine
Albright. May her soul rest in eternal peace.
Thailand voted in favour of resolution ES-11/2
because of the overriding importance that we attach
to the protection of civilians, including humanitarian
personnel and people in vulnerable situations. Our
support for the resolution also underlines our deep
concern about the ongoing humanitarian crisis in
Ukraine. We urge all the parties to fully comply with
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, protect civilians and civilian objects
and ensure the unhindered provision of humanitarian
assistance without discrimination or politicization. In
that regard, we commend Ukraine’s neighbours and the
other States that have quickly mobilized humanitarian
assistance for those in need.
For its part, Thailand reaffirms its responsibility
as part of the collective global efforts to alleviate the
plight of the civilians affected. We have provided
humanitarian assistance, including food, medical and
other essential supplies, through the Red Cross Society
of Ukraine. The only way to mitigate the humanitarian
consequences of the crisis is by settling the dispute

22-2987221/25

A/ES-11/PV.9

peacefully. We continue to hope for progress in the
bilateral dialogue between the parties concerned and for
every effort to be made to achieve a peaceful settlement
of the situation.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Jordan
voted in favour of resolution ES-11/2 based on our
position on the importance of respecting the provisions
of international law, international humanitarian law
and the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. We call on all the parties to the
conflict to establish a ceasefire and engage in effective
negotiations in order to restore peace and stability,
alleviate the human suffering that has resulted from the
crisis and enable refugees to return home.
Jordan also calls on the parties to the conflict
to abide by their obligations under international
humanitarian law in times of armed conflict, which
include refraining from targeting civilians and civil
installations and adhering to the principle of precaution,
which protects civilians from the scourge of war. They
should also protect civilians and humanitarian workers,
permit humanitarian access without hindrance or
preconditions and provide safe corridors for civilians
to exit cities and conflict zones.
Jordan supports the diplomatic efforts under way
and the role of the United Nations in reaching a political,
peaceful and sustainable solution to the conflict in
a manner that protects the legitimate interests of
all the parties and preserves Ukraine’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity.
Although Jordan voted in favour of resolution
ES-11/2, we emphasize the importance of examining all
allegations of violations of international humanitarian
law, because establishing the responsibility for all such
violations cannot be predetermined but is rather the
result of effective documentation of violations of the
rules pertaining to the law of armed conflict.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation abstained in the voting on resolution ES-11/2.
We reiterate our position on the current conflict as
we explained it during the meeting of the emergency
special session held on 2 March (see A/ES-11/PV.5).
The Islamic Republic of Iran is deeply concerned
about the deteriorating humanitarian situation in and
around Ukraine. We reiterate our principled position
regarding the need for disputes to be settled by peaceful
means, in accordance with international law, and
22/25

24/03/2022

underline the need for all parties to fully respect the
well-established provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, including international
humanitarian law. We emphasize that the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all States must be fully
respected and the safety and security of all civilians
and civilian infrastructure guaranteed. Iran reiterates
its call for an urgent cessation of hostilities and the
de-escalation of tensions in the current conflict and
encourages all the parties to pursue their concerns
through dialogue. We support the ongoing negotiations
between the parties and reiterate our urgent call for a
peaceful resolution of the conflict in accordance with
international law.
We believe that the resolution just adopted by the
General Assembly contains certain elements that go
beyond the scope of the humanitarian situation on the
ground and lacks realistic mechanisms for dealing with
the humanitarian aspects of the conflict. The Islamic
Republic of Iran emphasizes that the humanitarian
nature of assistance must always be upheld and that the
provision of such assistance should be guided solely by
the principles of humanity, neutrality and impartiality.
We urge all the parties to cooperate in advancing the
humanitarian response to the situation. In that regard,
we emphasize the importance of ensuring the provision
and effective delivery of humanitarian assistance
to the people in need, including refugees. We call
for the immediate facilitation of the safe, voluntary
and dignified transfer of all civilian refugees and
internally displaced persons from the areas affected by
the conflict.
Humanitarian issues have a prominent place
in Iran’s foreign policy. We once again express our
readiness to cooperate in coordinating and facilitating
the provision of humanitarian assistance to those in need
in the current conflict. In that context, we commend
the continued efforts of the Secretary-General and
United Nations agencies to deliver humanitarian aid
and assistance and protection for refugees.
Finally, my delegation regrets that Member States
were not given a chance to vote on draft resolution
A/ES-11/L.3, which focuses on humanitarian issues,
something that is urgently needed right now. Had it
been put to a vote, we would have voted in favour of it.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): Allow me to convey
my delegation’s deepest condolences on the passing of
former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright. She was
22-29872

24/03/2022

a great leader, a trailblazer and, most importantly, a role
model for so many women in diplomacy and foreign
policy, including me. I knew her personally as a great
champion of freedom and democracy around the world,
including in Lebanon.
We have just adopted resolution ES-11/2, on the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine, and Lebanon voted
in favour of it. We would have liked to see a resolution
on this important matter adopted by consensus and the
General Assembly united behind it. What do we do
now? Where do we go from here? Is resolution ES-11/2
going to be implemented? Is it more important to score
successes in voting than to make real progress on the
ground by helping the traumatized women and children
who are looking to us to stop this war? How much safer
are the civilians in Ukraine because of the adoption
of this resolution today? How much closer are we to a
solution and to peace today?
We are failing in our duty to stop the scourge of
war. We are failing the civilians in Ukraine. We are
failing the world, which is now standing on the brink of
a food crisis and prospects of hunger and famine. This
war is reverberating across the world, especially in
the least-developed and vulnerable countries that have
not yet recovered from the pandemic and the financial
crisis. It is high time for an immediate cessation of
hostilities. It is high time to alleviate the humanitarian
plight of civilians, especially children and women,
which continues to worsen by the day. It is high
time to achieve international cooperation in solving
international problems, as enshrined in paragraph 3 of
Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations.
In that regard, we reiterate our call for a peaceful
solution to this conflict through diplomacy, dialogue
and negotiations. I want to echo what my sister Mathu
Joyini, the Ambassador of South Africa, said in her
statement today. War has no heroes. Real heroes are
those who work for peace. The failure to stop a war
in Europe 76 years ago resulted in somewhere between
70 million and 85 million deaths in the Second World
War. We have to do everything in our capacity to stop
this war and make sure that it does not devolve into a
wider conflict. We in Lebanon know very well the price
of war and the consequences of inaction on lives and
livelihoods — not in one country alone, but around the
world. I call on all my colleagues here to act as heroes
for peace and today, after we leave this Hall, to embark
on a new path towards a consensus resolution that
unites us around peace. Today the Assembly clapped

A/ES-11/PV.9

when resolution ES-11/2 was adopted. I think the real
celebration and triumph will come when we vote to stop
this war and end the misery of the Ukrainian people.
Mr. Tlalajoe (Lesotho): Lesotho voted in favour
of resolution ES-11/2, motivated by our deep desire for
humanitarian action to be taken immediately, primarily
for Ukrainians and people of other nationalities
suffering as a result of the situation in that country.
The fundamental focus of Lesotho’s vote was therefore
on humanitarian action rather than the causes of the
conflict or any other factors that could escalate, fuel
or lead to further suffering. We do hope that after
the adoption of this resolution the focus will be on
humanity and action. As in our previous vote, in favour
of resolution ES-11/1 on 2 March (see A/ES-11/PV.5),
Lesotho’s position today was based on its respect for
the Charter of the United Nations, humanitarian law
and the territorial integrity of nations. We pray that we
will see a cessation of hostilities, a resolution of the
conflict by peaceful means and the restoration of peace
in the region.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote. We will now hear
statements after adoption.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French):
We have just adopted resolution ES-11/2, on the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine. It is a balanced text
that accurately reflects the disastrous situation on the
ground. It reiterates the urgency of putting an end to
the humanitarian disaster and respecting international
humanitarian law. It calls on Russia to stop its aggression
immediately. The text of the resolution, which is the
outcome of broad consultations with Ukraine and
Member States from all regions, was sponsored by 80
countries and adopted by an overwhelming majority of
Member States. It sends a very strong message from the
Assembly, and it is what Ukraine and Ukrainians need.
That is also why the European Union and its member
States supported Ukraine’s procedural motion. It is
now more important than ever for us to stand united
behind the universal principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international humanitarian law.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): I am delivering my
statement on behalf of the Nordic-Baltic countries:
Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway,
Sweden and, of course, my own country, Denmark.
Today we voted not to take action on draft
resolution A/ES-11/L.3, entitled “Humanitarian

22-2987223/25

A/ES-11/PV.9

situation emanating out of the conflict in Ukraine”,
submitted by South Africa. Let me be clear. In general,
South Africa’s draft resolution included messages and
principles that we support, as steadfast defenders of the
humanitarian principles and international humanitarian
law. Nevertheless, the decision to vote not to take action
on draft resolution A/ES-11/L.3 was not difficult, for
reasons that have already been stated today but that
bear repeating.
First, our problem with the text was less about what
was in it and more about what was not in it. It mentioned
only Ukraine. Yet Russia alone bears the responsibility
for the humanitarian catastrophe we are discussing
today, and Russia alone can end it. That responsibility
is clear, and the message that we send from the General
Assembly must be just as clear.
Secondly, our problem with the text was not who
was behind it, but who was not behind it. As Member
States of the United Nations, we have a strong tradition
of engaging on humanitarian crises together with the
country concerned, and those who sponsored South
Africa’s draft resolution are among the strongest
defenders of that principle. It was therefore particularly
regrettable that the text was drafted without the
engagement of Ukraine, and even more so that it was
submitted in competition with resolution ES-11/2, the
humanitarian resolution put forward by a cross-regional
group of countries, together with Ukraine, and adopted
by an overwhelming majority of the General Assembly.
It does not take much imagination for any of us to
put ourselves in the place of our Ukrainian colleagues.
A country has been invaded and its people are living
through a humanitarian disaster. How would any of
us here expect the United Nations to act? Would we
expect and insist on being consulted? If the answer is
yes, our conclusion can only be that nothing should be
done about Ukraine without Ukraine. And as NordicBaltic countries, we are grateful that this, too, was the
message from the General Assembly today.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): Israel ascribes great
importance to enabling the provision of unhindered
humanitarian assistance. We are of the view that the
utmost effort should be taken to prevent civilian
casualties, especially among vulnerable populations,
including women, children, persons with disabilities
and the elderly. It is for those reasons that Israel voted
in favour of resolution ES-11/2, which should be read
24/25

24/03/2022

as applicable in accordance with the obligations of all
parties under international law.
Israel remains gravely concerned about the growing
humanitarian crisis in Ukraine and is doing all it can
to provide aid to those in need. We have normative,
historical and ethical obligations to be part of the
humanitarian efforts. In that regard, Israel has already
provided more than 100 tons of humanitarian assistance
to the people of Ukraine, including medical supplies,
generators, water purification systems, emergency
water supply kits and winter gear. Just yesterday, Israel
inaugurated a Shining Star field hospital in western
Ukraine. As the head of the Israeli delegation noted
at the hospital’s inauguration ceremony, Israel hopes
to light the path of refugees in need of medical care.
We will extend a helping hand to them, as has always
been Israel’s custom in such crises. Israel reiterates
its call for de-escalation and dialogue. In view of our
positive relations with both parties, we are assisting in
the mediation efforts to stop this tragic war. We hope
and pray for a peaceful resolution of the crisis rather
than more needless suffering and bloodshed.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Holy See.
Archbishop Caccia (Holy See): The Holy See
welcomes the adoption of resolution ES-11/2, entitled
“Humanitarian consequences of the aggression against
Ukraine”, at this eleventh emergency special session of
the General Assembly.
My delegation is pleased to see the great clarity with
which resolution ES-11/2 deplores the dire humanitarian
consequences of the conflict; expresses grave concern
about the deteriorating humanitarian situation in and
around Ukraine; reaffirms the need to protect the
safety, dignity, human rights and fundamental freedoms
of people fleeing the conflict and violence, without
any kind of discrimination; strongly condemns any
attacks on civilians and civilian objects; and stresses
the particular impact that armed conflict has on women
and children, including as refugees and internally
displaced persons, as well as other civilians who have
specific needs, including persons with disabilities and
older persons. Furthermore, my delegation welcomes
the fact that the resolution recognizes the manifold
consequences of the conflict, including increased food
insecurity globally, as well as the potential impact of
a possible accident resulting from the bombing and
shelling of Ukrainian nuclear infrastructure.
22-29872

24/03/2022

Addressing the pilgrims in Saint Peter’s Square
yesterday morning, Pope Francis spoke in remembrance
of the many victims of the conflict, recalling that there
is no victory in war. Rather, everything is lost in war,
and war is nothing other than a self-destructive defeat
for humankind. In the face of the death and suffering
caused by the conflict, the Holy See reiterates its call
for an immediate ceasefire, the establishment of and
respect for humanitarian corridors and the advancement
of a real and decisive focus on negotiations towards, in
the words of the adopted text, “the immediate peaceful
resolution of the conflict”. The Holy See expresses its
gratitude once more to all, from States to individuals,

A/ES-11/PV.9

who have opened their homes and hearts to those
fleeing the conflict, who are providing food, clothing
and medicines to those in need and who are labouring
to put an end to this conflict.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item. In accordance with
the terms of paragraph 14 of resolution ES-11/2, which
the General Assembly has just adopted, the eleventh
emergency special session of the General Assembly is
temporarily adjourned.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

22-2987225/25
