UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-F/RST

YEAR

1928’”

MEETING:

18 JUNE 1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Puge

. . . . . . . . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

.. ... . ... ... .. .. ... .. .. ... .. .. ... .. .. ... .. ... .. .

1

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights:
Report of the Committee established under General Assembly resolution
3376(XXX)(S/12090)..............................................

1

Expression of condolences on the death of the United States Ambassador to
Lebanon and his colleagues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l928)

Adoptionoftheagenda

S/PV. 1928

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Suppletients
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1928th MEETING
Held in New York, on Friday, 18 June 1976, at 10.30 a.m.
Mr. Rashleigh

President:

E. JACKSON

from the representatives of the German Democratic
Republic, Hungary, India and Yugoslavia, containing
requests to be invited to participate without the right
to vote in the Council’s discussion, in accordance with
the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure. I therefore propose, with the consent of the Council and in accordance with the usual practice, to invite these representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote.

(Guyana).

Present:
The representatives
of the following
States: Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan,
Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l928)

1.

Adoption

2.

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian
people of its inalienable rights:
Report of the Committee establiShed under General Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX) (S/12090)
The meeting

3. In view of the limited number of seats available
at the Council table, I invite those representatives to
take the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber on the understanding that they will
be invited to take seats at the Council tgble when it
is their turn to speak.

of the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Florin (German Democratic Republic), Mr. Hollai (Hungary),
Mr. Jaipal (India) and Mr. Petrik (Yllgoslavia) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

wus called to order at I I.10 a.m. ,
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

4. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the representative of the United Arab Emirates. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people
of its inalienable rights:
Report of the Committee established under General
Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX) (S/12090)’

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision taken by the Council at its 1924th meeting,
I iAvite the Chairman and other members of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of
the Palestinian
People, the representative
of the
Palestine
Liberation
Organization
(PLO) and the
representatives of Cuba, Egypt, Jordan, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates
to participate in the debate without the right to vote.

5.

Mr. HUMAIDAN

(United Arab Emirates) interMr. President, before beginning my statement I should like to express our
regret at the tragic death of the United States Ambassador in Beirut and should like to express our condolences to the United States delegation and Government. We appreciate the efforts made by the Palestine
Liberation
Organization
to arrest the assassins and
bring them to justice.

pretation from

French):

6. Mr. President, I should like .to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council.
I have had the good fortune and pleasure of knowing
you very well and have worked with you to strengthen
co-operation and friendship between our two countries. Your abilities and your devotion to the cause
of peace and justice will, I am sure, enable you to
bring to a successful conclusion this debate on the
question of Palestine, which, thanks to the report of
the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People is now at an historic
turning-point
in its development.
I should also like to
thank you and the members of the Council for having

At the invitation of the President, ihe delegation of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienuhle
Rights of the Palestinian People and Mr. AI-Hour
(Palestine Liberation Organization) took places at
the Council table; Mr. Alar&n (Cuba), Mr. Ahdel
Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Sharaf (Jordun). Mr. Alluf
(Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Tiirkmen (Turkey), and
Mr. Hllrnaidan (United Arab Emirutes), took the
places reserlyed for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should now like to inform
the members of the Council that I have received letters
1

..

been so kind as to permit
important debate.

me to participate

in this

10. I do not wish to uildertake an analysis of the
report of the Committee,
since the statement made
by its Chairman [192&h meeting] has left me nothing
to add. But I would draw the Council’s attention to
the fact that the recommendations
in the report provide a valuable opportunity,
of which we should not
fail to avail ourselves, to make progress towards the
solution of the Palestinian question and, consequently,
to pave the way for a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East.

7. My delegation wanted to take part in this debate
for three reasons. First, my Government
sincerely
believes in the need to establish a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East. Secondly, we also believe
that peace and stability cannot be established in the
Middle East as long as the Israeli occupation of Arab
territories continues and as long as the Palestinian
people are deprived of their fundamental rights in their
ancestral homeland.
Thirdly,
as an Arab country,
obviously, the report of the Committe on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
is not entirely satisfactory to us. But we db none
the less believe that this report and, above a!!, the
recommendations
included in its second part, can
serve as a viable and realistic basis to enable the
Palestinian people to exercise their inalienable rights
and hence to pave the way for a settlement of the
Palestinian question, which is at the very heart of the
Middle East crisis.

11. It is noteworthy that in formulating
its recommendations
the Committee
not only was heeding
practical considerations
but also was basing itself
solely on the resolutions and decisions of the Assembly and the Council. For instance, we note that the
division of the plan for the exercise of the right of
return into two stages is something which is dictated
by realistic considerations and is based on the relevant
resolutions of the Assembly and the Council. The
same applies to the withdrawal from Palestinian territory illegally occupied by Israel, so that the political
entity can be established there with a view to enabling
the Palestinian people to take over control of its own
destiny.

8. In 1974 the Genera! Assembly unequivocally
reaffirmed the rights of the Palestinian people in its
resolution 3236 (XXIX), of which I shall quote only
the two most important paragraphs:

12. I have no wish at this stage to enter into the
details of the report and the recommendations
it
contains,‘but
I should like to make it quite clear that
the time has come for the Security Council, like the
Genera! Assembly, to affirm unambiguously
the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to self-determination, including the right of return and the right
to independence and national sovereignty in Palestine.

“ 1. R@j%rns the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people in Palestine, including:
“(cr) The right to self-determination
external interference;
“h) The right
sovereignty;

to national

without

independence

and

13. We believe also that this Council should give
serious consideration
to the Committee’s
recommendations in order to take action and perform one
of its most important
tasks-that
is, safeguarding
international peace and security, for-and this cannot
be said too often-thd
continuation
of the prevailing
situation in the Middle East threatens peace and
security not only in that region but also in the entire
world.

“2. Recrf;fir-111s crlso the inalienable right of the
Palestinians to return to their homes and property
from which the have been displaced and uprooted,
and calls for their return.”
But that resolution, like so many others, was in danger
of remaining a dead letter. Therefore, the Assembly
decided, in its resolution 3376 (XXX) to establish a
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People.

14. Having said that, I should add that in order to
prevent the deterioration
of the situation the Council
has a duty immediately
to take effective measures to
prevail upon Israel to desist from establishing new
settlements and to withdraw from the settlements
already established in the occupied Arab territories.
The Council should take measures to ensure that
Israel respects the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of
12 August 194g2, a convention which is applicable to
the Arab territories occupied by Israel.

9. I have had the opportunity
to follow that Committee’s work and to read its report, which is before
this Council. I should be failing in my duty if I did not
congratulate its Chairman, Ambassador Fall of Senegal, and its members on the sincere and responsible
efforts they put into performing an extremely difficult task. For this is indeed the first time in 28 years
that an attempt has been made to establish a programme of implementation
to enable the Palestinian
people to exercise its rights. Those rights are clearly
defined in resolution 3236 (XXIX),
which I have
already mentioned. They were reaffirmed in resolution 3376 (XXX).

15. Finally, I should like to say that, pending effective and responsible action by the Council to prevail
upon Israel to withdraw from the occupied Arab
territories and to give the Palestinian
people their
2

/

inalienable rights, the Government of the United Arab
Emirates cannot but support its Arab brothers by all
the means in its power in their efforts to liberate their
occupied territory, and help the Arab people of Palestine, under the leadership of their representative,
the
Palestine Liberation
Organization,
to exercise their
inalienable rights in their ancestral homeland.

of the Palestine Liberation
Organization
as the only
true representative
of the Palestinian
people. The
world recognizes now that there will be no just and
lasting peace in the Middle East without a just solution to the question of Palestine. President Anwar
Sadat stressed this fact in his address to the General
Assembly on 29 October 1975,3 when he said:

16. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

“I have no doubt that you agree with me that
there will be no peace in the region without a. political settlement of the Palestine problem. It is inconceivable-nay,
utterly unacceptable-that
the
Palestinian
people should remain homeless and
dispersed. They must regain their entity and establish their independent
State so that this ancient
people can contribute constructively to the development and progress of our international community.”

17. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID
(Egypt): Before I begin
my statement, on the item on the agenda, I should
like to take this opportunity
to express to the United
States delegation and the Government
and people of
the United States the Egyptian delegation’s
sincere
condolences and sympathy on the tragic loss they
have sustained in the death of the United States
Ambassador to Beirut and his colleagues.

22. As I mentioned before, the United Nations has
dealt with different aspects of the question of Palestine and the Middle East problem. No less than 106
resolutions of the General Assembly and 128 of the
Security Council have been adopted on the subject
since 1947. Besides them, there are innumerable
resolutions of other world organizations, conferences,
meetings and so forth. But all of us know the fate of
those resolutions and decisions. It is a strange and
regrettable situation when the aggressor is allowed to
continue in his defiance of United Nations resolutions
and the will of the world community .which seeks to
se,e that peace and justice prevail for all and everywhere. Today’s world will not and cannot afford to
tolerate that peace and recognition should be the prerogative of some while they are denied to others.
Peace and justice are one and indivisible.
It is high
time, therefore, that the highest executive organ of
the United Nations asserted its authority and responsibility to redress this injustice which has befallen the
Palestinian people if it really wishes peace and justice to prevail in the Middle East.

18. I should now like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. I am sure that with your ability and
wise leadership our deliberations will achieve positive
results. Your country, Guyana, and you yourself have
always been identified with the struggle of peoples to
regain their independence and free themselves from
foreign occupation and domination.
So it is more than
a mere coincidence that this historic debate about the
rights of the Palestinian people is taking place under
your leadership.
19. And historic indeed is the event. The United
Nations, almost ever since its creation, has dealt
with the Palestinian question peripherally
and indirectly. For the first time-and,
especially,
in the
Security Council, the highest executive organ of our
Organization-the
core of this question is being dealt
with.
20. The Council is not debating now this or that
practice of Israel in the occupied Arab territories, but
the very existence of a whole people, its fate and
future, in a world where there should be no place for
or acceptance of occupation or domination.
Of all the
people of the world, the Palestinian people has met
with the most callous and unjust treatment and the
greatest tragedy and it is a shock to the conscience
of every free man who believes in the Charter, in the
equality of all people and of their right to exist. In this
context, the mere fact that the Council is debating this
question today offers some hope to the Palestinian
people that the world is responding at last to its conscience and its sense of responsibility
and that the
world at large will shoulder its responsibility to rectify
the wrongs of the past and pave the way for a better
and brighter future built on justice and peace.

23. I shall not try to repeat in detail the developments
of the Palestinian
question because they are well
known to everybody and especially well known to the
Council.
24. The United Nations came to grips for the first
time in very clear terms with the definition of the basic
rights of the Palestinian
people when the General
Assembly adopted its historic resolution 3236 (XXIX).
In that resolution it reaffirmed the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people in Palestine, including: (cl) the
right to self-determination
without external interference, and (b) the right to national independence and
sovereignty. It further reaffirmed the inalienable right
of the Palestinians to return to their homes and property from which they had been displaced and uprooted and called for their return. Explicitly,
the
General Assembly in that resolution recognized that
the Palestinian people was a principal party in the
establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, a matter which the Assembly spelled out in

21. Indeed the world community is responding more
and more to the struggle of the Palestinian people.
This response is manifest in the growing recognition
3

one imoortant element in the achievement of a just
and laiting peace in the Middle East, namely, -the
exercise by the Palestinian people of their inalienable
rights, in order that this noble and industrious people
might once more contribute to the development
of
the area with all its peoples. The Committee’s
report
correctly emphasizes this central fact when it states
in paragraph 5 1:

clear terms in its historic resolution 3375 (XXX);
which emphasized the conviction that the participation of the Palestinian people was essential in any
efforts and deliberations
aiming at the achievement
of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East, called
for the invitation of the PLO, the representative
of
the Palestinian people, to participate in all efforts,
deliberations
and conferences on the Middle East
which are held under the auspices of the United
Nations, on an equal footing with other parties, on
the basis of resolution 3236 (XXIX),
and requested
the Secretary-General
to inform the Co-Chairmen
of
the Peace Conference on the Middle East of resolution 3375 (XXX) and to take all necessary steps to
secure the invitation of the PLO to participate in the
work of the Conference as well as in other efforts for
peace. The Secretary-General
indeed took some steps
to implement
that resolution. Worthy of note is his
latest initiative in contacting all the parties concerned,
including the PLO.

“A just solution of this question [the question of
Palestine] was a condirio sine qua non for the settlement of the Middle ‘East problem as a whole and
for the creation of the necessary conditions for a
just and lasting peace in the area.”
28. The Committee also stressed the importance of
the United Nations’ playing a greater role in all efforts
to solve the Palestinian question and to establish a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East, a role that is
incumbent upon the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Secretary-General
and that they
would play throughout the entire process up to and
including a final settlement of the problems in the
area. Consequently,
the Committee
said that there
was a need to reconvene the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East, with the participation
of all
the parties concerned, including the PLO, on an equal
footing with the other participants,
in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 3375 (XXX), in
order to deal with the problem in all its aspects.

25. It was as a logical consequence of resolutions
3236 (XXIX) and 3375 (XXX) that the General Assembly adopted its important resolution 3376 (XXX), in
which it decided to establish a Committee
on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People composed of 20 Member States appointed by
the Assembly. It requested that Committee
to consider and recommend to the Assembly a programme
of implementation
designed to enable the Palestinian
people to exercise the rights recognized in paragraphs 1 and 2 of Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX).
It also requested the Committee to submit its report
and recommendations
to the Secretary-General
no
later than 1 June 1976 and requested the SecretaryGeneral to transmit the report to the Security Council.
The Council was requested in resolution 3376 (XXX)
to consider the question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of the inalienable rights recognized in
paragraphs 1 and 2 of resolution 3236 (XXIX).
The
Assembly authorized
the Committee
to take into
consideration the action taken by the Council and to
submit to the Assembly at its thirty-first
session a
report containing
its observations and recommendations.

29. The report goes on to say in that regard that many
delegations underlined the particular importance of
the invitation extended to the PLO by the Security
Council to take part on an equal footing in its deliberations and in all efforts, deliberations
and conferences on the Middle East under the auspices of the
United Nations. That fact is particularly gratifying to
us in Egypt, since the Council responded positively
to our request on 3 December 1975 [S/11893] that the
PLO be invited to take part in the Council’s deliberations. The presence of the representative of the PLO
now with us in the Council, fully participating
in our
deliberations,
is living evidence and a clear manifestation of the fact that the world community,
as represented in the highest organ of our Organization,
fully recognizes the importance of this presence and
of the fact that unless the Palestinian people, represented by the PLO, takes a full share on an equal
footing in all efforts,. deliberations
and conferences
on the Middle East, there will be no genuine, just andlasting peace in the area.

26. The fruit of the work of the Committee is now
before the Council in document S/12090, in which the
Secretary-General
transmitted to the Council the final
report of the Committee.
I should like to seize this
opportunity to express to the Chairman, Ambassador
Fall, and the other members of the Committee,
Egypt’s thanks and appreciation
for the diligence,
impartiality
and objectivity
they have shown in their
deliberations,
which resulted in this important document. Impartiality
and objectivity there was indeed,
since the Committee was formed by the assembly of
members representing all geographical groupings and
the Committee itself sought and asked for the opinions
and suggestions of all Member States.
27. Egypt
mendations

..

30. Now, I should like to refer to part two of the
report, which contains the Committee’s
recommendations. I shall not go into detail by analysing all those
recommendations,
but we believe that they have
many positive points and that the three elements,’
namely, the basic considerations
and guidelines, the-’
right of return, and the right to self-determination,,
national independence and sovereignty, could serve’
as a proper and adequate basis for the implementation

believes that the Committee’s
recomcould serve as a basis for implementing
4

5

-

-..

in the Council. We believe the Council will not fail
them and that they will be able to continue their search
for a just, honourable and peaceful settlement.

of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, as
is stated in resolution 3236 (XXIX).
These recommendations are based on the United Nations resolutions, on the Charter and on principles of intemational law. All parties concerned must strive honestly
and earnestly to translate these recommendations
into reality if they really wish to see peace and justice
prevail in the Middle East. Consequently, the Council
is requested to take proper action to see that the rights
of the Palestinian
people are restored and implemented so that world peace .and security, for which
the Council has the primary responsibility,
may be
preserved and enhanced. That entails ensuring that
all the resolutions adopted by the United Nations are
implemented,
in order to establish the independent
Palestine State and to achieve a durable and just peace
in the area.

35. The only viable alternative to the continuation
of the tragedies of the last 30 years in the Middle East,
as I declared before the Council in Januar,y, is the
achievement of a just, honourable and durable settlement that takes into account the core of the problem.
Peace cannot be durable if it is not just.
36. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
37. Mr. PETRIC
(Yugoslavia):
May I first of all
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council. I wish also to pay a tribute
to you as the very able representative of Guyana, a
country which plays a very important
role in the
United Nations andin the non-aligned movement and
with which my country maintains the best and friendliest relations. Working together with you for the last
two years, we have been greatly impressed by your
diplomatic
and negotiating skill. All of us have been
deeply appreciative of the performance of your delegation, together with the, delegations
of the nonaligned members of the Council and others, in the
tenacious struggle to secure the best possible Council
decisions in support of democratic and progressive
causes.

3 1, At the same time, we believe that the Committee
will welcome any suggestions from the Council or its
members, whether substantive or procedural, which
may give force to its report and bring its recommendations nearer to implementation.
Therefore, we hope
that the Council and its members will give due and
adequate consideration
to those recommendations
and even come up with a programme of action and
chart the proper course for its execution under the
Council’s auspices.
32. Egypt’s stand on the Palestinian
question is
clear and well known. I referred to the basic elements
of OUT policy with regard to this vital question in my
statement before the Council on 13 January during the
debate on the Palestinian question [1871st mcefing],
and especially to the fact that we are fully convinced
that the Council could make a positive contribution
by unanimously agreeing to a resolution to the effect
that a permanent and just peace in the Middle East
must be based on the achievement by the Palestinian
people of their national rights.

38. We join others in deploring the tragic death of
the United States Ambassador in Lebanon ,and his
colleagues. We are strongly against every act of terrorism, whether committed by an individual or by a
State, as are those we are witnessing these days in
South Africa.
39. Over the last few years, the United Nations has
begun to devote greater attention to the question of
the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people
and to handle this question in a more effective way.
The Palestinian question is not viewed any longer as
a problem of refugees that is peripheral to the complex of the Middle East crisis; it has finally been given
the place it deserves. It constitutes the central element
in the settlement of the Middle East crisis, without
the just solution of which there can be neither peace
nor security in that region. The large majority
of
Members of the Organization
have recognized to the
Palestinian people, which is deprived of its rights, the
same national rights as those enjoyed by other peoples
throughout the world. In accordance with this stand,
the General Assembly established, by its resolution
3376 (XXX), the Committee
on the Exercise of the
Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian ‘People. That
Committee
is, after an inexcusably long time, the
first United Nations body to be dealing with the Palestinian problem in a substantive manner. For the first
time, all aspects of the Palestinian problem are being
considered; for the first time, the legitimate and in-

33. To sum up, Egypt believes that any just and
lasting peace for the Middle East must include, nay,
even begin with, the solution of the Palestinian question, and must be based on the following principles
and tenets enshrined. in previous United Nations
resolutions and in the Committee’s
recommendations:
first, the right of the Palestinian ,people to national
sovereignty
and self-determination
independence,
and its right of return; secondly, the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of land by force and the necessity
of Israel’s withdrawal from all the occupied Arab
territories;
thirdly, the definition of the Palestinian
question as the core of the Middle East problem;
fourthly, the paramount role of the PLO, the representative of the Palestinian people, and its participation on an equal footing in all efforts, deliberations
and conferences held under the auspices or within the
framework of the United Nations, as stipulated in
resolution 3375 (XXX).
34. The entire world has its eyes on the Security
Council. The Palestinian people are putting their faith
5

alienable national rights of the Palestinian
people
have been defined and elaborated-which
amounts
to an affirmation with regard to that people of the
principles on which the United Nations was founded.

recognition. By its intransigence, by establishing new
settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories,
and by changing the demographic structure of those
territories,
Israel is defying practically
the whole
world and making the prospects of peace seem even
more remote and unreal. By ignoring the rights of the
Palestinian people and the PLO as an essential and
equal partner, Israel is jeopardizing
not only peace in
the Middle East and in the world in general, but also
its own security.

40. My delegation wishes to draw particular attention to the diplomatic skill that the representative of
Senegal, Mr. Fall, has shown in guiding the deliberations of that Committee. We must also fully recognize
the dedication and great efforts that the esteemed
representative
of Malta, Mr. Gauci, the Rapporteur
of the Committee,
has invested in its productive and
realistic work.

45. The Government of Israel should realise that the
rights of the Palestinian people have today the backing
of the great majority-a
growing majority-of
the
international
community.
The overwhelming
majority
of States in the world demand that Israel withdraw
from the territories occupied in June 1967. There is
virtually not a single State in the world that does not
demand that Israel cease to establish settlements in
the occupied territories, as such a practice is contrary
to the principles of international
law, and to the provisions of the fourth Geneva Convention*
and the
Hague Conventions4. Is it possible that Israel realIy
does not realise this?

41. The report, together with the recommendations
presented to the Security Council, is the product of
the broadest consensus in the Committee,
whose
members represented countries from various regions
of the globe, countries subscribing to differing ideologies and belonging to various political groupings.
The report of the Committee is founded on the principles of justice and humanity, on the Charter, and on
the numerous resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly and the Security Council. The report has
taken into account the actual situation prevailing in
the Middle East and in the world in general. At the
same time, it provides a constructive and comprehensive basis for the implementation
of the rights of
the Palestinian people and, thereby, for the solution
of the Middle East crisis as a whole. The fact that the
Palestine Liberation Organization
has participated in
the work of the Committee
as an active observer
further enhances the significance of the report. It
represents an outstretched hand which should not,
and must not, be rejected.

46. Then the question arises as to what the real
intentions of Israel are, and whether Israel intends to
keep the whole world on the brink of war. A few days
ago, Israel stated in the Council that it was ready to
negotiate. It now has the opportunity to do so, and it
should show whether this profession of readiness is
real or is merely intended to achieve a propaganda
effect. Israel says that it does not want to negotiate
with the PLO, which is the legitimate representative
of over 3 millions people, although it is clear that
Israel cannot succeed in avoiding for ever the ever
more inescapable necessity of dealing with the central
issue and central factor of the situation. The Middle
East problem-the
Palestinian
problem-cannot
be
dealt with by or through proxies, large or small. Is
Israel not aware of the fact that its occupation cannot
be recognized and that Israel cannot ensure its own
security and peaceful life by occupying Arab territories?

42. The PLO has again shown a great sense of responsibility,
constructiveness
and dignity. Its contribution to the work of the Committee was of exceptional importance.
Of particular importance
in this
regard is the readiness of the PLO to negotiate through
the United Nations with the other side about modalities for the final solution of the Palestine problem and,
consequently, of the crisis in the Middle East.
43. Perhaps the greatest contribution
by the Committee is contained in the phased approach, within
which is envisaged a first stage in the context of territories seized after 5 June 1967, with everything else
to be discussed and agreed upon between and by the
sovereign entities of the area, including an independent Palestinian entity. Diplomatically,
it is a message
of the first order of importance. Such an approach has
proved that the role and the presence of the PLO in
the search for peace in the Middle East are irreplaceable. The PLO has once more strongly asserted the
justice of the struggle of the Palestinian people and
confirmed that it is the sole irreplaceable and legitimate representative of that people.

47. The non-aligned
countries have always supported the just struggle of the Palestinian
people.
They have constantly drawn attention to the untenability of the principle of the use of force for settling
disputes between States and to the incompatibility
of
aggression and occupation with peace and security.
The recent ministerial
meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned
Countries, held in Algiers,
condemned Israel’s aggression once again, stating,
inter dice :

“The Bureau considers that Israel, by its continuous aggression against the Palestinian
people
and the Arab countries of the region, and by its
systematic refusal to respect the decisions of the
United Nations, is violating the fundamental principles of the Charter. Accordingly,
recalling the

44. Unfortunately,
Israel is continuing its policy of
illegal occupation and its short-sighted policy of non6

Declaration of the Lima Council of Foreign Ministers and the resolutions on the questions of the
Middle East and Palestine, the Bureau considers
that the United Nations should take effective steps,
including those provided for by Chapter VII of the
Charter, to ensure respect by Israel for the decisions
taken by the United Nations.“”

the nrovisions of the relevant resolutions. An esuitable and appropriate compensation
should be paid
to those who many not desire to return to their properties.
50. The right to self-determination,
national independence and sovereignty is a universal right that
belongs to all the peoples of the world. This right
cannot be denied to the Palestinian people. The Palestinian people itself should decide its own fate. This will
become possible only if Israel withdraws from the
occupied territories and if the displaced persons are
enabled to return to their homes, in accordance with
the provisions of resolution 237 (1967).

48. Experience gained over a number of years has
shown that whatever happens, no proposal or action
that fails to take adequately into account the rights of
the Palestinian people can lead to a just and lasting
peace. The rights of the Palestinian people are generally and increasingly recognized; they are legitimate
and inalienable.
They cannot be disallowed by any
Power, by any passage of time or by any behind-thescenes conspiracy of conquerors.
The Palestinian
people and its rights should not be the subject of bargaining or manoeuvring on the part of anyone, not only
because it would be immoral but also because it would
not be realistic. The rights of the Palestinian people
are a constituent element of the solution of the Middle
East crisis, and they should and must be implemented.

51. Israel should discontinue the illegal practice of
establishing new settlements in the occupied territories and should withdraw the existing ones. Israel
should put an end to the practice of displacing and
oppressing the Palestinian
people. It is a generally
recognized principle of contemporary
international
law that military occupation resulting from a war of
aggression does not confer any right of sovereignty
over the occupied territory and; consequently,
does
not confer the right to dispose of such territory in
favour of anyone.

49. There exist certain generally, or almost generally, recognized principles, which have been accepted
by the international
community
as a foundation for
a just solution of the Palestinian question and the
establishment of peace in the Middle East in general.
The report of the Committee is based on those principles, which should be reaffirmed by the Security
Council. In this regard, we have primarily
in view
the withdrawal of Israel from the territories occupied
since 5 June 1967. Never in history has an occupation
brought either freedom to the occupied people or real
security to the occupiers. Israel’s withdrawal is a
conditio
sine qua non, both for the realization of the
rights of the Palestinian people and for peace in the
Middle East. In its recommendations,
the Committee
has proposed the establishment of a time-table for the
withdrawal of Israel. My delegation considers this
recommendation
to be constructive and useful. We
also believe that it would be appropriate to secure the
presence of United Nations peace-keeping forces with
a view to facilitating the process of withdrawal. The
right of the Palestinian people to return to its homeland, its right to self-determination
and its right to
establish an independent State should be recognized,
and the implementation
of these rights should be
undertaken in keeping with the recommendations
of
the Committee.
In this respect, we underline in particular the necessity of implementing
the provisions
of Security Council resolution 237 (1967) calling for
the return of displaced persons to the territories
occupied by Israel in June 1967. The return of displaced persons. should be effected in the shortest
possible period of time and should not be made dependent on any-other conditions. The United Nations,
in co-operation
with the States directly involved,
should undertake preparations
for the creation of
conditions for the return of Palestinian refugees displaced between 1948 and 1967, in accordance with

52. As a logical consequence of the process of
solving the Palestinian
question, and thereby the
problem of the Middle East as web, the Security
Council should provide, in keeping with the Charter,
guarantees of the sovereignty,
territorial
integrity
and independence of all the countries in the region
and of their right to live within secure and recognized
borders. In order to create the proper conditions for
a lasting and just peace in the Middle East, all the
countries involved, including an independent Palestinian State, should resolve all outstanding questions
on the basis of equality and of the provisions of the
Charter, as well as on the basis of the rules of international law and the resolutions of the United Nations.
53. We would suggest that it would indeed be foolhardy for Israel to base its calculations on the shortrange developments
of the situation. The Arab peoples, and the Palestinian
people especially,
have
suffered innumerable
setbacks in the pursuit of their
just causes in recent -decades. But who can deny that,
taking the developments of those decades as a whole,
those just causes and their strength have progressed
immeasurably?
54. Equally, the Palestinian people and their sole legitimate representative have weathered many a setback,
always to come back with greater strength and international support.. Like other peoples who were ready
and able to fight, suffer, and even die for their right
to survival and to an independent and equal existence,
they cannot be swept away.
55. Therefore,
lasting solution
7

whoever really desires a just and
of the Middle East crisis must work

in the General Assembly, the cause of the conflict in
the Middle East is Israel’s continuing aggression and
its stubborn refusal to leave the Arab territories it
occupied in 1967 and to recognize the lawful rights of
the Arab people of Palestine.

for recognition of the inalienable national rights of
the Palestinian people. The phased implementation
of the recommendations
in the report would constitute
a great contribution
towards that end. Neither the
Security Council now nor the General Assembly in
the fall of this year can afford to turn away from it.
We hope the Council will take the necessary steps to
make it possible to implement the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people as proposed in the recommendations of the Committee.

61. As we are aware, the Government of Israel continues to ignore decisions of the Security Council and
the General Assembly that are based upon unshakable
principles. Furthermore,
once again it has preferred
to take no part in the debate in the Council-the
Council whose task it is to further a solution to the conflict
in the Middle East.

56. In the name of peace, humanity and justice, the
Security Council and all the Member States should
not postpone the solution of the Palestinian problem
any longer. There is no valid justification
or reason
for doing so when the question of the peace and security the peoples of the Middle East and of the world
should enjoy is involved. Those’who did not understand this would assume a grave responsibility
before
the whole of mankind. In such a case the Palestinian
question would also be a question of their own conscience, a test of their morals and sense of responsibility before mankind for world peace, as well as a
touchstone of their attachment to the principles and
provisions of the Charter.

62. Clearly, those forces in Israel which are inimical
to the vital interests of the Israeli people, with their
concepts of aggression and expansionist Zionism, feel
they have the support of certain imperialist
circles
which are egging them on in political, .military and,
particularly,
in financial fields. All this encourages
them to take their reckless stand, which is so dangerous for peace. Those imperialist forces which are
protecting Israel, the aggressor, are by the same token
revealing their utter indifference to a just and lasting
settlement of the Middle East conflict and are doing
everything they can to sow discord among the Arab
States .and peoples and to -divert- attention from-. the
fundamental issues of a solution to the conflict.

57. - The PRESIDENT:
I invite the representative of
the German Democratic Republic to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.

63. The mvemment
of the’ German Democratic
Republic has ‘repeatedly expressed its concern about
what is going on in the Middle East. The intrigues of
imperialism,
of Israel and of other reactionary forces
have led to tragic consequences and to unnecessary
bloodshed. We are for an immediate cessation of the
bloodshed in Lebanon, and we are against any imperialist intervention in the internal affairs of that State;
which is a Member of our Organization.
At the same
time, my delegation categorically rejects any attempts
to divert attention from the fundamental issue in the
Middle East conflict, namely, the continuing aggtession of Israel, whose prime target is the Arab people
of Palestine. All actions which are directly or indirectly detrimental to the forces of the Palestine resistance movement play into the hands of the aggressor
and do nothing to promote the necessary settlement
of the Middle East conflict in accordance with the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the.Security
Council. Today it has become clearer than ever that
the so-called step-by-step approach, far from being
able to take the place of the necessary comprehensive
solution to the Middle East conflict, actually serves
to make it more diflicult to achieve.

58. Mr. FLORIN
(German Democratic
Republic)
(interpretation
from Russiun):
Mr. President, it is a
particular pleasure and honour for me to be addressing
the Council while you are its President. The German
Democratic
Republic and the Republic of Guyana
enjoy friendly relations which, I am convinced, will
be ever further deepened and expanded on the basis
of our common approach to the struggle for peace and
progress. The German Democratic Republic has been
following with great attention and sympathy the
efforts of the Government of your country further to
strengthen
the independence
and sovereignty
of
Guyana.
59. On behalf of the delegation
of the German
Democratic Republic I should like to express condolences to the delegation of the United States of
America on the tragic loss of the American diplomats
in Beirut. I should also like to offer our heartfelt comradely condolences to the delegations of the African
countries on the criminal mass murder of their brothers in South Africa by the racist regime of .Vorster,
whose treacherous and inhumane nature has once
again been revealed to us.

64. The work of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, of
which the German Democratic Republic is a member,
and the report submitted by the Committee
cleariy
bring out the importance of implementing
the tights
of the Palestinian people as the key to a just and
lasting political settlement of the Middle East conflict..
In that connexion I should like to quote the following

60. Over and over again the Security Council has
had to deal with the situation in the Middle East, particularly the question of the need to implement
the
inalienable rights of the people of Palestine, rights
recognized in decisions of the United Nations. As the
delegation of the German Democratic Republic has
repeatedly stressed, not only in the CounciI but also
8

from paragraph 59 of the Committee’s
report: “no
solution in the Middle East can be envisaged which
does not fully take into account the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people”. That historical fact,
that historical necessity, cannot be challenged by
anyone who is seriously interested in a just solution
of the Middle East conflict.

“ 1. The withdrawal of Israeli troops from all
the Arab territories occupied in 1967;
“2. The satisfaction of the lawful national
demands of the Arab people of Palestine, including the exercise of their inalienable right to
establish their own State;

65. The sole legitimate representative
of the Arab
people of Palestine has been and remains the Palestine
Liberation Organization.
That fact was recognized at
both the twenty ninth and the thirtieth sessions of the
General Assembly, after the role of that organization
had been clearly laid down at the Conference of Heads
of Arab States in Rabat. With growing frequency the
representatives of the PLO are being invited to participate in international conferences and in the work of
international
organizations.
A growing number of
countries are establishing official relations with the
PLO. All this goes to demonstrate the growing authority of that liberation organization. Recent events have
clearly demonstrated that the PLO enjoys the support
of the mass of the people in the territories occupied
by Israel.

“3. The
establishment
of
international
guarantees for the security and the inviolability
of the frontiers of all the States in the Middle
East and their right to an independent existence
and development.
“The Government
of the German Democratic
Republic is convinced that such a settlement would
be in keeping with the interests of all the States
and peoples of the area.
“The Government
of the German Democratic
Republic regards the. Geneva Peace Conference
on the Middle East as the appropriate international
machinery for ensuring a just and lasting settlement
of the Middle East conflict. It is indispensable that
the Conference resu.me its work, with the ‘participation of all the parties directly concerned. Of
course, the Palestine Liberation
Organization,
as
the lawful representative
of the Arab people of
Palestine, should be represented from the very
beginning. The proposal of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics to hold this Conference in two
stages has created new opportunities for the resumption of the work of the Conference.”

66. I should like to point out that the statement of
the leadership of the PLO condemning the dastardly
murder of the American diplomats by provocative
elements testifies to the political personality of that
organization and its leaders, who are defending their
just cause.
67. On behalf of the delegation of the German Democratic Republic, I welcome the delegation of the
PLO, which is taking part in the Council’s discussion
on an equal footing with the delegations of Member
States. The world Organization is thus confirming the
fact that the cause of the Arab people of Palestine is
not a mere matter of refugees. This was stressed also
by the Chairman of the Committee, the representative
of Senegal, in his introduction
of the Committee’s
report [1924th
meeting].

That statement is in keeping with the spirit of the
recommendations
in the Committee’s
report, in paragraph 61 of which we read:
“The participation
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization,
the representative of the Palestinian
people, on an equal footing with other parties, on
the basis of General Assembly resolutions
3236
(XXIX)
and 3375 (XXX) is indispensable
in all
efforts, deliberations and conferences on the Middle
East which are held under the auspices of the United
Nations.”

68. In my delegation’s opinion, it would be not only
a mistake but also dangerous to distort the question
of the just national demands of the Palestinian people
and the implementation
of those demands. Today
everyone understands that the issues are the fundamental issues of peace in the Middle East.

70. The German Democratic Republic believes that
the results of the work of the Committee are a useful
and valuable incentive to the attainment
of a just,
lasting and peaceful settlement in the Middle East.
The report is the fruit of wide-ranging discussions and
sober assessments. It was adopted by a consensus of
all the 20 members of the Committee,
who spared no
effort in discharging the mandate entrusted to them
by the General Assembly in resolution 3376 (XXX)
and in accordance with resolution 3236 (XXIX). The
delegation of the German Democratic Republic, as a
member of the Committee, wishes to express the hope
that all the members of the Council will impartially
consider the document before them and, on that basis,
will feel the need to take action commensurate
with
the importance of the problem.

69. On 4 May 1976 the Government of the German
Democratic
Republic
published
a statement
with
regard to the situation in the Middle East which reads:
“The Government
of the German Democratic
Republic confirms its view that a consistent and
comprehensive
settlement in the Middle East requires solutions to the following organically interdependent questions, on the basis of the relevant
reiolutions of the United Nations Security Council
and General Assembly:
9

71. In so far as we are able, we shall do everything
in our power in the German Democratic
Republic
to further the elimination
of existing sources of conflict in the world. At the recent Ninth Congress of the
Socialist Unity Party of Germany, the General Secretary of the Central Committee,
Erich Honecker,
stated:
“We stand solidly behind the Arab peoples
struggling for liberation from the yoke of the aggressor. A key question in the political settlement,
which is urgently needed in the interest of universal
peace in the Middle East, is the total withdrawal of
all Israeli troops from the territories they occupied
in 1967 and the implementation
of the lawful rights
of the Arab people of Palestine, including their
right to create their own national State. The German
Democratic
Republic
will always stand wholeheartedly and unreservedly behind those struggling
against imperialism
and colonialism and for national
liberation in all continents.”
72. My delegation believes that if all Arab States,
along with the PLO, favour overcoming the consequences of the continuing aggression of Israel and
work for the establishment of a lasting and just peace
in the Middle East, it will then be possible to thwart
the attempts which are being made to maintain tension
and conflict in that area. The German Democratic
Republic, as a member of the Socialist community,
stands shoulder to shoulder with all those who are
acting on the basis of the relevant decisions of the
United Nations in order to attain that end.
1 , :
73. The PRESIDENT:
The.next speaker is the representativve of India. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

since the Committee
was required to refer it to the
Council first and only thereafter to finalize it for submission to the General Assembly.
77. However, despite its tentative character, the
report has been formulated by the Committee
with
scrupulous adherence to the limited terms of the
mandate given to it by the General Assembly. The
Committee
has also taken into account, as it was
bound to do, all the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. Even so, the report is incomplete and it
may be regarded by some as containing only halfmeasures. Its recommendations
are not likely, therefore, to satisfy all the parties concerned. However,
that was not the precise intention of the report. The
Committee’s
objective was solely to stick to its terms
of reference and to evolve a pragmatic approach to
solving peacefully a complex problem which has defied
several attempts at solution through the application of
force.
78. The Committee’s
report, in our judgement,
is
only a first step in the right direction. But if that step
should not be taken or cannot be taken for one reason
or another, then surely another first step will have to
be found. It is in that context that we expect the Council to examine not only the report of the Committee
but also the underlying question of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people and how and when and
where they should exercise those rights.
79. The views expressed in the Council would be of
great value to the Committee
in finalizing its report
for the General Assembly. Whether or not the Council
adopts a resolution is a matter for it alone to decide,
but what would be of great interest to the Committee
is the actual debate in the Council on the question of
Palestine, a question which has been before the United
Nations since April 1947. The tragic history of this
question since that time, as well as its legendary
origins lost in the fogs of antiquity, is known to all of
us. It is not the past that concerns us today but rather
the present and the future, and the responsibility
for
both that has to be shared between the Council and
the General Assembly. The core of the problem has
always been Palestine and its people, and because
Palestine was given to Great Britain to administer
under a Mandate of the League of Nations, it became
an international
question, and hence the disposal of
the Territory and the exercise of the rights of its people
also became matters of concern to the United Nations.
The subsequent series of conflicts were the effects of
that original cause and the responsibility of the United
Nations is therefore unmistakable.

74. Mr. JAIPAL
(India): Mr. President,
may I
express to you on behalf of my delegation our great
pleasure at seeing you preside over the Security Council this month, and may I wish you all success in the
very difficult and different roles that you are being
called upon to play in such, quick succession.
75. May I also at the outset joint the others who
spoke before me in deploring the senseless killing of
the United States Ambassador and his colleagues in
Beirut. It is surely a perverse act of madness to kill
diplomats and it will be condemned by all men of peace
and good will. We wish to convey to the delegation
of the United States our deeply felt condolences.
76. My country is a member of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian
People and since the report of that Committee is now
before the Council, we thought that we ought to
express our views here. Since we are a party to the
report of the Committee, it is not my intention to discuss the substance of the report, but we should like
to clarify the fact that the report in its present form is
‘tentative; indeed it can be nothing more than that,

80. When the rights of a people to self-determination
and national independence
are recognized by the
international
community
as inalienable, but the exercise of those rights is prevented by the fact of Israeli
occupation and aggression, then it is clear that the first
thing to do is to secure the termination of that aggression and occupation. The Council has been given the
10

asks to be invited to participate in the debate, in
accordance with the provisions of Article 31 of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure. Accordingly,
I propose, with the Council’s
consent, in accordance with .the usual practice, to
invite the representative of Saudi Arabia to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote.

powers to do this under the Charter. It is therefore in
the expectation that the Council will be successful in
the exercise of its powers that the Committee
has
drawn up a tentative programme for the implementation of the rights of the Palestinian people within.a
time-frame that is by no means sacrosanct. If the
Council should be unable to play its expected role,
then the Committee’s
programme
can only be of
academic interest, since it is based on the assumption
that the Council will secure its implementation.

At the invitution
of the President,
(Saudi Aruhiu)
took the place reserved
side of the Council
chamber.

81. Well, of course, the Council is entirely free to set
aside the Committee’s
report, but then it must come
up with its own programme for the exercise by the
Palestinian people of their rights. It is because of its
uncertainty of the position of the Council in this regard
that the Committee’s
report does not attempt to
answer all questions, but it certainly leaves the door
open for the Council to find its own answers to the
questions. The Committee
was given a seemingly
impossible task, but it has in fact come up with a
plausible programme which could. be refined by the
Council for implementation
in stages, if necessary,
over a period of time to be determined by the Council
itself.

Mr. Buroody
for him at the

85. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Saudi Arabia, whom I invite to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
86. Mr. BAROODY
(Saudi Arabia): I thank you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Council
for affording me the opportunity
to participate.in
the
debate. I am indeed heartened, Sir, that a son of
Guyana should be presiding over the deliberations of
the Council. The United Nations has recognized that
there is a distinct people which lives in an enclave of
Latin America-none
other than your own people,
Sir. Again, I must say that we are fortunate to have
you, Sir, presiding in order to affirm that, had it not
been that the right of self-determination
was assumed
and exercised by your people, you would not be in
that Chair-and
we should not have an able gentleman to guide us. At one time people did not even
know where Guyana was situated. That proves that
the elaboration of the principle of self-determination
into a full-fledged right, an elaboration in which I participated for eight years in the 195Os, has, so to say,
paid dividends. The leaders of many peoples which
were then under the colonial yoke are now raising
their heads high, because we are al1 brothers under
the skin and no one is higher than another in intellect,
effort or yearning for liberty and freedom.

82. I believe that the Committee’s
report provides
a certain sense of psychological relief or psychological
emancipation
for the Palestinian
people which for
some 30 years have been denied all hope. More than
ever now, and indeed at all times, the Palestinian
people need the assurance that their rights in their
own homeland will be respected. I hope that the Committee’s report will be examined by the Council with
the care that it deserves and not only with reference
to its inherent merits but also from the point of view
of formulating
practical alternatives..
For nothing
could be more damaging to peace than silent indifference to the rights of the Palestinian people on the
part of the only organ in the United Nations system
which is in a position to deliver the goods. If it should
fail to do so, it would not surprise us if the Palestinian people were to try to exercise their rights themselves.

87. Having said that, I ask why then should .the
Palestinian entity be considered as not having a personality of its own?
88. We should thank the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the
Palestinian
People, my good friend and brother,
Ambassador Fall of Senegal. I have watched him ever
since he became the representative of this country in
the United Nations, and I believe we have benefited
not only from his wisdom but from his candour and
from his indefatigable
efforts to ensure that people
who still were under the colonial yoke or who were
discriminated
against should play the role that is their
due. So it was the best of choices to make him Chairman of the Committee.
The report of the Committee
prepared under his guidance is both concise and comprehensive and, needless to say, every member of the
Council can be guided by its contents.

83. The Committee’s
report was introduced by its
Chairman and its contents were fully explained by
him. As its Rapporteur has said, the report is biased
in favour of a peaceful solution. May I express the
hope that under your presiding genius, Mr. President,
the Council will exercise its authority and influence
as a matter of priority in the search for an implementation of an over-all peaceful settlement that will
secure for the Palestinian people’ the early exercise
of their inalienable rights. It is needless to stress that
the great Powers should come to your assistance, and
I trust that you will find them responsive to your
longings and urgings.
84; The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
members of the Council that a letter has been received
from the representative of Saudi Arabia in which he

89. Then, why have I asked to be allowed to speak?.
There is nothing that I or others have said about the
11

Palestine question since 1947 that has not already
been mentioned here in the Council or in the General
Assembly. Is it not ‘supertluous that I should speak
again? No. It seems that the animal called man is more
a rationalizing creature than a rational one. We have
to remind ourselves that we cannot find excuses for
the injustices that we sometimes perpetrate against
others on account of having too much power too much
wealth or too much glory-vainglory,
I should say.
90. I was at Lake Success when the partition of
Palestine took place, and I remember how we walked
out of the General Assembly because we all felt the
pressure that had been brought to bear by those who
exercised power then in order to bisect the land of
Palestine. But then we were persuaded that we had
better resume our participation
in the United Nations
because, after all, errors could be rectified.
91.. But since then, -year in, year out, those who
exercise world power, instead of administering justice
in the international
community,
have been serving
their own interests, predicated on the balance of
power, power politics and spheres of influence. Hence
we in the Arab. world happen to be in the sphere of
influence of a big Power-not
that I am exonerating
other major Powers that have their own spheres of
influence-and
we are the victims, in our area, whether
we are Palestinians,
whether we are Lebanese,
whether we are Iraqis, whether we are Egyptians.

that these people are Khazars, converted to Judaism
in the eighth century A.D. They are not our Jews.
95. Yesterday, while I was making a call in the
lobby of my hotel, somebody recognized me and said:
“Ambassador Baroody.” I said: “Who are you, young
man?” He said: “I come from Jerusalem.”
“But”,
I said, “You are speaking to me in Arabic. I know our
Jews; you look to me like an Oriental Jew.” “Yes”,
he said, “we were Iraqis. Those Ashkenazis drove
us from Iraq because of what they had done, and later
we had to go to Jerusalem; we had to leave because
they do not consider us as part of them: they are
Eastern Europeans.‘* This happened only last night.
“And”, he went on to say, “do you know that there
are 250,000 Sephardic Jews in the United States? We
are looked down upon.” While that was no revelation
to me, it was a surprise, coming from a 30-year-old
man. I asked him: “What are you doing now?” He
said: “I am in Brooklyn,
trying to make a living:
I have just opened a restaurant with some others”
-a restaurant serving Arab food, not Jewish or Ashkenazi or Yiddish food.
96. I approach this subject now in an unorthodox
manner, rather than referring to this or that paragraph
and sub-paragraph. What has happened to the major
Powers? They are the Powers, the five of them, that
are responsible for peace in the world. Do they not
see what is happening in my region? It is all the result
of the injustice perpetrated against the Palestinians.
The Palestinians are frustrated. Were not the French
frustrated when the Nazis occupied part of their
country during the Second World War, and did they
not valiantly fight to liberate their country? There
were the maquisards. Now, in every country, unfortunately, we find that where injustice is rampant
people resort to terrorism. We do not condone terrorism, but if the members of the Council do not see to
it that justice is meted out to those whose rights are
trampled underfoot, what other resort can the victims
have, even though it is inhuman to take the life of
another person? And usually it is the innocent who
suffer.

92. They do not leave us alone. They created a
problem so that they could interfere in our area. But
anything that is based on injustice is bound, sooner or
later, to totter and fall. Have they not read history?
Have they not seen empires totter and fall-not
only
the empire of Rome and, before that of Alexander the
Great, but even recent empires, without my having
to name them? Where are they? They crumbled and
went down the drain-and
rightly so. We Arabs had
three empires, but we got drunk with power and
wealth and lost our heads, and our empires crumbledand rightly so. So I feel sorry for those Zionists, because sooner or later, if not by war, they will be assimilated like .those who have been, assimilated before
them.

97. In my last statement on the question of Palestine
not very long ago, I mentioned in reply to Mr. Herzog,
who was occupying this seat, that the,Zionists should
not be blinded by what they consider to be a fait
accompli. There is no such thing in history as a fait
accompli. The world is based on change. No merit,.not
even a second one, duplicates itself for there is always
something added to the old and even to the new.
Therefore, if I have asked to be allowed to speak, it
is not in order to describe or to elaborate on this c:@ncise, and in many ways exhaustive, report. My colleagues and others who have read it commended’it
to
me. It is self-explanatory.
It needs no furthe~~‘discussion. What is needed is the will of the Council,‘and
especially of the permanent members, to act. If they
do not act, they will one day fall, not they as.individuals but those who issue instructions to the‘m:
.,“C If

93. Have we not learned any lesson from the First
World War and the Second World War? Can there be
.no new approach to international affairs? Maybe the
young will form a corps that will use different methods
from those that are allegedly based on self-interest.
Some call it enlightened self-interest, but it is misguided self-interest because, in the long run, as I said,
anything that is based on injustice is bound to disintegrate .
94. Some of my colleagues today, and before, mentioned how even Israel undertook to respect the rights
of the Palestinians ‘within the territory that had been
allotted to them-and,
indeed, wrongly allotted to
them. Time and again I have to remind the Council
12

they do not fall physically, they will fall politically,
and unless there is a new approach to international
affairs we are doomed as human beings. The leaders
or misleaders nowadays speak out of one side of the
mouth and say one thing, and speaking out of the other
side of the mouth they connive and engage in conspiracies.. I am not throwing mud at anyone. The
things I am saying apply even to the leaders or misleaders in my own region- lest anybody should think
I am picking a quarrel with anyone;

from the region from which the three monotheistic
religions Sprang-Judaism,
Christianity
and Islam.
They arose amidst a tribal society. There was poetry,
figures of speech, mythology. If one studied the origins of those mythological
metaphors,
one would
find that they were necessary because the people
were illiterate and one had to talk to them using poetry
and figures of speech. And then come those Khazars,
whose ancestors had never laid eyes on the Middle
East since they had been converted to Judaism in the
eighth century A.D., and they say, “God gave us
Palestine”.
Whom do they think they -are fooling?
How many times have I said that God is not in the real
estate business and that our English and American
friends did not have a power of attorney to give away
something that did not belong to those Khazars or ta
the British or to our American _ friends? I feel sorry for
our .‘American friends because- it is now an election
year.

98. What shall we do? Does religion any longer
constitute a nation? It .has been tried. Remember the
Holy Roman Empire in history. Temporal and religious power was vested in one person. It broke down.
Nationalism
became nefarious, as we know, following
the French revolution. Ideology is bankrupt because
nationalism
is transcendent.
What .should we have
instead? Capitalism?
Socialism? Communism?
There
should be only one “ism’*-humanism.
This should
be the religion of the United Nations. Are we treating
those Palestinians with humanism, those Palestinians
who are scattered and not only throughout the Arab
world? You Arabs, why do you not absorb them? They
do not wnat to be absorbed. They have a right not to
be absorbed; they have a right to their own land.

103. My humble contribution
today can be summed
up very concisely in the following words. I plead
with the representatives
of the permanent members
of the Council to reason with their Governments
-which
quite often, of course, provide them with a
straitjacket of instructions-and
to tell them that we
can no longer go on like this, because the United
Nations will become the laughing stock of the whole
world. We should remove the injustice and allow the
Palestinians
to exercise their right of self-determination, not scatter them to the four winds, not compel
them to take the law into their own hands because
they are frustrated; their homeland should be restored
to them, and then, and only then, would it be possible
for them to come to an understanding with the Khazars.

99. Mr. President, as a leader of Guyana do you think
your people would accept someone who said, “Yes,
we will take you because we are stronger than you”?
And then there would no longer be a Guyana, They
say: “The Arab world is vast; let it absorb the Palestinians”. The Palestinians have a right to. their land,
to their home. Whether we like it or not, it is not for
me or for anyone to tell them what to accept. It is
for them to decide. So the fair accompli,
which the
Zionists and their supporters are trying to rationalize,
is doomed to failure.

104. But do you know, why the Khazars do not want
this? It is because they know that they will have no
future there. They would ‘be assimilated, and if they
wage war there will still be Arabs to wage far, unfortunately for both sides, and people will suffer. This is
the truth. I am telling you the truth. We cannot afford
dirty politics nowadays,. whether on the international
level or on the local level. The world is one. Distances
have shrunk. Whatever happens here resounds in the
hills of Asia, in the jungles of Africa, in the islands of
the Caribbean and everywhere else.

100. Where are Alexander the Great and his legions?
They reached India and Bactria. They ruled our part
of the world. Where are the Selucids? Where is the
Roman Empire? Where are the Crusaders whose
castles are still in evidence along the coasts of Syria,
Lebanon and further south? Where are the Mongols,
who also passed through that area? Where are our
brothers, the Ottomans, who ruled for 400 years?
Where are our friends, the British and the French,
who had mandates over those territories. Gone.

105. We cannot isolate ourselves any more. In past
times empires rose and fell, and other people were not
aware of it. But now the world is one. We all fall
together,
if by miscalculation
some mischievous
elements take into their hands the destiny of the world
and bring themselves and us down with them-and
why? Look at nature. Look how beautiful spring is.
Look at families, look at friendship. There is a lot to
live for rather than antagonizing one another.

101. And those Ashkenazis-latter-day
saints or
devils, whatever one wants to call them-those
Ashkenazis from central Europe who want to lord it
over our area, they do not want a political peace they
want an economic peace. But they have alienated the
whole Arab world, and they cannot have an economic
peace. I shall be frank with them-they
will never
have it;because
they come as a superior people; as
the chosen people of God-mythologically,
of course.

106. I feel sorry for the Zionists, because they are
human beings. But if I ,feel sorry for them that does
not mean that I exonerate them from the guilt of
their actions: Let them and those who support them be-

102. I ask, as an aside: “Do we here in the Council
still believe in the traditional God?” Ask me. I come
13

ware: the end will not be very far off. Today, changes
are accelerated by the will for good or by the misdeeds
of men.

111. As I have said, let us only believe in humanism,
and then the problem will be solved.
112. These are my last words. Perhaps I should
summarize what I have already said today, what 1
have repeated time and again: it is up to those who
exercise world power, the more so the United States,
the Soviet Union, China, and, to a large extent, because they have had experience in our area, the United
Kingdom and France, to put their heads together and
teach their leaders, because they are the specialists
here, that the world cannot go on like this. It is then,
and only then, that peace may prevail.

107. No religion forms a people. Nationality
is predicated on a common culture, not necessarily on
language, although that plays a good part. In Israel,
they want to teach everybody Hebrew, thinking that
the language is cohesive. Well, in the United States
the same language has been spoken for 200 years, but
the United States fought for its independence.
Language is not enough. We very well know that in Belgium there are Walloons who speak French, and there
are the Flemish. We know. that although Robert
Bums, a Scot, wrote in English, not long ago the Scats
and the Welsh-the
Celts-had
a different language,
but there were common interests.

Expression of condolences on the death of the United
States Ambassador to Lebanon and his colleagues
113. The PRESIDENT:
1 should now like to make
a statement on behalf of the members of the Council.

108. Those Zionists want to ingather all the Jews of
the world, but the Jews are clever and intelligent and
do not want to be ingathered. Ther are 16 million of
them.

114. I am sure that I speak on behalf of all the members of the Council when I say that we wish to express
our sense of grief at the recent tragic event in which
the United States Ambassador, Mr. Meloy, and his
colleagues lors their lives. I wish to extend to the
Govemement
of the United States and to the families
of the deceased the heartfelt condolences and sympathy of the members of the Council.

109. Do you think we are so simple? Even if we were
not Palestinians, would we be so simple as to allow a
foreign element to come there? Our Jews ‘are no
problem. There is no problem with them. We live side
by side. Sometimes we do not know they are Jews.
We have no quarrel with Judaism, a noble religion.
But those Khazars, eastern and central European
Jews converted to Judaism-they
have used a noble
religion, Judaism, as motivation
for a political and
economic end. We will not accept it. If they had come
without a flag, without a State, we would have received them with open arms. Theyzare our brothers,
although they may not be of the region. As I have said,
nationalism
has not solved world problems but has
pushed many countries of the same religion into war.
What happened in the First and Second World Wars?
People of the same religion cut each other’s throats.

115. Mr. SHERER
(United States of America):
Mr. President, I should like to express the sincere
gratitude of the United States delegation for the expressions of sympathy and condolence made by you, Sir,
and by the representatives of the United Arab Emirates, Egypt, Yugoslavia,
the German Democratic
Republic and India.
The meeting

rose at 1.15 p.m.
Notes

f For the report, see Official Rrcords of the Genrral Assembly.
Thirty-fint Session, Supplemenr No. 35.
2 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, p. 287.
’ Ojjicitrl Records of the Generd Asser~~hl.v, Thirtieth Session.
PIemrry Meetings, 2388th meeting.
4 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, The Hagtre Conventiorrs am/ Declarations of 1899 nr~d 1907 (New York, Oxford
University Press, 1915).
‘A/31/110, annex, p. 7.

110. It is not a question of religion. It is not a question of belonging. The Crusaders foundered. At one
time, some Moslem countries wanted to use the Caliphate for political reasons, to extend their supremacy
over other Moslem countries. They failed. And now
those Zionists want to engage in something that is
doomed to failure.

14
Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

83-60801-February

1985-2.200
