S/PV.8657

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8657th meeting

Monday, 4 November 2019, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Pierce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-34992 (E)
*1934992*

S/PV.8657

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

can find lasting solutions to the complex challenges of
the region.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite Her
Excellency Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to warmly welcome the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Her Excellency Ms. Amina Mohammed, to
whom I now give the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank you,
Madam President, for the invitation to brief the Security
Council on my recent joint mission with the African
Union (AU) to Ethiopia, Djibouti, Eritrea and Somalia.
This is the fourth visit I have undertaken focused on
women, peace and security and development, and the
third joint solidarity mission with the African Union. I
am pleased that Ambassador Fatima Kyari Mohammed
is here to brief alongside me.
At the request of the Prime Minister, I also travelled
with senior United Nations officials to the Sudan,
to focus on support for the transition, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and women’s leadership. Those missions
are an opportunity to strengthen implementation of our
shared United Nations-AU frameworks on peace and
security, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Agenda 2063 of the African Union and the Silencing
the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative.
I would like to commend the leadership of
Chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat as well as that of
Ms. Bineta Diop, AU Special Envoy on Women, Peace
and Security, who led the AU delegation.
In each country, we met Heads of State, ministers,
senior women Government officials, civil society
members, the international community and our United
Nations country teams and peacekeeping missions. I
left all five countries with a sense of hope and optimism.
The chance for peace in this region is very real. The
international community, together with these countries,
2/21

04/11/2019

Each country is moving at its own pace through
a process of reform and transformation. And in all
countries, women are playing a critical leadership role
in social cohesion, economic revival and peace. The
leaders of these countries are making concrete efforts
to place gender equality and greater representation
of women at the heart of reforms in order to reap the
benefits of the links between inclusion, stability and
peace, and to give substance to prevention efforts
during these complex transitions.
Ethiopia now has its first woman President, and
half its Government ministers are women. Together
they hold some of the most significant decision-making
portfolios in the country. The President is leading
efforts towards social cohesion. Women serve as the
Ministers of Peace, Labour and Infrastructure and are at
the helm of the National Electoral Commission and the
Supreme Court. The Government programme includes
far-reaching legal reforms for greater gender equality.
All of this was cited by the Nobel Committee when
it awarded Prime Minister Ahmed the Nobel Peace
Prize last month. I also met with the Mothers for Peace
initiative, which is working across communities to
repair the social fabric of the country, and with women
who have served as United Nations peacekeepers. I note
that Ethiopia is our largest troop-contributing country.
In Somalia, we met the Prime Minister and
dynamic female ministers who are introducing reforms
to address the challenges of women’s low representation
in political life. We heard from women in civil society
who are on the front lines of preventing the spread of
violent extremism. We also met with the head of the
National Independent Electoral Commission, who has
a challenging task ahead of her. Our efforts in Somalia
must prioritize financial support to free, fair and
inclusive elections next year, as well as to the national
development priorities of the Government, including
debt relief. There are islands of stability in the country
that can be built upon, but that will require more
central Government cooperation with federal member
states, as well as a road map for transitional justice and
social reintegration.
In Eritrea, one of the few countries in the world
where women fought in significant numbers on the front
lines of the independence movement, gender equality
and women’s leadership are seen as an unquestioned
19-34992

04/11/2019

Peace and security in Africa

reality. We met with young women entrepreneurs and
saw the investments in critical infrastructure — from
multipurpose dams to solar power to roads that will
reintegrate the country with the region. Relations
between Eritrea and its neighbours are nascent, but they
are making strides. There is a unique opportunity at
this moment for the international community to support
greater integration and sustainable peace.
In Djibouti, we met with local women who have
built community centres to care for children with
disabilities and to support refugee and migrant women,
in a context where many young women are fleeing
conflict or migrating in search of a better life, only to
become victims of human trafficking and horrendous
abuse. The country has recently passed legislation
that increases maternity leave and provides for greater
protection from violence, gender parity in the civil
service and the private sector and a quota for women
in Parliament.
In the Sudan, I met some of the women who were
the engine of the revolution and are now demanding
equality and social inclusion across all strata of society.
All of that reinforces the need for us to question our
own narrative and mindsets. The region I saw has some
of the fastest-growing economies on the continent,
with rich natural resources, extraordinary capacity,
particularly among their youth, and genuine reforms.
Those are the elements that we need to support and the
narrative that we need to share.
The road ahead for the Horn of Africa will not be
easy. The foundations have been laid for a transition
from peace to sustainable development. But building
on these fragile foundations will require unity and
cooperation across the region and common ground
internationally to accompany those transitions. That is
particularly true when it comes to the issue of refugees
and internally displaced persons, of which there are
tens of thousands, many of whom are vulnerable to
trafficking, as well as in finding regional solutions to
protection challenges, including sexual violence, in
areas where conflict is still going on.
It was clear from our travels that the whole region is
cut from the same fabric. Each country is its own shade,
but they are interwoven. What happens in one country
will impact the others, and therefore regional approach
and genuine collaboration are paramount. In that regard,
I am encouraged by the signs of the revitalization of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. This

S/PV. 8657

platform will be essential to providing the necessary
pathways we can all support.
That is also the reason that it was important that
it was a joint mission with the African Union. In
working together, we can achieve so much more. As
one Government official said to us, the joint mission
has changed the nature of the relationship with both
the United Nations and the AU, in terms of the quality
and content of the dialogue. What is needed now is to
maintain and deepen that dialogue and partnership, and
to use them to encourage regional solutions and unity.
Finally, I wish to turn to the Sudan. Last week, the
Council heard from an amazing young woman, Alaa
Salah, whose image became synonymous with the
protests in Khartoum (see S/PV.8649). I met Alaa, along
with three other women civil society activists — Huda
Shafig, Safaa Adam and Samah Mohamed — in New
York, after talking to their compatriots in Khartoum
and El Fasher. Thanks to the efforts of these amazing
women and thousands more like them, the Sudan
is seeing a new dawn. We must be ready to support
the people and the Government through a successful
transition that lays the foundations for truly inclusive
elections and sustained peace.
I welcome the recent unanimous extension by the
Council of UNAMID’s mandate for one more year and
its decision to include in that mandate support for the
peace process and peacebuilding activities. During my
visit to El Fasher and in meetings with women from
local communities, they made it clear that a premature
drawdown could leave a security vacuum, thereby
exposing them to greater violence and putting at risk
progress towards economic stability.
We have just taken part in a whole-of-system
visioning exercise with the Sudanese Government that
will enable us to respond to the changing context and
support the Sudan’s priorities over the next three years
of the transition. The exercise establishes a vision for
our partnership with the Sudanese people, our support
to those leading the transition — the Forces for Freedom
and Change, the Sovereign Council and the transitional
Government — and the national development plan
that they have jointly developed. Our responses will
sequence immediate and longer-term activities, in
alignment with the priorities set by the Government.
Those priorities include the peace process, economic
and social development, economic reforms, the

19-349923/21

S/PV.8657

Peace and security in Africa

reintegration of internally displaced persons and
comprehensive transitional justice and reconciliation.
These are tall orders and, while they need to be
delivered urgently, expectations must also be managed.
I urge the Council, and the international community
more broadly, to assist in identifying concrete actions
that can be delivered in the short term over the next
three months, while maintaining momentum and
addressing the medium- and long-term opportunities
necessary for lasting peace.
At the same time, the Government is committed to
addressing root causes. I cannot put it better than the
Sudanese Minister who told me:
“It is not peace documents that are missing in [the]
Sudan. We have shelves of beautifully worded
peace agreements since independence. We need
to address the root causes — exclusion, human
rights, marginalization and underdevelopment.
We need a Marshall Plan for areas of our country
and the support of the international community to
deliver this.”
Responding to the opportunity in the Sudan will
require putting aside our usual ways of working.
Investment in development must accompany the
transition if it is to take root and flourish. Continuous
efforts in a wide range of critical areas, such as
delisting and debt relief, will be urgently needed to give
the Sudan a fresh start, as will creative solutions for
domestic resources and external investments, including
tax reforms and the recovery of stolen assets.
While they are moving at different speeds, each
country in the region is heading in the right direction.
We must seize this opportunity to invest and support
peace and promote women’s participation and
leadership, education, peace dividends, free and fair
elections and the short-term, high-impact projects that
reach those who are farthest behind.
Having met with our United Nations staff in
each country, I can attest to their courage, sacrifice,
commitment, motivation, and willingness to walk
this road together in support of the collective goals
of national counterparts. That includes everything
from the United Nations Office to the African Union
personnel, who are leading our partnership with the
African Union on peace and security, to the innovative
efforts of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
on trafficking in the region, the UN-Women’s work
4/21

04/11/2019

towards mobilizing and supporting women’s demands,
the United Nations Development Programme’s role in
sustainable development, the Economic Commission
for Africa’s efforts at strengthening economies, and all
those who serve in our country team under the leadership
of our Resident Coordinators, alongside the critical work
of our peacekeeping and political missions. With the
solidarity and support of the international community,
those countries can overcome their challenges and
become an anchor for growth and stability within the
broader region and the African continent.
Finally, I would like to pay tribute to our
peacekeepers and specifically mention our women
in peacekeeping. In each of the countries that we
visited, the critical importance of women serving
in security forces, the police, the military and in
peacekeeping was starkly clear. Those women, against
all odds, strengthen our protection efforts, increase
the credibility of our endeavours, engage in local-level
mediation and make communities feel much more at
ease. And yet we continue to deploy less than four per
cent female peacekeepers. Much more can and should
be done. Women shared their practical challenges
with us. Even where they are enrolled in their national
security services, they are often not provided with the
opportunities needed to be deployed — from mapreading to specific driving and computer skills. When
they are deployed, they often contend with harassment
or are asked to serve tea and coffee rather than patrol
communities. The kits we provide do not fit the needs
of women. In contexts such as that of Somalia, where
head-covering is needed, that is left to the individual
women to secure. And while this may be the first time
that these words have been said in the Security Council,
sanitary pads are a basic necessity for women and yet
do not form part of their deployment kits.
As the Security Council returns to the open debate
on women and peace and security this afternoon, I
hope that these issues will be among those discussed. I
humbly urge the Council to heed the winds of change,
so that we may continue to strive towards peace in all
hearts and in all nations.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for her thoughtful briefing. Her words are
well-heeded.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mohammed.
Ms. Mohammed: At the outset, I wish to
congratulate the delegation of the United Kingdom to
19-34992

04/11/2019

Peace and security in Africa

the United Nations for assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of November. I also
wish to thank Ambassador Pierce, and through her
the United Kingdom, for giving us an opportunity to
brief the Security Council on our recent joint African
Union (AU)-United Nations solidarity mission to the
Horn of Africa, which was led by my dear sister Her
Excellency Amina Mohammed, Deputy SecretaryGeneral — along with whom I am honoured to be
briefing the Council today — and Her Excellency
Ms. Bineta Diop, Special Envoy of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission on Women, Peace
and Security.
As indicated by the Deputy Secretary-General,
senior women leaders from the African Union
Commission and the United Nations conducted a joint
solidarity mission on the participation of women in
peace, security and development and visited a number
of countries in the Horn of Africa from 21 to 26 October.
On the first day, the joint mission briefed the African
Union Peace and Security Council on the purpose
of the mission. We also met with the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission for exchange and
guidance on the proposed engagements during the
mission. The central tenet of these missions is that of
supporting women’s initiatives and enhancing their
roles and leadership in peace processes, governance
and the development of their communities, countries
and ultimately the transformation of Africa through
inclusive processes.
The mission to the Horn of Africa is the third joint
AU-United Nations solidarity mission. This past year, in
July 2018, we had the opportunity to brief the Security
Council after the second joint mission, which had taken
us to South Sudan, the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel
region (see S/PV.8306). Then, we witnessed first-hand
that peace, security and development had little chances
to stand without the full and effective participation
of women and young people, who are on the front
line addressing climate insecurity, radicalization and
violent extremism. Our efforts this year highlighted
the poignant realities of women and girls who continue
to suffer from exclusion, communal conflict, internal
displacement, unregulated migration and violent
extremism. However, in the midst of the challenges
faced by women, girls and young people in the Horn
of Africa, our delegation also witnessed resilience,
commitment and a strong drive for the transformation
of the region. Indeed, in all of the countries we visited,

S/PV. 8657

the delegation witnessed the creativity and innovation
of women in the political and socioeconomic spheres of
their societies. We must all bolster their laudable and
courageous initiatives. With that in mind, permit me
to share some of our experiences and perceptions from
this year’s visit.
In Ethiopia, our joint delegation sat down
and listened to the testimonies of women leading
peacebuilding efforts at the grassroots level. The
Mothers for Peace initiative has endeavoured to
sensitize young people to the dangers of ethnic division
as the country undertakes to build a democratic and
peaceful country. The delegation also met with women
peacekeepers, who play a pivotal role in Ethiopia’s
engagement in peace operations. We participated in
the launch of the National Ethiopian Chapter of the
African Women Leaders Network (AWLN), together
with the President of the Federal Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia, Her Excellency Mrs. Sahle-Work Zewde,
herself an AWLN pioneer. The National Ethiopian
Chapter of the AWLN will seek to contribute to
ensuring women’s financial inclusion, empower rural
women, mentor young women and support women’s
participation in peace and development. Our delegation
further seeks to continue supporting women-led
movements that are transforming the lives of people
on the ground through that network. We also visited
a shelter for women victims of human trafficking and
heard first hand their plight as they try to reconcile
their experiences and try to heal from the physical and
mental wounds. The African Union, in partnership with
its member States, is providing leadership to tackle
the challenges of human trafficking in the region. The
African Union-Horn of Africa initiative on human
trafficking and migrant smuggling provides a platform
for countries in the region to exchange information,
share experiences and deliberate on policies and
strategies to effectively respond to that menace.
In Djibouti, our joint delegation met with women
parliamentarians and entrepreneurs in new technologies
and media, as well as medical doctors who are leading
transformation on the ground. Our meeting with the
President of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Ismaïl
Omar Guelleh, was very positive. He reaffirmed the
country’s commitment to strengthening women’s
participation in governance and peace, especially in
the light of the new era for peace in the region. The
African Union remains committed to supporting the
Government, women and young people of Djibouti in

19-349925/21

S/PV.8657

Peace and security in Africa

an effort to achieve the objectives inscribed in Agenda
2063: The Africa We Want and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
In Somalia, the joint mission was received by
the Prime Minister, His Excellency Mr. Hassan Ali
Khayre, and other senior Government officials. Our
consultations focused on women’s participation in
elections and preventing violent extremism. At the
headquarters of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), we were inspired by our engagements with
women peacekeepers. We shared in their activities at
the community level, as well as in improving enhanced
civil-military relations, which allows AMISOM to
support national initiatives on women’s leadership for
peace and elections. The AU reaffirms its commitment
to the participation of women in its mission in
that country, and the AU is actively engaging its
member States to increase women’s participation in
peacekeeping and to increase the number of women in
their national defence and security services.
In Eritrea, women’s economic empowerment
featured strongly with interactions on dam projects
led by young women engineers to provide water for
households and agriculture. The joint delegation also
met with the National Union of Eritrean Women, a
leading force for women that goes back to the years
of the liberation struggle. We also met with a dynamic
group of young women who are committed to building
their country and inspired by a future filled with hope
and potential. The joint delegation also held a fruitful
meeting with the President of Eritrea, Mr. Isaias
Afwerki, as well as with ministers, senior Government
officials and the diplomatic community. We had
important exchanges and discussed the meaningful
participation of women in all sectors for peace, security
and development. Despite the positive perceptions
garnered from the initiatives on the ground, there is
no doubt that efforts have to be redoubled in order to
ensure that we remain on track towards achieving the
development goals we have set for ourselves.
Last week, during the open debate on women and
peace and security (see S/PV.8649), we were reminded
that the realities on the ground are far from reflective
of the pronouncements and commitments in our
deliberations and decisions. It is time for us to break
that cycle. Women’s aspirations and initiatives that
we heard and saw in our interactions across the four
countries provide a clear basis to affirm that women’s
participation is imperative if we want to deliver on our
6/21

04/11/2019

commitments. Substantive support to their organizations
and projects and continued engagement with member
States to create the conducive environment for women’s
participation in decision-making, at all levels, from
grassroots to higher office, should be prioritized.
In French they say “l’union fait la force” — there
is strength in unity. Indeed, concerted efforts between
our two institutions, guided by the frameworks of
cooperation on peace, security and development,
provide an immense opportunity to bridge the gaps on
women’s leadership. I had an opportunity to brief the
Council last week (see S/PV.8650), alongside Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Hannah Tetteh,
on AU-United Nations cooperation, which continues to
strengthen as we make significant progress in a number
of areas. It is important that our organizations continue
to support women’s initiatives, as they have impact
on communities. At the African Union Commission,
under the women, peace and security framework, we
want to emphasize the implementation of commitments
by various actors and strongly believe that partnership
with women’s organizations will provide the vehicle for
concrete actions.
On that note, I would like to conclude with the
following points. First, the Horn of Africa must be
encouraged and supported to invest in its women
and youth. Secondly, we saw women’s initiatives to
enhance participation in peace efforts, governance and
development geared towards service to the community
in all the countries we visited. They need Member State
and partner support. Thirdly, women peacekeepers in
the African Union Mission in Somalia are playing a key
role in the sensitization of Somali women to leadership
and community engagement. It is important to continue
to support their endeavours and provide them with
adequate gender-sensitive facilities to create a better
working environment for them. Lastly, the new era
of peace in the Horn of Africa provides an immense
opportunity for enhanced regional cooperation. It is
an opportunity to show true solidarity with the people
and the Governments of the region. I call on our two
institutions to be at the vanguard of that solidarity and
to respond to the aspirations of the people of the Horn
of Africa for a peaceful, stable and integrated region.
Allow me to end by commending the efforts
undertaken by the women and leadership of Djibouti,
Eritrea, Ethiopia and Somalia. The African Union
remains firm about the urgency of supporting those
regional efforts to ensure the full rebirth of the Horn
19-34992

04/11/2019

S/PV. 8657

Peace and security in Africa

of Africa in line with our continental aspirations for
peace, security and development.

countries to promote
women’s participation.

The President: I thank Ms. Mohammed for
her briefing.

The United States also remains dedicated to
advancing security more broadly in the Horn of Africa.
We support efforts to stabilize Somalia through the
advancement of the federalism process, including
peaceful, inclusive and democratic elections next
year. We commend Eritrea’s efforts to develop and
implement a peace agreement with Ethiopia and hope
the momentum of peacebuilding in the region leads
to greater harmony between Djibouti and Eritrea. We
congratulate Prime Minister Ahmed on winning the
Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts to promote regional
peace and stability. Improving inter-State relations in
the Horn of Africa is an important step on the road to
greater trade and development. We therefore encourage
the United Nations Special Envoy to the region to
facilitate more dialogue on improved cooperation and
integration. We also look to countries in the Horn of
Africa to improve cooperation for the sake of regional
peace and stability.

I recognize the presence in the Chamber of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, and
thank her for joining us today.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for her briefing. I extend
my congratulations to South Africa for a successful
presidency of the Security Council and welcome
the United Kingdom’s presidency for the month
of November.
The success of the Council’s work in the Horn
of Africa hinges on a clear understanding of the key
issues. Therefore, the United States is grateful for the
close attention to detail, especially to the role played
by women and youth in peace processes. I thank
Ms. Fatima Mohammed for her briefing. Yes, it is time
to break the cycle. I would like to highlight that we have
an opportunity to do so with the current peace process
in South Sudan.
In remarks last week (see S/PV.8649), I noted that
the United States has released a strategy on women,
peace and security. Central to that landmark document
is a commitment to the full, effective and meaningful
participation of women in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. While greater female participation is
welcome in its own right, our commitment to that
principle is born of our understanding that women
improve the effectiveness of missions in specific ways
that men cannot. As just one example, given that local
communities and conflict areas are largely comprised
of women and children, female peacekeepers have
a unique ability to conduct outreach and build trust
among hurting and traumatized populations. We must
strive to increase the number of women in military
contingents, police units and civilian support forces.
The United States will continue to work with troopand police-contributing countries to strengthen the
capabilities of all peacekeepers, as we have over 11,000
women in our Global Peace Operations Initiative. We
continue to urge all troop- and police-contributing

policies

that

increase

In particular, we urge the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and its member States
to engage with South Sudan’s leaders and encourage
them to reaffirm their commitment to the cessation of
hostilities and to implementing their peace agreement.
In our recent visit, the Council was united in its message
that South Sudan’s leaders must embrace compromise
to form an inclusive transitional Government. We
know the urgency of that task because we saw for
ourselves that political failure in this moment will spell
catastrophe for the people of South Sudan, especially
women and children. The eyes of the international
community remain firmly fixed on 12 November,
when we expect the parties to form a Government of
national unity. That is just one example of why the full
participation of women in our institutions of power
must be a priority for each of us.
The Council has an incredible opportunity to
help secure the meaningful inclusion of women in
preventing, resolving and recovering from conflict in
Africa. But, frankly, this is not just an opportunity. It is
an obligation. When women are involved, the result is
more durable peace and greater security. Accordingly, if
the Council is serious about fulfilling its core mandate,
let us make use of the solution that has been ignored for
so long despite standing in plain sight. Let us give more
women a seat at the table and let us listen to what they
have to say.

19-349927/21

S/PV.8657

Peace and security in Africa

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, Madam President, I would like to welcome your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to thank South Africa for having carried out that
function effectively throughout the month of October
and for having led the Council on the Horn of Africa. I
thank the Deputy Secretary-General for her statement.
Thanks also to the Permanent Observer of the African
Union for her briefing.
The Deputy Secretary-General’s visit to the Horn of
Africa is very timely, given the encouraging momentum
in the region today. Women are stakeholders in that
process, and the momentum must benefit them over
time. The resolution we adopted last week (resolution
2493 (2019)) reminded us that the time has come to
implement all dimensions of the women and peace and
security agenda, everywhere in the world. The United
Nations must mobilize fully in support of States.
We welcome the efforts of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa,
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, in the area of women’s
political participation in that region. We also commend
the efforts of the Prime Minister of Ethiopia to
strengthen peace in the region, including his signing
of an agreement with Eritrea and the actions he has
undertaken in the Sudan with the African Union. We
are delighted that he has been awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize. Ethiopia, which has a woman President and 10
women ministers, is a leading example in terms of
women’s political participation.
The situation in the Sudan is also encouraging,
and France supports Prime Minister Hamdok’s efforts
to achieve lasting peace and to revive the economy.
Sudanese women played a decisive role in their country’s
revolution. They have earned their rightful place in the
transition. In that connection, we call for compliance
with regard to the quota for women’s representation that
was set out in the Constitutional Declaration. The fact
that there are four women ministers in the Government
is positive, but that should only be the beginning.
Despite that positive momentum, significant
challenges remain. We hope that South Sudan will
be able to form a Government of National Unity by
12 November. In that regard, we call on all South
Sudanese parties to respect the 35-per cent quota for
women in transitional bodies, in accordance with
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan.
8/21

04/11/2019

We also call for a rapprochement between Djibouti
and Eritrea in order to enable those two countries to
resolve the persistent problems between them. In
that regard, we consider it necessary for the Security
Council to continue closely monitoring the relations
between those two countries.
Finally, in Somalia, while the recent progress
achieved by the Somali National Army is encouraging,
we remain concerned about the frequency and intensity
of attacks by Al-Shabaab and the sexual violence
that is being perpetrated in the country. We call
for the resumption of dialogue between the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member states,
and believe that Somali women have a key role to play
in that process.
I will conclude by reiterating that it is important
to France that these transitions enable significant
progress to be achieved on the ground with regard to
the resolutions of the Council on women and peace
and security.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
congratulate you, Madam President, and the delegation
of the United Kingdom, on assuming the leadership of
the work of the Council for the month of November.
We wish you and your delegation every success in
your work.
We also commend the leadership of the South
African delegation towards achieving our objectives
during the month of October.
We appreciate the valuable information that has
been delivered by the briefers. We also commend in
particular the vision that the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Amina Mohammed, has shown in her efforts to
engage closely with and understand the situation on the
ground of women in the East Africa subregion, together
with Ms. Bineta Diop, the African Union Special
Envoy on Women, Peace and Security, and other senior
officials of both organizations. That partnership has
endowed her with a comprehensive perspective and
contributed to strengthening cooperation and synergies
in that area.
Peru firmly believes in the importance of the
leadership and active participation of women as agents
of peace in all phases of conflict, the impact of which
has proved not only positive but also crucial. In that
regard, while the rapprochement with governmental
and non-governmental actors in various countries of
19-34992

04/11/2019

Peace and security in Africa

the subregion has led to important advances, it has also
revealed elements that still need to be strengthened with
regard to the women and peace and security agenda in
those States. For example, Somali women are being
urged to play a leading role in the economic development
of their country and in the fight against terrorism and
violent extremism. In that connection, this past Friday
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism held a meeting
aimed precisely at integrating a gender perspective into
those objectives. We welcome the contribution made by
women and young people in peace and security efforts
in that country, which should also include their effective
participation in the 2020-2021 federal elections and in
the promulgation of a new constitution. We would like
to learn more about the role and leadership of women’s
organizations in those processes.
We also highlight the role that women have played
in the Sudan as a key component in the developments
that led to the auspicious beginning of a civilian
Government. Community leader Ms. Alaa Salah, who
helped to mobilize people to achieve that end, briefed
the Council last week (see S/PV.8649) and lamented
the fact that women had been sidelined in the political
process in the months following the revolution. We also
appreciate the information that the Deputy SecretaryGeneral shared with us today about the current situation
about recent meetings with the leaders of that State.
From that perspective, we consider it essential
to promote the participation of Sudanese women in
the country’s political and economic participation
processes and mechanisms, including their greater
involvement in decision-making through the creation of
employment opportunities and access to Government
posts. The same applies to women in Djibouti, Eritrea
and the other countries of the subregion. To that end,
the Council should maintain and strengthen the gender
perspective and the women and peace and security
agenda, especially in the drafting of mandates and in
the subsequent follow-up to the recommendations that
have been made in that regard.
In conclusion, I reiterate Peru’s commitment to
continuing its implementation of concrete measures
in favour of women’s participation in these processes,
which, as we have said, tend to make them all the more
successful and inclusive.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Madam President, I would first like to wish you every

S/PV. 8657

success during your month as President of the Council.
I would also like to thank South Africa for its successful
presidency last month.
I commend and thank the Deputy Secretary-General
and the African Union Special Envoy on Women, Peace
and Security for their useful briefings on their recent
joint mission in the Horn of Africa.
Just a few days ago, Belgium welcomed Ms. Alaa
Salah, Sudanese civil society representative, to the
Council (see S/PV.8649). The role played by women in
the recent developments in the Sudan is crucial and was
recognized as such in the announcement that women
were to be included in the transitional Government.
The developments in the Sudan also effectively
demonstrate, as our two briefers have illustrated, the
role of the African Union in finding an African solution
to an African crisis. For all of those reasons, Belgium
warmly welcomes the initiative of the joint missions
with the African Union and particularly appreciates
their broad focus, which includes peace and security,
development and humanitarian issues. We are keen
supporters of increased cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union and of an integrated
approach to countries in crisis and in transition.
In the space of a year, the Horn of Africa region
has seen positive developments, although the outcomes
are fragile. The meaningful participation of women in
political processes is essential to consolidating those
outcomes. Some first steps have been taken, such as
the appointment of women ministers and the adoption
of legislation on gender equality. President Sahle-Work
Zewde is not only Ethiopia’s first woman President,
but also the only woman Head of State in office in
Africa. She is also a strong advocate for women in her
country and on the African continent. It is necessary
to continue along this same path and to implement the
decisions that have been made. Electoral deadlines are
opportunities to ensure the meaningful participation of
women. We will be focusing on that area, especially
with regard to the first elections in decades to be held
next year in Somalia.
The United Nations can and must lead by example
by working towards real parity in its missions and
representation. We also call on troop-contributing
countries to redouble their efforts in that direction. If
we are humble in our approach, all of us in the Chamber
will be able to evaluate our own shortcomings. It is by
keeping this issue on its agenda that the Council will

19-349929/21

S/PV.8657

Peace and security in Africa

be able to make a difference. I would be interested to
learn from the Deputy Secretary-General what followup will be given to this joint solidarity mission and
what support the Security Council could provide in
order to encourage our partners in the region to pursue
their commitments.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): First, let me congratulate
you, Madam President, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council. We wish you every success and
you can count on our support. I also wish to thank our
South African colleagues for their very able stewardship
of the Council’s work in October.
Let me express our appreciation for the very
informative briefings delivered by the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, and the
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations, Ambassador Fatima Kyari Mohammed.
We welcome the joint mission of United Nations and
African Union representatives to the Horn of Africa. We
see it as a practical implementation of the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union in
addressing Africa’s peace and security challenges in a
coordinated and comprehensive manner. Over the years,
the Horn of Africa has been perceived as a volatile
and conflict-ridden region of the continent. Today,
we are witnessing new, promising political dynamics.
The Horn of Africa now has a unique opportunity to
finally overcome its history of conflicts and poverty
and collectively work together to forge a future of peace
and progress.
In order for those transitions to be successful and
for peace in the region to be durable, the meaningful
participation of women is crucial. The meaningful and
full participation of women in the peace process and
broader political processes is about not only ensuring
that women and men will be equally represented, but
also the quality of that participation. It is all about
women’s leadership. The women of the Horn of Africa
deserve an equal seat at every table at which decisions
are made. We encourage the region to ensure that
women have a strong voice in decision-making, from
the initial peacemaking process to the establishment
and development of local and national governmental
institutions. We know that there are women who are
adequately trained for those roles, that women are
available for high-level appointments and, further still,
that qualified women are everywhere.
10/21

04/11/2019

In that context, we welcome the recent appointment
of women to senior decision-making positions in
the Sudan. In the case of Somalia, we hope that the
authorities will secure a 30 per cent quota for women
in the upcoming elections, which will offer a historic
opportunity for women to participate in the first
universal suffrage elections that the country has held
in 50 years.
The evidence shows that security efforts are more
successful and sustainable when women contribute to
prevention and early warning, mediation, peacekeeping,
post-conflict resolution and rebuilding. If we are serious
about our commitment to a more peaceful, sustainable
and prosperous Horn of Africa, there is simply no
alternative to investing in women, giving them a voice in
all relevant decision-making processes and supporting
their political, social and economic empowerment.
Poland believes that the Security Council will remain
united in encouraging the participation of women in
political life in the Horn of Africa, and by doing so will
continue to contribute to achieving durable peace and
development in the region.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): First, I would like to congratulate
the delegation of South Africa on its presidency of the
Security Council for the month of October and at the
same time take this opportunity to wish every success
to the United Kingdom during its presidency of the
Council for the month of November.
We thank Ms. Amina Mohammed and Ms. Fatima
Kyari Mohammed for their testimonies, assessment and
recommendations regarding the implementation of the
various pillars of the women and peace and security
agenda and its subsequent impact on the development
of each country in the subregion. We strongly welcome
the cooperation between the African Union and the
United Nations in the pursuit of stability, peace and
sustainable development in the region.
Capitalizing on the moment of hope that the
subregion is enjoying following the peace agreement
between Ethiopia and Eritrea, the recent visit of the
Deputy Secretary-General sheds light on the critical
role of women in matters of peace and security and
represents an important moment in the promotion of
the women and peace and security agenda. We note
the significant progress made in Ethiopia, such as
gender parity throughout the Cabinet, including a
female President, and the representation of women in
19-34992

04/11/2019

Peace and security in Africa

the Federal Parliament, which stands at almost 40 per
cent. The role of women and their leadership, including
that of young women in peace processes, should be
encouraged and supported so that we may deliver
peace, security and development dividends.
Laying the foundations for inclusive politics and
strengthening respect for the rights and representation
of women in the political system is key. In that regard,
we are concerned that Somalia’s draft constitution does
not guarantee due representation to women. However,
we see it as a positive step that the Government has
committed to ensuring the participation of women
in political decision-making by completing its
constitutional review by June 2020. We would be grateful
if the Deputy Secretary-General could elaborate on
whether additional measures were proposed to the draft
constitution during the deliberations, which would
ensure the representation and inclusion of women in
the coming electoral process in Somalia, in accordance
with the principle of one person, one vote.
During the recent open debate on women and
peace and security (see S/PV.8649), Ms. Alaa
Salah — a young woman and symbol of the protests
in the Sudan — addressed the Council and gave us
recommendations to ponder and follow up. We know
how women and young people were at the forefront
of those transformative protests, and Ms. Salah
emphasized that although women were at the forefront
of the revolution, they are currently being relegated.
We would like the Deputy Secretary-General to inform
us as to whether her recent discussions addressed the
measures being taken by the Government of the Sudan
to implement its national action plan on women and
peace and security and to address the concerns raised
by Ms. Salah. We understand that the renewal of the
mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur will allow us to rethink an exit
strategy focused on preserving the mission’s capacity
to protect civilians, particularly women and children,
and monitor human rights abuses.
We call for such missions to continue to be
carried out in order to strengthen cooperation between
the African Union and the United Nations, thereby
allowing for a better and greater implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda in the region,
at a juncture at which we face so many significant
challenges, such as climate change — the adverse
effects of which have a particular impact on women and
represent a multiplying factor of threats to peace and

S/PV. 8657

stability. We underscore the role of women, including
young women, in achieving these goals.
Given that this is his last week in the Council, I take
this opportunity to wish every success to Ambassador
Jonathan Cohen in his new role. It truly has been an
honour to serve on the Council alongside him.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to begin by congratulating the United Kingdom on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
November. China is also grateful to South Africa for its
practical and efficient work as President of the Council
for October.
China thanks Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed and Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed,
Permanent Observer of the African Union (AU) to the
United Nations, for their briefings.
We welcome the AU-United Nations joint solidarity
mission to the Horn of Africa and commend the United
Nations and AU for attaching importance to the
significant role of women in regional peace, security
and development. Given the important strategic
location of the Horn of Africa, maintaining stability
in the region has a bearing on peace and development
throughout Africa.
Recently, positive progress has been made on the
political, economic and security fronts in the Horn
of Africa, which have been widely acclaimed by the
international community. Challenges nevertheless
remain. In particular, the rights and interests of women
in peace and development have yet to be effectively
guaranteed, which necessitates continued international
assistance. In that regard, I would like to underscore the
following points.
First, there is a need to resolve differences through
dialogue and consultation. The United Nations and
the international community should act on the basis
of respect for State sovereignty, actively mediate and
facilitate peace talks, help regional countries build
mutual trust, resolve hotspot issues politically and
provide an enabling environment for the survival and
development of women affected by conflicts. China has
always supported African countries in seeking African
solutions to their problems and supports their efforts to
engage women as major players in conflict prevention
and mediation, while ensuring their full involvement in
decision-making and post-conflict peacebuilding and
national development processes.

19-3499211/21

S/PV.8657

Peace and security in Africa

04/11/2019

Secondly, there must be respect for the leading role
of the countries concerned, which bear the primary
responsibility of protecting women in conflict. They
should adopt an integrated approach to providing
security guarantees and humanitarian relief and
resolutely combat violations of women’s rights in
conflict situations. The international community should
fully respect, trust and support African countries
and provide constructive assistance in response to
the needs of the countries concerned. The Security
Council, the Peacebuilding Commission, UN-Women
and other relevant agencies should, in accordance with
their respective mandates, maximize their respective
advantages and strengthen coordination to jointly
promote the important role of women in the field of
peace and security.

African Union (AU) to the United Nations, Ms. Fatima
Mohammed, for their briefings on their recent joint
visit to the Horn of Africa.

Thirdly, due regard must be given to economic and
social development. We must give top priority to those
areas and strive to eliminate the root causes of conflict
by promoting the comprehensive economic and social
development of countries of the region. The Horn of
Africa faces issues such as unemployment and refugees
and needs help from the international community in
meeting its development challenges, strengthening
capacity-building and leveraging the role of conflictaffected women in contributing to regional peace and
security. The United Nations should make full use
of various mechanisms, including its country teams
and the United Nations Development Programme, to
provide constructive assistance, thereby improving the
capacity of African countries to achieve sustainable
economic and social development.

The social, religious, cultural, economic and
security ties between the Arab peninsula and the entire
Arab region and the Horn of Africa are historical and
multifaceted and intimately link the security situation
of those two regions. The League of Arab States plays an
important role in the security of the African continent.
Likewise, the AU and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) play a central role in strategic
Arab security. We recall today with appreciation the
achievements recently made in that regard, thanks to
the leaders of the region, reflected by the Custodian
of the Two Holy Mosques and the leaders of Horn of
Africa, with the aim of achieving rapprochement and
making peace. We hope to see greater Arab-African
cooperation in the near future, especially at the fifth
Arab-African summit, to be held in Riyadh late
this month.

China and Africa have always been part of a
community of shared future. China firmly supports
African countries in their efforts to maintain regional
peace and stability. China stands ready to work
with African countries and the wider international
community to bring the work of United Nations on
women, peace and security to a new high and make new
contributions to peace and development in Africa.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We wish
you, Madam President, every success during the course
of your presidency of the Council’s work for this month.
We also thank Ambassador Matjila and the members of
his delegation for their outstanding presidency of the
Council last month.
I thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina
Mohammed, and the Permanent Observer of the
12/21

I would like to focus in my statement on three
issues: the centrality of African security; developments
this year; and women and youth.
On the centrality of African security, the links
between the Horn of Africa and peace and security
are demonstrated in the convening of this meeting,
following the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to
the Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Mr. Abiy Ahmed. We
reiterate Kuwait’s congratulations to the leadership
and people of Ethiopia on that merited prize. The visit
also coincided with the annual joint meeting of the AU
Peace and Security Council and the Security Council.

With respect to this year’s developments, we
note the reconciliation between Ethiopia and Eritrea,
the rapprochement between Eritrea and Djibouti,
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, the crucial role
of the United Nations and the AU in achieving peace in
Somalia and the dialogue with armed movements in the
Sudan. All of those developments show the willingness
of both the leadership and the peoples of the Horn
of Africa to achieve peace within one year. That is
why we still have hope in seeing greater cooperation
and regional integration among those peoples. The
accomplishments of the peoples of the Horn of Africa
towards making peace and healing the wounds of the
past are examples to be followed and merit our attention,
support and appreciation.
19-34992

04/11/2019

Peace and security in Africa

We welcome and encourage the visits of the United
Nations and regional organizations to States of the
Horn of Africa. We hope to see more such visits in the
future, and we call for continued interest in that key
region, whose security is closely tied to the security of
international navigation and trade.
On women and youth, half of our society is made
up of women while young people represent the future
and, in many States in the region, are the largest strata
of society. Those two groups have a central role to play
in achieving and consolidating peace. The democratic
change in the Sudan is not far-fetched. Women occupy
leadership positions in the State as well as other
sovereign positions, in addition to important ministerial
portfolios in Ethiopia, the Sudan and South Sudan. That
raises hope in the continued empowerment of women
through their growing representation at the legislative
level in the Sudan and South Sudan.
In her briefing, the Deputy Secretary-General
provided us with information about the empowerment of
women and their role in making and building peace. That
draws our attention to the fact that investing in human
beings, in particular women and youth, is not confined
to issues of war or peace, but is an uninterrupted project
of many interrelated issues. As the Security Council
deploys multidimensional operations, while believing
in the importance of dealing comprehensively with the
issues of security and peace, the questions of women
and youth are also closely related to peace and security.
Lastly, we welcome the historic visit to the Horn of
Africa and hope to see greater progress and prosperity
for the peoples of that region and throughout Africa.
We also wish our colleague Ambassador Jonathan
Cohen every success in his future endeavours.
The President: Before we continue, I would like
to say that there will be another opportunity to pay
a proper and full tribute to Mr. Jonathan Cohen later
in the week. We will inform members of the Security
Council when that will take place. For those who are
going to Greentree, I believe that they will be able to
do that there.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I hope to pay tribute to
Ambassador Cohen at a later date.
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Madam President, as well as my brother Ambassador
Jerry Matjila for the excellent South African presidency.
I would also like to thank our sister Deputy Secretary-

S/PV. 8657

General Amina Mohammed and Ambassador Fatima
Mohammed for their briefings.
We have witnessed historic changes to the
peace in the Horn of Africa, which has long been
ridden with complex internal strife and conflicts.
Rapprochement between Ethiopia and Eritrea last year
triggered subsequent engagement between Eritrea,
Djibouti and Somalia, better positioning the region to
embrace friendship and cooperation. I recall that the
Secretary-General has aptly said that “there is a wind
of hope blowing in the Horn of Africa” and I am glad
to hear that from the statement of my sister Amina
Mohammed. She left those five countries with a sense
of hope and optimism, and that is where we should
start our discussion today. I would like to underline
several points.
The first concerns the primacy of peaceful solutions
to settle differences. We are fully aware of unresolved
bilateral issues and unhealed wounds, with the potential
to reignite tensions in the region. The international
community must continue to encourage countries
of the region to peacefully settle their outstanding
disputes, while also providing space for them to further
reconnect. Rapprochement in the Horn of Africa has
demonstrated the virtue of African solutions to African
problems. Dialogue is key to building confidence
and to narrowing the differences in ways to resolve
outstanding issues.
My second point concerns the need for a united
front against common security challenges. Countries
of the region are still facing many conflict-drivers,
including socioeconomic difficulties, marginalization
and weak governance. Terrorism remains one of the
largest security threats to the region. Caution is needed
to minimize the impact of conflicts in its proximity
and to protect safe passage across the Red Sea. The
United Nations has developed a comprehensive
regional prevention strategy for the Horn of Africa.
We look forward to seeing it support national efforts
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
prevention mandates.
Thirdly, economic cooperation holds the key to
a lasting peace. The Horn of Africa is strategically
located on one of the world’s major shipping routes and
is blessed with vast natural resources. Countries of the
region are among Africa’s fastest growing economies.
Rapprochement should be used to further economic
cooperation and intraregional trade, capitalizing on

19-3499213/21

S/PV.8657

Peace and security in Africa

the launch of the African Continental Free Trade
Area. Furthermore, it could underpin the attainment
of both the African Union Agenda 2063 and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. To this
end, Indonesia is committed to enhancing economic
and development cooperation with Africa, including
through capacity-building and the convening of the
Indonesia-Africa Forum and the Indonesia-Africa
Infrastructure Dialogue.
My fourth point relates to the imperative for
women’s inclusive and meaningful participation. I
think we have heard quite a lot this morning and I am
pleased that the United Nations and African Union
solidarity mission to the Horn of Africa sent a clear
message on that particular issue. Women are powerful
agents of peace. Their participation in peace processes
is an important factor in its success. My delegation is
encouraged to hear of the commitment of the region’s
leaders to reinforce women’s contribution to politics
and peacebuilding. We acknowledge a record of 50 per
cent female membership in the Ethiopian Cabinet.
I would like to echo what the Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed said about paying tribute
to women peacekeepers. During my visit in Dubai, I
made contact with our Indonesian women peacekeepers
and other women peacekeepers in other missions and
the message I received was that we need to do more
on the issues of deployment kits, living quarters and
home leave because women also have obligations to
their families back at home. That is an issue that I
have been discussing over the last three years. In that
regard, I would like to ask a simple question to the
Deputy Secretary-General. What can we in the Council
do and what particular, concrete incentives could we
offer to enhance the number of women peacekeepers
in missions? We cannot continue making statements
without anything concrete to offer. The United Nations
system offers, for instance, the simple case of those
issues previously mentioned.
Mr. Adom (Republic of Côte D’Ivoire ) (spoke in
French): I would like to begin by congratulating the
United Kingdom on its assumption to the presidency
of the Security Council and assure you, Madam, of
the full support of the Republic of Côte D’Ivoire and
our wish for your success. I also extend my warm
congratulations to my friend and brother Jerry Matijila
and his entire team for their remarkable management of
the work of our Council last month.
14/21

04/11/2019

My delegation welcomes the holding of today’s
briefings on the joint solidarity mission organized by
the United Nations and the African Union in the Horn
of Africa in October. We thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed and Ambassador Fatima
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations, for the quality of their reports.
The recent positive developments observed in the
Horn of Africa eloquently reflect the determination
of the authorities of the countries of the region to be
part of the momentum aimed at achieving stability and
promoting sustainable development. However, despite
the progress made, all countries of that region of Africa
still face major challenges related to peace, security
and development. Women are undeniably one sector
of the population that pays a high price for the pursuit
for stability.
The Republic of Côte D’Ivoire therefore welcomes
the joint mission, which took place in a context of
questions concerning cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union and the contribution
of women to peace and security. Beyond its political
nature, the visit was a tangible sign of the need to
coordinate the efforts of both institutions to address the
multidimensional challenges of the region, including
the participation of women in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities.
While strengthening women’s contribution to
peace and security is contingent on their increased
participation in political decision-making, conflictprevention mechanisms and policies for peacebuilding,
their financial empowerment and their inclusion in the
fabric of the national economy are a requirement for their
meaningful contribution. To that, we add the difficulties
regarding education, health and empowerment and
independence of women and young girls to strengthen
their social standing, thereby ensuring their more
proactive participation in socio-political conflictprevention mechanisms and for peacebuilding.
The recent visit of the members of the Security
Council to the Horn of Africa; the clarifications offered
last week by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Horn of Africa, Parfait OnangaAnyanga; and all that has been said this morning offer
hope for a better future in the Sudan and South Sudan
and relations between Ethiopia and Eritrea, Somalia
and Djibouti, Kenya and Somalia and so on.
19-34992

04/11/2019

Peace and security in Africa

A virtuous and hopeful momentum has been
launched in the Horn of Africa. Our Council should
work to strengthen it and ensure its inclusive character
with a growing place not only for women but also for
young people. To that end, the Council’s vigilance and
sustained attention must be ongoing.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I want to pay tribute
to Ambassador Matjila. October was a very intensive
month, with a week in Africa. I think I spent more time
with Mr. Matjila than I spent with my wife last month.
I wish good luck to the United Kingdom, which is
starting its presidency on a gorgeous day. I would have
loved to see the curtains open and have some of those
rays of sunshine come into the Chamber. Also, the
United Kingdom separated us from our French brothers
and sisters here for a month, the only consolation is that
I now have the privilege of sitting next to the Permanent
Observer of the African Union here.
Let me first thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for her briefing. I think it was a fantastic idea to go
to the Horn of Africa. The messages that the Deputy
Secretary-General has brought us are all ones that
we share with regard to women’s empowerment and
participation. She also mentioned sexual violence,
which unfortunately continues to occur, and here I
would like to pay tribute to Ms. Pramila Patten, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Sexual Violence in Conflict. The reason that she is here
is due to the fact that this is still a concern.
I was also very encouraged by what the Deputy
Secretary-General said about regional cooperation,
particularly on how it is developing and how important
it is. But I think the most important message here is
that these joint missions and the cooperation that they
represent between the African Union and the United
Nations have now become a real and intense tradition.
That was symbolized by the fact that when we in the
Security Council went to Ethiopia to meet with the
African Union Peace and Security Council, the Deputy
Secretary-General was there at the same time, in a
demonstration of the intensity of the contact between
the African Union and the United Nations.
With regard to Ms. Fatima Mohammed’s briefing, I
fully concur with her key point, which is that peace and
security do not stand a chance if women are excluded.
I have to say that when we consider South Sudan, the
one country that the Deputy Secretary-General did not
visit, I believe that if there were greater participation

S/PV. 8657

by women in the top levels of leadership, the situation
there would be different. I am pleased about the opening
of an Ethiopian chapter of the African Women Leaders
Network, and in that connection, I would like to pay
tribute to the President of Ethiopia, who spearheaded its
launch. With regard to the President of Ethiopia, I want
to echo my Belgian colleague, who pointed out that not
only is she the only woman President of an African
country, there are no female executive presidents
or prime ministers in Africa, either. We earnestly
believe that this must change. Some countries have
constitutions that do not allow women to be president
or prime minister, which I think is a serious deficiency.
With regard to the various places that the Deputy
Secretary-General visited, we would of course like to
pay tribute to Ethiopia, where the Security Council’s
meeting with the Prime Minister was so refreshing, but
where we all realize how many problems he is facing
domestically in terms of getting his reform agenda and
message of national reconciliation adopted. This is
therefore no time to be complacent.
With regard to the Sudan, Ambassador Singer
Weisinger already mentioned the meeting last week at
which we were briefed by Ms. Alaa Salah, a wonderful
and very courageous woman (see S/PV.8649). The
young women of Khartoum stood up and played a huge
role in the peaceful protests. They were the backbone
of the peaceful revolution in Sudan, but they are not
adequately represented in the transitional Government
or in the current peace talks. I can only echo Ambassador
Singer-Weisinger’s question, which was about what
can be done to ensure that more women participate.
Measures should also be taken to end female genital
mutilation in the Sudan, another serious problem.
Turning to Eritrea, we have indeed witnessed some
changes there. However, if we look closer, we see that
its land borders are still not really open. Many citizens
are still subject to the dreaded conscription into national
service, including women in the paramilitary training
conducted at the Sawa camp.
In Djibouti, we commend the efforts being made
to promote the role of women in the country’s political
and economic life, but once again we believe that more
must be done to tackle discrimination and violence
against women, especially with regard to implementing
laws and fighting impunity.
In Somalia, too, we believe it is important for women
to play a major role in the country’s reconciliation,

19-3499215/21

S/PV.8657

Peace and security in Africa

including the management and prevention of conflict.
It will be important to ensure the strong participation
of women in the 2020-2021 electoral process, as both
candidates and voters. That will be a yardstick for what
is happening in the country and the extent to which the
women and peace and security agenda is actually being
implemented. We will support that, and we truly hope
that as the Deputy Secretary-General said, the winds
of change are indeed blowing through the country. We
once again thank her for leading this trip, which was
extremely valuable both as a message and a measure.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
South Africa on its successful presidency in October and
on the Council’s adoption of resolution 2439 (2019), on
women and peace and security. We wish the delegation
of the United Kingdom a productive presidency and
would like to assure it of Equatorial Guinea’s steadfast
collaboration and support. My thanks also go to the two
briefers, my sisters Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed and Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, for
their informative statements.
We join others in commemorating the tenth
anniversary of the establishment of the mandate of the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary
General on Conflict-Related Sexual Violence. Our
Government will continue to support the various
elements of the United Nations architecture aimed
at combating sexual violence in armed conflicts, the
promotion of women’s rights and the inclusion of
women in decision-making processes.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes that the
enhanced cooperation between the Security Council
and the African Union’s African Peace and Security
Architecture, which also strengthens subregional
initiatives in the implementation of Council resolutions
to advance the women and peace and security agenda,
among other things, is an example of the type of
alliance that should continue to be supported in a
more predictable manner. In that regard, we would
like to highlight the high-level visits led by the Deputy
Secretary-General to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Nigeria in 2017, the Niger, the Sahel,
South Sudan and Afghanistan in 2018, and to Ethiopia,
Djibouti, Somalia and Eritrea this year, not forgetting
the visit to Cameroon in April. I would also like to
acknowledge the dedication of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict to mainstreaming this agenda,
16/21

04/11/2019

while also encouraging the strategic initiatives within
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security concerning
the prevention of and response to conflict-related
sexual violence in Africa, bolstered by the support of
UN-Women, the African Women Leaders Network and
FemWise-Africa.
The strategic importance of the Horn of Africa and
the generally positive evolution of events in the region
made a joint visit of the United Nations and the African
Union more than necessary. These visits are becoming
something of a tradition for the two institutions, which
complement one another in the quest for solutions to
issues affecting life on the African continent. Equatorial
Guinea has always applauded the cooperation between
the two organizations in Africa, given that their
partnership is a valid formula that is bound to have
positive results. The promotion of the women and peace
and security agenda must continue to be united in its
criteria and actions with a view to making more room
for women at the negotiating and decision-making
tables and benefiting from their unique perspective.
Only in this way, and with the support of subregional
institutions such as the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, will it be possible to make progress in
terms of conflict resolution and peacebuilding in the
subregion and throughout the continent.
The participation of women in the quest for
solutions to the problems affecting the region should
be encouraged. Women, together with young people,
must be at the heart of those efforts in order to forge
sustainable peace and development and seek out
lasting solutions in a context of humanitarian crisis.
And women must always play a principal role in postconflict situations.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to begin by welcoming you to
the presidency of the Security Council, Madam, and
wishing you and your team every success this month.
We are also grateful to our South African colleagues for
their leadership of the work of the Council in October.
We would like to thank today’s briefers, Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and Ms. Fatima
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations, for their information on the
outcomes of the joint solidarity visit by representatives
of the two organizations to the Horn of Africa. We
consider such visits useful, as they fully reflect the firm
19-34992

04/11/2019

Peace and security in Africa

commitment of the United Nations and African Union
secretariats to forging united approaches to Africa’s
toughest problems.
The Horn of Africa is currently going through
a critical period in its history in which differences
between Governments are being dismantled and direct
contacts between countries revived. The awarding of
the Nobel Peace Prize on 11 October to Prime Minister
Abiy Ahmed of Ethiopia for his efforts in the peace
settlement between Ethiopia and Eritrea and in the
normalization of the situation in the region in general
is a striking confirmation of the epoch-making nature
of the developments in those countries. We also see the
process of normalization in relations between Eritrea
and Djibouti continuing. The situation in the border
areas remains stable. While we are aware that progress
on their bilateral cooperation has stalled somewhat, the
fact is that the resolution of that issue lies in sustained
dialogue with the potential mediation of regional
actors, foremost among them Ethiopia. On the whole,
this issue no longer poses a threat to international peace
and security, and we see no need for keeping it on the
Security Council’s agenda.
The situation in Somalia continues to be troubled.
The increased activity of the Al-Shabaab terrorist group
in the centre and south of the country is particularly
worrying. In our view, the principal mechanism for
combating Al-Shabaab is still the African Union
Mission in Somalia. Given the difficult humanitarian
situation, we intend to continue providing aid to
Somalia and Somali refugees in neighbouring countries
through earmarked contributions to the relevant World
Food Programme (WFP) funds. We will also continue
training Somali civilian personnel with funds from our
federal budget.
We welcome the normalization of the situation in
the Sudan. A constitutional declaration has been signed,
a Prime Minister elected and a transitional Government
formed. The task now facing the international
community is helping the country with its economic
recovery. We support the Deputy Secretary-General’s
call for lifting the remaining unilateral restrictive
measures on the Sudan.
We note the positive developments in the situation
in South Sudan. However, the prospects for complying
with the provisions in the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan aimed at the formation of a transitional

S/PV. 8657

Government by the 12 November deadline are still
uncertain. We hope that the parties to the conflict will
make additional efforts to deal with the issue within the
agreed time frame.
We agree that the resolution of peace and security
issues in the region should be supported by efforts to
promote the socioeconomic development of its countries,
and we value the coordinated work of United Nations
bodies in that area. Economic development issues are an
integral and high-priority component of our country’s
relations with the States of Africa, as was reaffirmed
by the first Russia-Africa summit, held in Sochi in
October. As an international development assistance
donor, Russia provides support to African partners
through bilateral and multilateral channels. Part of that
work is carried out through earmarked contributions to
international aid programmes for Africa. Just recently,
my Government decided to increase the amount of
its annual voluntary contributions to the WFP by an
additional $10 million. Those funds will be directed to
the WFP’s funds for African assistance every year, and
we are working on other measures as well.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate the United Kingdom on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November. Please be assured of South Africa’s support
for your efforts this month, Madam President. On a
slightly different note, I would also like to congratulate
the England rugby team on their performance in this
year’s Rugby World Cup and final. In all sports our
teams have historically had a healthy competitive spirit,
and that was again illustrated during the Rugby World
Cup matches this year and the past weekend.
We would like to thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed and Ambassador Fatima
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
(AU) to the United Nations, for their briefings. We
commend the joint visit to Sudan, Djibouti, Ethiopia,
Eritrea and Somalia led by the Deputy SecretaryGeneral together with Ms. Bineta Diop, the AU Special
Envoy on Women, Peace and Security, and Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Horn of Africa. The focus of the
joint United Nations-African Union trip on women
and peace and security, and on the international
commitment to peace, stability and credible elections
in those countries, was important. South Africa would
also like to commend the role that the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority for Development

19-3499217/21

S/PV.8657

Peace and security in Africa

(IGAD) and other international partners have played in
facilitating State-building and peacebuilding processes
in the Horn of Africa.
As we have seen in the recent past, the winds of
positive change are blowing in the Horn of Africa. The
frontiers of peace and peaceful neighbourliness are
expanding, and in the process are touching many nations
and ordinary people. Though still fragile, they augur
well for the goal of silencing the guns in Africa by 2020.
It is in that context of peaceful overtures ahead that
South Africa thanks the Deputy Secretary-General and
Ambassador Mohammed, and their colleagues both at
the United Nations and the AU, for their extensive visits
and numerous engagements held with policymakers,
activists and ordinary people in their successful trip to
the Horn of Africa. We also want to acknowledge the
role played by Abiy Ahmed, Prime Minister of Ethiopia
and the current Chair of IGAD, in facilitating the peace
agreement and transition processes in the Sudan, as
well his own country’s rapprochement with Eritrea.
In terms of the peace process in South Sudan, we
would like to note the progress made so far towards
implementing the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. We want to highlight how important it is that the
parties strictly adhere to the deadline of 12 November
to form a revitalized transitional Government of
national unity and emphasize that there can be no delay
or postponement of that deadline, which arrives in eight
days’ time.
My delegation further wishes to underline the
importance of ensuring that the political process
in the Horn of Africa is sustained. In that regard,
South Africa reiterates that the gains achieved can be
strengthened and sustained only through continued
dialogue and cooperation among the countries of the
region. We emphasize that the steps taken so far are a
major milestone in Africa’s efforts to quiet the guns by
2020 and deepen regional and continental integration,
in line with the African Union’s Agenda 2063.
We agree with the Deputy Secretary-General in
her statement to the African Union Peace and Security
Council in Addis Ababa on 21 October, when she
emphasized that women’s inclusion contributes to the
development of responsive decision-making processes
that ensure sustainable development. We also share her
view that in situations of conflict, and in preventing
18/21

04/11/2019

violence, women’s mediation and peacemaking efforts
have been proven to be more effective.
The involvement of women in United Nations
peacekeeping roles within the military, police and
civilian components in conflict remains negligible,
despite the adoption of resolution 2242 (2015), which
calls for doubling the number of women in the military
and police contingents of United Nations peacekeeping
operations over the next five years, a period that has
now almost run its course. We were encouraged,
however, by the Council’s unanimous adoption, on
29 October 2019, under our presidency, of resolution
2493 (2019) urging States to recommit to the women
and peace and security agenda, including by creating
safe environments for women leaders, peacebuilders,
human rights activists and political actors around
the globe.
We must continue to support the narrative that
women, including young women, are agents of change.
As we have heard today, and as we have seen in many
examples all over the world, they have the greatest
potential for transformative effects on societies,
including in peacebuilding and nation-building. We
must work to provide the necessary resources for
holding elections and implementing peace agreements,
as we are seeing in the processes taking place in the
Horn of Africa and elsewhere in the world.
The President: I thank the representative of South
Africa for his kind words about England’s rugby team.
I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity.
I wanted to say that we share the strong support
that has been expressed for the visit by the Deputy
Secretary-General and Ambassador Mohammed. I
think that it has been a fantastic venture in highlighting
how central the women and peace and security agenda
is to African peace and security. The United Kingdom
strongly supports all our colleagues who have called
today for increasing the numbers of women in political
processes in general and in peace processes in particular.
In turn, I think that means that there must be an even
greater focus on the issue of girls’ education so that
we can start to help young girls and women take their
rightful place at the top tables of their communities
and nations. I would like to mention several countryspecific examples.
19-34992

04/11/2019

Peace and security in Africa

The United Kingdom has a strong partnership with
Somalia in serving and protecting women and girls.
We work to include women in reconciliation efforts,
security reform and political dialogue and to address
sexual and gender-based violence, and we support
access to comprehensive sexual and reproductive health
care. I very much endorse what others have said today
about the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women in Somalia’s upcoming elections. We encourage
Somalia to maintain its commitment to the 30 per cent
quota for women in Parliament, and we hope to see the
bills on sexual offences and female genital mutilation
making swift progress through the Somali legislature.
Turning to the Sudan, I think that the Security
Council wishes the Sudan well and wants to do
everything it can to support it. The United Kingdom
feels the same way. At the General Assembly in
September we were delighted to hear the Prime Minister
reiterate his commitment to women’s full participation
in Government (see A/74/PV.10). We have all referred
to Alaa Salah’s very important contribution to last
week’s open debate (see S/PV.8649), and I think we look
forward to even greater engagement and participation
in public life for women.
We were very pleased that the Deputy SecretaryGeneral was able to visit Eritrea. There is a clear
opportunity for real change in United Nations and
African Union engagement with Eritrea, following
its historic agreement with Ethiopia and the lifting of
sanctions. We believe that it is essential that increased
international engagement deliver further improvements
in regional security and concrete progress on human
rights there.
Finally, with regard to Ethiopia, I join other
colleagues in paying tribute to Prime Minister Abiy
Ahmed and the award to him of the Nobel Peace
Prize, which is an important testimony to his role in
promoting peace in the region and political reform at
home. What everyone has said about the Ethiopian
President is extremely important. It is very good that
50 per cent of Ethiopia’s Cabinet positions are reserved
for women, and that may be a lesson for all of us. We
hope to see Ethiopia build on that progress and promote
women’s participation as voters and candidates in
upcoming elections, as well as reforming security and
justice institutions to make them more responsive to
the needs of women and girls. The continued outbreaks
of violence in Ethiopia are concerning, however, and

S/PV. 8657

they highlight the need for all actors to work to reform
institutions and the importance of peaceful dialogue.
We wanted to make this meeting interactive. I
therefore would like to ask a few questions, if I may, in
addition to those that my colleagues have already raised.
First, with regard to girls’ education, how can we
make sure that increased investment in girls’ education
translates into women’s economic empowerment? I
think the Indonesian Ambassador already asked what
practical steps would improve women’s participation
in peacekeeping. The Deputy Secretary-General has
given us some, but if there is more that can be said
in that regard, we look forward to it. Besides that,
what additional support do our briefers think women
mediators and civil-society actors need so that they can
strengthen their participation in political dialogue?
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would like to invite first the Deputy SecretaryGeneral and then the observer of the African Union to
respond to the good number of questions that have been
asked today. I will be happy to repeat them if necessary.
I give the floor to the Deputy Secretary-General
The Deputy Secretary-General: I would like
to once again express my deep appreciation to the
Security Council for giving us this opportunity to
share what I think was not just a visit to the region but
one that left us with a lot of homework to do when we
came back, particularly considering that the Council is
underscoring the urgency with which we need to see
actions at scale to support the Horn of Africa. I would
also like to add my voice to the congratulations on the
leadership of our colleague from South Africa during
his presidency in October. It was an important month
for women and peace and security, and beyond that the
Security Council’s visit was critical to reinforcing our
presence in the Horn of Africa, and now under your
leadership for November, Madam President, we are
starting off with a resumption of the open debate on
women and peace and security.
We have had a number of initiatives proposed in
the United Nations since we have been discussing the
visit with our colleagues and asking what more we can
do. First, with regard to very specific issues that were
raised during the visit, our peacekeeping departments
are already looking at what we can do with regard to
the uniform list and the kits being issued, for instance.

19-3499219/21

S/PV.8657

Peace and security in Africa

That is already something that we can take cognizance
of. But what is important is how to get better feedback,
such as this, that does not have to wait for a visit. I think
that is what concerned us most. We should not have to
wait for a visit to be aware of such challenges.
The capacity-building that we are providing
is insufficient, and we need more of it for women
peacekeepers. They need support in the cases where
they have not had specific training — for example, the
centres that our Ethiopian peacekeepers referred to,
saying that they need more of that, and that we need to
identify and map the whole range of relevant skill gaps.
In our missions too, it would be helpful to have support
for positions that are focused on better understanding
those gender-specific aspects. We therefore want
to encourage Member States, as they consider the
resources envelope, to put more into that. It does not
take very much, but it is not there right now.
In addition, peacekeeping has many trained
mediators who are women, but we do not have the
resources to deploy them, or the kinds of checks and
balances that we need to determine the complement of
women engaged in those negotiations right from the
outset, when the seeds are being sown. We all have a
role to play in that by asking those questions and trying
to push the envelope further in order to see women at
the table from the very beginning. That was particularly
applicable in the Sudan, where peace negotiations have
started, and the response to us was that they had only
just started, they were not there yet and would include
women eventually. But women need to be there from
the very start. I think that was something that the Prime
Minister was very enthusiastic and supportive of, but I
believe that the rest of the community around the table
should take it up quite quickly.
In other places, again concerning peacekeepers,
some of the issues were from the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), which has more than
1,000 peacekeepers. The feedback we received in that
regard, as we manage and support that Mission, was
that we also need to be aware of some of the needs.
Regarding girls’ education, which is a tremendously
important part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and Agenda 2063, without which we will
not silence the guns, we must have educated young
people, particularly women and girls, whether as part
of the basic right to education at the beginning, secondchance education or a renewal of skills, which we found
20/21

04/11/2019

among a number of adolescent girls who would like to
join the marketplace and to be a better empowered to
take such decisions not just for themselves but also
since they impact the community. That reinforces what
we saw in the cases of the Sudan and Eritrea, namely,
that really looking at their plans and how inclusive
the curriculum was of girls entering education was
important. We continue to reinforce that.
The decade of action for the delivery of the
Sustainable Development Goals is approaching. I think
that this is something that requires that we undertake
much more analysis and planning, taking into account
the current context. Prevention and transitions are lenses
that we look through in Africa in particular regarding
girls’ education. On the one hand, it is prevention
but, on the other hand, there are very many girls and
women who have been kept out of the space of being
empowered, particularly through education. As we look
towards the strategy for the Horn of Africa and for the
plan in the Sudan, it is an important area of planning,
including to see the investment that is going to be made
in the line item that we put for girls’ education.
I am not sure if there were any more questions that
were asked, but we are following this up. Agency by
agency, it also becomes a matter for the United Nations
development system as well.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for the clarifications she has provided.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Mohammed to
respond to comments.
Ms. Mohammed: Before I comment, I would like
to say that it is quite refreshing to have the opportunity
to actually engage, and I hope we will have more such
opportunities during this presidency. A number of
questions were asked, which I will try and answer in
general, with just a few country-specific comments.
First, regarding the Sudan, the implementation of
the 17 August Constitutional Declaration, which was
mentioned several times, needs to be encouraged and
accompanied. But, most important, the sanctions need
to be lifted in order for the Sudan to be able to move
forward and, of course, we must continually encourage
it to support more women’s participation. Last week,
the Council had such an opportunity by hearing firsthand from some of the actors that are actually on the
ground (see S/PV.8649), and such engagements should
be encouraged in order to raise their voices.
19-34992

04/11/2019

Peace and security in Africa

On South Sudan, something that has also been
mentioned a couple of times is the need for accelerating
the implementation of the revitalized peace agreement.
The international community needs to maintain
pressure. That also has to be supported, and the fact
that there is a major humanitarian crisis in that country
should not be overlooked. Women and children are the
ones who suffer the most in that situation.
Regarding Somalia, which I believe was also
mentioned a couple of times, and the resumption of
the dialogue between the central Government and the
federal member states, as I mentioned briefly last week
also within the framework of our cooperation with
the United Nations (see S/PV.8650), we have started
exploring the development of a political strategy to
facilitate coherence in our engagements in the country.
I would also like to express appreciation for the
four points that were mentioned by Indonesia regarding
the primacy of peaceful settlements and disputes,
particularly the fact that we work with a united front
and, by confronting some of these common challenges,
we will be able to have more of an impact. Regarding
encouraging more female peacekeepers, I think that
the Deputy Secretary-General has addressed that
point. However, I would also like to re-emphasize that
whatever support and encouragement we give, we have
to also consider the fact that there are some basic needs
of that women peacekeepers have and that must be
taken into consideration in Somalia. We heard from the
African Union Special Envoy for Women, Peace and
Security about basic needs, such as bathroom facilities
that are exclusive to women and having privacy — for

S/PV. 8657

example, sanitary towels and being able to have access
to communications to speak that to their families on a
regular basis. These are simple things that can easily be
overlooked but make a huge impact in supporting them
or encouraging them to actually stay on the ground,
including when they are deployed.
My second to last point regards what the Deputy
Secretary-General said about girls’ education, which,
I believe, clearly translates to women’s economic
empowerment. We have seen that in so many different
country situations where it can be seen how, by educating
girls, eventually even the mothers are educated by
proxy just based on the experiences they have on the
ground. So that should definitely be fully encouraged.
Finally, I believe the Peacebuilding Commission
provides an opportunity. It is currently engaged in the
greater Horn of Africa. I hope that with the upcoming
review, opportunities such as with regard to coherence,
financing and ownership will be explored, particularly
at the regional level and working with the regional
mechanisms and regional economic communities.
The President: I thank Her Excellency
Ms. Mohammed for the clarifications she has provided.
I would like to remind colleagues about the
five-minute rule regarding the delivery of statements.
As it is difficult for speakers to see their own microphone
flashing if they speak for more than five minutes but
it is very visible to everyone else around the table, I
would invite those sitting behind their Ambassadors, as
a kindness, to make them aware.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

19-3499221/21
