II.

32/5.

Recent illegal Israeli measures in the occupied Arab territories designed to change
the legal status, geographical nature and
demographic composition of those territories in contravention of the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, of
Israel's international obligations under the
fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and of
United Nations resolutions, and obstruction of efforts aimed at achieving a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Stressing the urgent need to achieve a just and lasting peace in the Middle East,
Expressing grave anxiety and concern over the_ pr~sent serious situation in the occupied Arab temtones
as a result of the continued Israeli occupation and the
measures and actions taken by the Government of
Israel, as the occupying Power, and designed to chan~e
the legal status, geographical nature and demographic
composition of those territories,
Considering that the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, 6 is applicable to all the Arab territories occupied since 5 June 1967,
1. Determines that all such measures and actions
taken by Israel in the Palestinian and other Arab. t~rritories occupied since 1967 ha~e no legal va~idity
and constitute a serious obstruction of efforts aimed
at achieving a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East;
2. Strongly deplores the persistence of Israel in
carrying out such measures, in !?articular the. cst~blishment of settlements in the occupied Arab terntones;
3. Calls upon Israel to comply strictly with its
international obligations in accordance with the principles of international law and the pro~isions ?f. !he
Geneva Convention relative to the Protect10n of Ctviltan
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949;
4. Calls once more upon the Government of Israel,
as the occupying Power, to desist_ forthwit~ from taking
any action which would result m chan~mg the ~e_gal
status, geographical nature or _dem~graph1c co~pos1t~on
of the Arab territories occupied smce 1967, mcludmg
Jerusalem;
5. Urges all States parties to the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War to ensure respect for and compliance
with its provisions in all the Arab territories occupied
by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem;
6. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To undertake urgent contacts with the Government of Israel to ensure the prompt implementation
of the present resolution;
( b) To submit a report to the Generral Assembly
and the Security Council, not later than 31 December
1977, on the results of his contacts;
7. Requests the Security Council to :eview the
situation in the light of the present resolution and of
the report of the Secretary-General.
52nd plenary meetinf?
28 October 1977
6 United

13

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.

32/7.

Question
Mayotte

of

the

Comorian

island

of

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 Dec~mber
1960, containing the Declaration_ on the Grantmg of
Independence to Colonial Countnes and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also resolution 3161 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, in which the General Assembly affirmed
the unity and territorial integrity of the Comoros and
through which the representative of France affirmed
the intention of the Government of France to respond
faithfully to the aspirations of the Comorian people,
Recalling that those aspirations were clearly expressed by the overwhelming v~te of. ~2 De~ember
1974 in favour of independence m political umty and
territorial integrity in accordance with the provisions
of General Assembly resolution 3291 (XXIX) of 13
December 1974,
Considering that in its communication of 17 O<:to~er
1975 7 the Security Council recommended the adm1ss1on
of the Comoros to membership in the United Nations
and that on that occasion France raised no objection,
Recalling that by General Assembly resolution 3385
(XXX) of 12 November 1975 the Comor~s were admitted to membership in the United Nations as an
entity composed of the islands of Anjouan, GrandeComore, Mayotte and Moheli, as em~hasized in resolution 3291 (XXIX) and other resolutions,
Recalling the provisions of resolution_ 31/4_ of 21
October 1976, mainly its paragraph 6 m which the
General Assembly called upon the Government of
France to enter into negotiations with the Government
of the Comoros,
Bearing in mind the efforts of the Organization of
African Unity, especially those of its Committee of
Seven on the Question of the Comorian Island of
Mayotte, which met at Moroni on 5 and 6 September
1977 and recommended that individual and collective
efforts should be exerted in order to bring about a
just and urgent solution by the Government of Fr~nce
to this problem which preoccupies the whole of Afnca, 8
l. Calls upon the Government of the Comoros and
the Government of France to work out a just and
equitable settlement for the problem of the_ ~omori~n
island of Mayotte which respects the political umty
and territorial integrity of the Comoros, in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
on this issue;
2. Mandates the Secretary-General to take, in close
consultation with the Government of the Comoros and
the Government of France, any initiative in favour of
negotiations between the two Governments;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General of the
United Nations to contact the Administrative Secretary-General of the Organization of A_frican Unity w~th
a view to obtaining any assistance which may help him
to discharge his mission;
7 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, ~1 nnexes, agenda item 22, document Al I 0302.
~ See A/32/305, annex II.
