TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR

nd
MEETING
NEW

6 MAY 1968

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1422) , . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , , , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(al Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8560);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under General Assembly resolution
2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem (S/8146) . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

s/W. 1422

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

L

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

Held in New York

AND TWENTY-SECOND
on Monday,

President: Lord CARADON
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1422)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to tb.e President
of the Security Council (S/8560);
Report of the Secretary-General under General
Assembly resolution
2254 (ES-V) relating to
Jerusalem (S/8i46).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 25 April Ii68 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8560);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under General Assembly resolution 2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem (Sl
8146)

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
previously taken by the Council, I shall now invite the
representatives of Jordan and Israel to take seats at the
Council table in order to participate, without the right to
vote, in the discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr, M. II. El-Farra
(Jordan)
and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT: I wish to make a short report to the
Council on the request made by the Ambassador of Algeria
for the circulation of certain documents to which reference
was made at our last meeting.
3. I wish to report to the Council that eight of the nine
exhibits will be circulated tomorrow as an addendum to the
provisional
verbatim record of the 1421st meeting. I
understand
that 200 copies of the book entitled The

MEETING

6 May 1968, at 11 a.m.

Resistance of the Western Bank oj’ Jordan to Israeli
Occupation 1967 are to be provided to the Secretariat.
Accordingly, the booklet will be made available to delegations in the very near future.
4. The Council will now continue its consideration of the
question before it. The first speaker inscribed on my list is
the representative of the Soviet Union.
5. Mr. MALIK (Union of, Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): The Security Council is continuing its consideration of the situation which has developed in
Jerusalem as a result of the acts of aggression committed by
Israel against the Arab States last June and of the illegal
measures undertaken by the occupation authorities in
annexing the Arab sector of Jerusalem. As you know, the
most recent of these measures was the military parade held
by the Israel authorities in that part of the city on 2 May,
in violation both of the General Assembly resolution on the
inadmissibility of changes in the status of Jerusalem
adopted at the fifth emergency special session
(2253 (ES-V)/ and of the Security Council resolution
calling on Israel to refrain from holding the military parade
[250 (1968)]. This was a provocative demonstration of
policy from a position of strength. By holding that parade,
Israel pursued its purpose of strengthening its illegal claims
to the Arab sector of Jerusalem.
6. Through the Secretary-General’s report and the annex
thereto [S/8567] the Council was officially informed that
all types of troops of the Israel army, including the air
force, took part in this parade, and that detachments
equipped with tanks, heavy weapons and missiles and
rockets were brought into the occupied Arab sector of the
city.
7. Israel’s attitude to the relevant Security Council resolution clearly exposes the real aims of the Tel Aviv authorities
in their Middle East policy, These actions show yet again
that Israel is still pursuing the course of aggravating tension
in the Middle East and organizing further acts of provocation in an attempt to impede and frustrate the Security
Council’s attempts to reach a political settlement in that
part of the world.
8. At the Council’s last meeting we heard a statement by
the Mayor of Arab Jerusalem, Mr. El-Khatib, 011 the
situation in that city. In this connexion, I must again point
out that, irrespective of the verbiage used by the President
of the Security Council in expressing his reluctance to refer
to Mr. El-Khatib as mayor, the Security Council in fact
invited and listened to Mr. El-Khatib not as a private

individual, but as a competent official, as the mayor of the
Arab sector of Jerusalem, in which, until its occupation
by
the Israelis, there lived more than 70,000people.
9. We also listened with great attention to the representative of Jordan.
10. The information submitted to the Council by the
Mayor of Jerusalem and the Jordan delegation, together
with the facts already known, shows that the Israel
aggressors are still pursuing a policy of tyranny and violence
against the peaceful Arab population in the occupied sector
of the city. They are driving the Arabs out of their native
city, subjecting them to terror and violence and depriving
them of their fundamental human rights.
11. In

violation

of

General Assembly

resolutions

2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V) of 4 July and 14 July 1967
respectively, the Israel Parliament adopted a decision to
extend the laws of Israel to the Arab sector of the city of
Jerusalem and to include this sector in the Israel municipality of the city. The Israel Government, spuming the appeals
of the United Nations, has issued a number of statements
declaring its intention of “israelizing” the occupied Jordanian sector of Jerusalem and of adopting measures which
would permanently deprive the city of its Arab character
and essence.
12. The Israel authorities have followed up these annexationist statements with the practical measures so eloquently
described here, at the 1421st meeting by the Mayor of
Jerusalem. The illegality of these actions is obvious, The
occupation of Arab lands and the coercive measures used
against the Arab population are acts of aggression, violating
the United Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. These actions are also in flagrant
contravention of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights-covenants of which Israel was
one of the signatories. But what is Israel’s attitude towards
its international obligations, particularly those deriving
from these covenants?
13. Let us consider what rights are enjoyed by the Arabs
living in the occupied sector of Jerusalem and in the other
territories invaded by Israel. They have no rights of
freedom or of personal inviolability. From the information
given by the representative of Jordan and from documents
submitted to the Security Council, including the report of
the personal representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr, Thalmann, dated 12 September 1967 [S/8146], it is
evident that the slightest disagreement with the policy of
the occupation authorities results in either the arrest or the
forcible eviction, or both, of the person concerned. Many
political and public figures have been expelled from Arab
Jerusalem for refusing to co-operate with the invaders, An
example of the persecution of the indigenous Arab population for refusing to co-operate with the invaders and
become collaborationists is the expulsion of the Mayor, of,
Arab Jerusalem from his native city. In this connexioni it
should be recalled that similar methods were widely u&i
by the Hitlerite annexationists in the territories that they
occupied during the Second World War.

14. The representative of Jordan adduced numerous facts
to show that religious freedom is being suppressed among
Arab Moslems in occupied Jerusalem. These actions of the
Israel invaders affect the interests of citizens of many
countries, whose religious feelings are offended by the
aggressor’s atrocities and by the desecration of cherished
historical monuments in Jerusalem.
15. The real nature of the so-called “new order” established by the Israel invaders in Jerusalem can bejudged by
the cruelty with which they suppressed a peaceful demonstration of Arab women who were protesting against the
holding of a military parade in the Arab sector of the city.
The Council has learned of this from official documents
submitted by the representative of Jordan on 1 May 1968

[S/8.%8].
16. In this connexion, I must recall also the special
telegram sent to the Government of Israel in March 1968
by the United Nations Commission on Human Kights,
which read:
“The United Nations Commission on Human Rights is
distressed to learn from newspapers of Israeli acts of
destroying homes of Arab civilian population inhabiting
the areas occupied by the Israeli authorities subsequent to
the hostilities of June 1967. The Commission on Human
Rights calls upon the Government of Israel to desist
forthwith from indulging in such practices and to respect
human rights and fundamental freedoms.“r
17. That Commission
also adopted a resolution
[6 (XXIV)/z containing a demand that the Government of
Israel “should take the necessary measures in order to
facilitate the return of those inhabitants to their own
country without delay”.
18. When he spoke here, the representative of Israel made
vain attempts to refute all these facts. He chose an
unappealing and unconvincing method of doing so: he
delivered a lecture to the Council-and this is not the first
time he has done so-on the ancient history of Jerusalem,
making out that the numerical preponderance of the Jewish
population in Jerusalem at present gives Israel the right to
appropriate the whole of this city, which does not belong
to Israel. Nor did he shrink from distorting history by
omitting to mention the well-known fact that before the
State of Israel was created the Arab population of
Jerusalem was not smaller than the Jewish population.
Throughout its history, Jerusalem, with its historical and
religious monuments of three religions, has been a multinational city. As for his reference to the fact that the Jews
at present constitute the majority of the population in
Jerusalem, here again, he is, to put it mildly, guilty of
inaccuracy. He attempts to gloss over the well-known fact
that, if there is now a certain numerical predominance of
Jews.over Arabs in Jerusalem as a whole, this does not date
back to the ancient past to which Mr, Tekoah refers us but
is simply the result of the forcible expulsion of the
indigenous inhabitants, the Arabs, from the western part .of
‘: I-See Official Records pf the Economic and Social COUncil,
Forty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 4, pam. 400.
2I&id., p. 151.

Jerusalem when it was captured by Israel in 1948. The
lands and parts of the city wrested by force from the Arabs
have been just as illegally settled by Israeli immigrants.

Israel, as the result of Israel’s aggression and the annexationist policy of the occupiers. Israel’s policy of aggression
has been condemned by the United Nations, by the
Security Council and by world public opinion. The situation created in Jerusalem by the occupiers’ tyranny and
unlawful actions is increasing tension throughout the
Middle East. The facts show that the ruling circles in Tel
Aviv are continuing their policy of expansion, invasion and
appropriation of other people’s lands, without considering
the fatal consequences of such a policy for the State of
Israel itself.

19. In this connexion, the Security Council cannot ignore
the report received from the representative of Jordan,
which states that after last year’s aggression the activities of
extremist circles in Israel and Jerusalem were stepped up,
and they adopted a slogan calling for the creation of a
“greater Israel” at the expense of the occupied Arab
territories. In this matter, the Israel extremists are imitating
the practices and methods of the Hitlerites. Their slogan:
“This land will be ours if we occupy and appropriate and
develop it” conjures up the dark days of the Hitlerite
aggressors who unleashed the Second World War under the
slogan of creating “greater Germany” by conquering other
people’s lands. We all know what fate awaited the instigators of this inhuman ideology.

23. We have already stated, and we consider it necessary
to emphasize again, that the responsibility for the delay in a
political settlement in the Middle East lies wholly and
entirely with Israel and with those imperialist circles which
protect the Israel aggressors.
24. It is the Security Council’s duty to demand that Israel
should desist from such illegal acts. In accordance with the
United Nations Charter the Council should take all necessary steps to eliminate the obstacles to a politicai settlement in the Middle East.

20. In his statements in the Council the representative of
Israel invariably talks about the hardships of the Jews
during the thousands of years when Jerusalem was under
foreign domination, from the time of the Roman Empire
and the Roman legions to the reign of British imperialism in
the Middle East. He has rightly described all these foreign
invaders as tyrants and oppressors of the people of
occupied Jerusalem; but he has tried to convince the
Security Council that the Israel invaders and occupiers are
benefactors concerned for the welfare of the Arab population in the territories occupied by their troops. Why did
Mr. Tekoah have to tell us all these fairy tales? Obviously,
to divert the Security Council’s attention from the acts of
tyranny and lawlessness which the Israel occupiers are
perpetrating today in Jerusalem and the other occupied
Arab terrjtories. This is not the first time the aggressors
have used this tactic. The representative of Israel spoke to
the Council about a far-reaching housing programme, which
he represented as an act of benevolence towards the Arab
population of Jerusalem. But the facts tell a different story.
The foreign invaders have brought the Arabs not prosperity
and progress, but eviction and suffering; the new houses are
being built not for Arabs, but for Israel settlers on land
taken away from Arabs, on the sites of demolished Arab
houses. Arab dwellings are being demolished and destroyed
by bulldozers. The population is being driven out of the
city, adding to the vast numbers of Palestinian refugees who
have been deprived of their land, their houses and their
means of livelihood.

25. As many members of the Security Council have
repeatedly pointed out, the basic condition for a settlement
is the immediate withdrawal of the Israel troops from all
the Arab territories they have occupied, in accordance with
the Security Council resolution of 22 November 1967
[242 (1967/l. The sooner this is done, the sooner it will be
possible to bring about a settlement and __^,
restore peace in
_,--_
the Middle East.
26. In regard to the situation in Jerusalem which is here
under discussion, the Soviet delegation would like to
reiterate that the Soviet Union will continue to give all
possible support and assistance to the Arab States in their
legitimate struggle to eliminate the consequences of Israel’s
aggression.
27. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): The situation in the Middle
East continues to pose the gravest threat to peace and cause
profound concern throughout the world. It cannot be
resolved unless adequate action is taken with regard to each
of its three component elements. These are: first, Israel’s
refusal to withdraw its forces from the Arab territories
which it overran in June 1967; secondly, Israel’s military
reprisals and persistent violations of the cease-fire; thirdly,
Israel’s attempt to annex the Holy City of Jerusalem. The
three elements are interrelated. Each requires full consideration by the Security Council.

21. These are just B few examples of the tyranny of the
Israeli occupiers in Jerusalem. It was reported in the press
in March 1968 that 265 plots of land had been taken away
from the local Arab inhabitants in the Arab sector of
Jerusalem, and these were all given to Israel settlers.
Preparations are being made to transfer another 500 plots.
A special plan has been devised for the mass eviction of
Arabs from Jerusalem and for resettling about 10,000
Israelis in the Jordanian part of the city in the very near
future. These are the so-called acts of ‘“charity” which the
Israel occupiers perform for the Arab population.

28. The Council dealt with the first element when it
adopted resolution 242 (1967). This resolution enunciated
the basic principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition
of territory by war, and called for the withdrawal of Israeli
armed forces from territories-which
means all territoriesoccupied in the recent conflict. That resolution has not yet
been carried out. The Council still awaits Israel’s unequivocal declaration that it accepts the .resolution in its
entirety and will co-operate in its implementation.

22. The Council is considering not the ancient history of
Jerusalem but the situation which has been created in that
city, as indeed in the other Arab territories occupied by

29. The second element was dealt with by the Council at a
series of meetings in March when it adopted resolution
3

Maria of Portugal as far back as 1624. The stolen objects
are reported to have been subsequently restored. Nevertheless, the fact that such a theft, which would have been
inconceivable under the Islamic regime, occurred under
Israeli occupation, is clearly symptomatic. Sixthly, we have
the expropriation of 838 acres of the areas adjacent to the
old city and the uprooting of the Arab inhabitants for the
purpose of building homes to settle Jewish immigrants,
This, like the demolition of homes in the Maghrabi quarter,
was a clear violation of Article 53 of the Geneva Convention,a which expressly prohibits any destruction of real or
personal property belonging to private persons or to the
State or public authorities or organizations. The seventh
instance is the policy of demolishing the homes of so-called
“suspected terrorists”. Such a pretext can be used to justify
any act of extreme repression.

248 (1968) of 24 March 1968. This resolution condemned
a large-scale military action launched by Israel in flagrant
violation of the United Nations Charter and the cease-fire
and declared that such actions of military reprisal could not
be tolerated.
30. We are now dealing with the third element, which
pertains to Jerusalem. The Holy City of Jerusalem is, of
course, included in the territories from which, under the
United Nations Charter and specifically under resolution
242 (1967), Israel has the inescapable obligation to withdraw. But Jerusalem has become the focus of the Middle
East conflict because it has tragically fallen a victim to a
special and wholly illegal annexationist move by Israel.
3 1. This move must be reversed and the measures it entails
rescinded if the prospects of peace in the Middle East are
not to suffer irretrievable damage.

34. All these acts culminated in the military demonstration held by Israel in the old city of Jerusalem on 2 May.
Since,it was this culmination which brought the situation in
Jerusalem compellingly to the Council’s attention, my
delegation considers it necessary to make some observations
about it here.

32. My delegation believes-and the belief is widely
shared-that Israel’s actions in regard to Jerusalem constitute the most acute threat in the Middle East situation. The
threat is directed not only against the Arab nations, but
also against the hundreds of millions of adherents of Islam,
Christianity and Judaism. The special and unique importance of Jerusalem for the international community has
been repeatedly emphasized by the United Nations. Any
arbitrary act with regard to the status of the city of
Jerusalem is an assault on the most cherished sensibilities of
the followers of these three world religions.

35. This demonstration was but the latest example of the
impunity with which Israel defies the resolutions of the
Security Council. Mr. Eban attempted to justify this defiance in his letter to the Secretary-General of 30 April 1968
/S/856.5/. That remarkable document, however, despite its
arguments, failed to explain why Israel’s ceremony of
thanksgiving should take the form of a massive display of
military might. Was it necessary for Israel to overawe and
try to humiliate the vanquished in the City of Peace, which
for thousands of years has been hallowed as the City of
God, and at whose portals even conquerors have become
pilgrims and, halting their cohorts, have walked in
humility?

33. Since June 1967, Israel has embarked on a series of
arbitrary acts designed to change radically the national and
historical character of the Holy City. These acts have been
extensively reported in the world press and also brought
out in the report submitted by the personal representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Thalmann [S/8146]. They
have been described to us with clarity and in convincing
detail by the Mayor of Jerusalem, Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib, to
whom my delegation would like to pay tribute for a
presentation as factual as it was free from vehemence.
These acts can be summarized as follows: first, the
enactment on 27 June 1967 of legislation enabling Israel to
annex the old city of Jerusalem and its environs; secondly,
the creation of a climate of terror in the old city to bring
about the exodus of its inhabitants; thirdly, immediately
after the occupation, the dynamiting and bulldozing of 135
houses belonging to the Moslem Waqf in the Maghrabi
quarter adjoining the Haram Ash-Sharif. Paragraph 29 of
the Thalmann report states: “To the destruction of the war
new destruction had been added.” Fourthly, we have the
dissolution of the Arab Municipal Council and the banishment from their city of the Mayor and other religious and
political leaders, and fifthly, acts of disrespect in the Holy
Places. The authorization given to the Chief Rabbi of the
Israeli army and others to conduct prayers in the sanctuary
of Haram Ash-Sharif, the thinly-veiled intention to rebuild
the Jewish temple within the sacred precincts of the Al
Aqsa Mosque and intrusion into the Holy Places during
hours of prayer are examples of such disrespect which
cannot but constitute provocations detrimental to peace. It
was under the Israeli regime that the gold halo and tiara
were stolen from the statue of the Virgin Mary in the
Church of the Holy Sepulchre, which was the gift of Queen

36. We were moved by the ancient Hebrew words of
lamentation quoted by Mr. Eban in his letter; but was it not
incongruous that the lament which was evoked by the
destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans 2,000 years ago
should be directed against those who for centuries have
been the loving custodians of the city and have practised
tolerance and demonstrated their veneration for Jerusalem? The picture that Mr. Eban tried to conjure up was
one of Zion spreading forth her hands in helplessness, But
in reality the picture was one of the uncoiling of an endless
column of lethal weapons and the crash and thunder of the
infernal machines of war.
37. In passing, I must observe here that Mr. Eban’s letter
did not even mention Security Council resolution
250 (1968), which was adopted unanimously on 27 April
1968. But, apart from this, there were two fallacies in that
letter: first, the question at issue was not whether the
provocative parade held by Israel was within or across the
cease-fire line; the question at issue was what right Israel
had to brandish its military might in a city over which it
can claim no sovereignty and whose status it has been
3 GenevaConventionrelativeto the Protection of CivilianPersons
in Time of war (United Nations, neaty Series, vol. 75 (19501,
No. 973).
4

expressly called upon not to alter; secondly, the whole basis
of Mr. Eban’s letter was the unexpressed premise that in
matters affecting international peace and security, and
those which exercise the universal conscience, it is Israel’s
prerogative, by virtue of its military power and its victory,
to act without the slightest regard for the unanimous
recommendations of the Security Council or for the
conscience of mankind as voiced by the General Assembly.
There can be no question that this premise is fatal to the
restoration of peace in the Middle East.

respect for private property and personal rights and
freedoms.
“132. It was repeatedly emphasized that the population of East Jerusalem wasgiven no opportunity to state
for itself whether it waswilling to live in the Israel State
community. It was claimed that the right of self-determination, in accordance with the United Nations Charter
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, had
therefore been violated.

38. Let us be clear about the nature of Israel’s act, which,
superficially, might appear to be a mere celebration. If
Israel had chosen to comply with the Council’s resolution,
would it have entailed any sacrifice of its interests, any
renunciation of its claims? Certainly not. All that Israel
was asked to do was to abstain from a provocative act and
to show a decent respect for the opinion of mankind. All
that it was urged to do was to restrain a certain exuberance.
That Israel will not exercise even this modicum of restraint
in deference to the Council’s call gives us only too clear an
idea of how it conceives its policies towards the issues of
war and peace. It is indeed tragic that belligerence and
vehemence rather than reason should animate Israel’s
pronouncements in regard to Jerusalem.

“133. In conclusion, it waspointed out that the Arqb
population places its trust in the United Nations and
relies on the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly.”
In paragraph 135 of the samereport, we read:
cc. . . one detected concern for the future. Would the
situation remain as it was,or werefurther convulsions to
be expected? What would be the consequences if the
Holy Places were under the sovereignty of a State which
identified itself with one religion and which had never
concealed the fact that, where Jerusalem was concerned,
its political objectives coincided with the religious objectives? ”

39. In dealing with the situation, my delegation must
stress that the Council is dealing with matters OEa legal and
political nature. The General Armistice Agreement of
3 April 1949, article XII of which provides that it “shall
remain in force until a peaceful settlement between the
parties is achieved”: regulates the present status. General
Assembly resolutions 181 (II), I94 (III) and 303 (IV)
recognize the special importance of Jerusalem to the
international community. General Assembly resolutions
22.5’3 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V) have declared invalid the
measures taken by Israel to change the status of Jerusalem,
and have called upon Israel to rescind these measures and to
desist from any action which would alter the status of the
Holy City.

41. Thus we see the situation in Jerusalem in its legal and
political aspects. These alone concern the Council. It is
therefore nothing but deliberate obfuscation on the part of
Israel that it should draw our attention to an aspect of the
situation which, to put the best interpretation on it, is
wholly subjectivist. I repeat: we are dealing with matters of
a legal and political nature. A rational disposition of these
matters cannot but be prejudiced if we inject into the
discussion the elements of a mystique, the assertion of an
exclusive primordial right which is inimical to a peaceful
international order.
42. We have the greatest respect-and I say this in all good
faith-for the religion and culture of Judaism and for its
sentiments regarding Jerusalem. But it is not permissible to
cite the name of this religion and culture and invoke its
memories or emotions in order to lend justification to acts
which are wholly illegal and which indicate a complete
rejection of the decisions of the United Nations. Such
attempts at justification, besides doing a disservice to the
religion itself, can only make the conflict implacable, the
problems insoluble and bring to naught any attempt to
restore even a semblance of peace to the Middle East.

40. These provisions, backed by the Incontestable legal
principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by force, prohibit any attempt by Israel to
establish sovereignty over Jerusalem. They are further
reinforced by the clearly expressed will of the population
of the old city of Jerusalem. In paragraphs 131-133 of the
report of the Secretary-General [S/8146/ under General
Assembly resolution 2254 (ES-V), based on the mission of
his personal representative, it is stated:
“ 131. The Personal Representative was told that the
Arabs recognized a military occupation regime as such
and were ready to co-operate with such a r&me in
dealing with current questions of administration and
public welfare. However, they were opposed to civil
incorporation into the Israel State system. They regarded
that as a violation of the acknowledged rule of international law which prohibited an occupying Power from
changing the legal and administrative structure in the
occupied territory and at the same time demanded
4 See Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth
Special Supplement NO. 1.

43. The outstanding theme in Israel’s case regarding
Jerusalem is that the Jewish people have a special attachment to the Holy City. The question then arises: does this
mean that in total denial of the sovereign right of the
people of Jerusalem itself, with total disregard for the
universal vocation of the city and in total defiance of the
principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by force, Israel should be allowed to annex
Jerusalem? What basis is there to the claim that Israel
represents the entire Jewish population of the world? Even
if, for the sake of argument, this groundless claim were
accepted, what justification is there for the assertion that
the Jewish right to Jerusalem is superior to the Islamic or

Year,

5

48. Secondly, the Israeli representative is not even consistent with his own doctrine. What point in history does he
regard as the final determinant of the national status of a
territory?
In the case of Palestine, if his doctrine be
accepted, why should the determinant be the point at
which the Jewish people conquered it and not the
preceding period when it was inhabited by other peoples?

the Christian right? Above all, what is there in this right
that is superior even to law?
44. Two facts were established by the Commission aPpointed in 1930 by the United Kingdom, as the Mandatory
Power, with the approval of the Council of the League of
Nations. First, the legal proprietary right to the Wailing
Wall belongs exclusively to Moslems. Secondly, during more
than twelve centuries of Islamic sovereignty over Jemalem
free access for the Jews to the Wailing Wall for devotional
purposes was recognized as a right ab arztiwx Whatever the
persecution suffered by the Jewish people elsewhere, it is
an unquestionable historical fact that they enjoyed tolerance, asylum and freedom of worship and devotion in
Islamic Jerusalem. This is the maximum scope of their
rights in the Holy City.

49. Thirdly, the Israeli representative tried to show that
Jerusalem had not been Arab. What else has it been since
the seventh century? The fact that it was under the rule of
Ottoman Turks-an Islamic people-for centuries made it
no lessArab than if it had been consistently underArab
rule. Surely the Israeli representativewould not expectus
to forget that we are dealing here with periodsof history
when national differentiations had not yet crystailizedand
the living organismwasnot a nation but a civilization.

45. The spokesmen of Israel try to make capital of the
fact that ithey were deprived of these rights for the years
1948 to 1967. What brought about the collapse of the
heritage of tolerance? Is it to be expected that those who
are subjected to cruel injustices should show benevolence to
those who inflict them? It was the sanguinary circumstances of 1948 and the refusal to permit the repatriation
of Arab refugees that forced upon the Jordanian authorities
the most unpalatable security precaution of forbidding the
entry of Israelis into the Holy City. The fact that they also
excluded the Arabs living in Israel shows that there was no
discrimtiation against Jews. Besides, we have no grounds to
assume that the Government of Jordan ever intended that
such a precaution, taken in exceptional circumstances,
should become part of a permanent rkgime. King Hussein of
Jordan has said that Jerusalem belongs to the world. This is
a fitting recognition of the universal vocation of Jerusalem.
It certainly implies that the Jewish people should be given
the same access for devotional purposes to the Wailing Wall
as they enjoyed throughout Islamic rule. It implies notbing
more.

50. Fourthly, the Israeli representative tried to lendsome
strengthto his argumentby stressingthe fact that the Arabs
never made Jerusalemtheir capital. His very citing of tllis
fact showshow unawarethe Israeli leadersareof the sense
of sanctity with which religious cultures areimbped.The
holiest place in Islam,Mecca, wasnever a capitalof Islamic
rule. What does that indicate? It indicates that, in Islam,
Mecca is so holy that it is improper to convert it into a seat
of temporal power. The Arabs and other Islamicpeoples
showedthe sameveneration for Jerusalem.It is a veneration which has been expressed by a respectedreligious
leader of the United States, Cardinal Cushing,the Archbishopof Boston.Writing in The Pilot in July 1967,hesaid
regardingthe Holy Placesin Jerusalem: “There shouldbe
no place here for either politics or power, for violenceor
for strife, for destruction or for death. It shouldbea place
of peace.” These words strike the deepest chordsof
sympathy and reverencein the heartsof mankind.
5 1. Fifthly, the Israelirepresentativesought to establish
at
one and the same time that Jews were persecutedin
Jerusalembefore the creation of Israel and that Jerusalem
remainedconsistently Jewish. He quoted censusfiguresfor
Jerusalemunder Ottoman rule. Assuming thesefiguresto
be accurate, they prove nothing but the toleranceof the
Islamic rulers of Jerusalemtowards the Jews.On the basis
of the facts cited by the Israeli representative,the Jewish
attachment to the Holy City has never beenviolatedand
did not remainin need of a fresh vindication by a militant
movement.

46. Let me now briefly turn to the arguments advanced by
the Israeli representative at our meeting on Friday. If I refer
to them only briefly, I wish it to be understood that this is
not a recognition of their validity. One has only to hear
these arguments to be impressed with their incompatibility
with any rational criterion for determining the national
status of territories.
47. First, the Israeli representative propounded the
doctrine that the national status of territories should be
determined by their original inhabitants, who preceded the
population movements which have taken place throughout
history. He in fact went so far as to imply, in a previous
statement, that the peopling of Palestine and of Jerusalem
by non-Jewish inhabitants for 2,000 years was a form of
colonialism. If that is so, then I am afraid the United
Kingdom and the United States, to name only two
countries, are still groaning under colonial rule. The theory
of decolonization advanced by Israel would demand that
the United Kingdom be purged of both Saxons and
Normans, the United States of all the European and African
immigrants and their descendants, and-if I may come
nearer home-that the bulk of their populations be
evacuated from both India and Pakistan. Surely it is a
rather radical programme that Israel seems to have in mind
for reordering the ethnic demography of the whole world.

52. Sixthly, the Israeli representative emphasizedthe
fact that the very name “Jerusalem” is Hebrew.What does
that mean? This is only one of its names current in the
Westernworld. For the Arabs it is “Al Quds”-the Holy.
The original nameof a city is no indication of legaltitle.
53. These are arguments, however, which need to be
disposedof only to prevent confusion. They do not bear
upon the issuesof international peaceand securitywhich
are posedby the situation in Jerusalemand which demand
effective measuresby the Council. We seea drift towards
disasterin the Middle East. If this drift is to behalted,the
Council must call upon Israel to respect the resolutions
of
the GeneralAssemblyconcerning Jerusalem,to rescindall
measurestaken to alter the status of the Holy City, andto
6

refrain from such actions in the future. No settlement of
the Middle East conflict which militates against those
resolutions will be politically viable or morally defensible.
The resolutions constitute the expression of opinion of the
overwhelming
majority of the United Nations, They
embody a commitment made by most members sitting in
the Security Council. They have been hailed by peoples all
over the world. They cannot be relegated to oblivion. Since
Israel has refused to comply with them, the Security
Council must lend the full weight of its authority to
securing their observance.

burned-down villages, rape, kidnapping of women and
many killings. The new wave of flights is considered a link
in the huge stream of refugees who have had to leave
Pakistan since 1947 because of religious persecution. In
the state of West Bengal alone they have, during the last
sixteen years, received 3,400,OOOrefugees.”
59. Israel may at times appear alone in its struggle for life
and in its efforts to ensure its fundamental rights to
equality, security and peace. However, there must be at
least a modicum of decency and veracity in international
relations, especially when a State claims, as Pakistan does,
the privilege of being a member of the Security Council.

54. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Israel
to exercise his right of reply.

60. Membership in the Security Council imposes a special
responsibility on States. This responsibility assumes crucial
importance in the case of permanent members of the
Council and their attitude towards peace and international
security. The Middle East has for a number of years had a
full taste of the Soviet Union’s policy on these vital
matters. This policy has found expression in Soviet vetoes
cast against water development projects in the area, against
the reaffirmation by the Security Council of decisions on
freedom of navigation, against any attempt to censure the
murder of Israeli citizens in Israeli territory. This policy has
been followed through unlimited arms supplies to Governments openly avowing aggressive intentions, through encouragement of intransigence and belligerency. What the
Middle East, however, still has not received from the Soviet
Union, what the Middle East still awaits from the Soviet
Union, is a sign of peace and understanding, Even five
months after the adoption of the Security Council resolution which called for the establishment of a just and
lasting peace and for the promotion of agreement between
the parties, the Middle East has not heard a single word
from Moscow indicating that the Soviet Union is interested
in a just and lasting peace between Israel and the Arab
States, that the Soviet Union supports the attainment of an
agreement between Israel and the Arab States,

55. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Pakistan’s attitude towards
Israel is well known. .Pakistan belongs to the group of
countries of dubious distinction which deny the right of a
Member State of the United Nations to exist, Pakistan has
supported
and identified itself with the Arab war of
aggression against Israel since 1948. Pakistan now supplies
arms to the terrorist organizations operating against Israel,
The Lebanese daily newspaper, EZ-,!i’afa, reported on this in
some detail on 26 April, 1968. The Foreign Minister of
Pakistan declared on 24 April 1967: “Israel’s existence is
the greatest of evils.” The statement delivered just now by
the Pakistani representative is but another expression of
this attitude.
56. Above membership in the Security Council there is the
Charter of the United Nations; above hatred there is justice;
above slander there is truth. Israel, as a Member of the
United Nations, challenges and rejects Pakistan’s right to
speak in the name of Charter principles or in the name of
human rights, in the name of universal religious interests, in
the name of the philosophy of history or in the name of
peace.
57. Does the representative of Pakistan really conceive
that the world does not know, that the world does not
remember, what Pakistan stands for? Here, for instance, is
what the Argentine daily newspaper, El Tribuno, wrote on
23 February 1964:

61. Instead, singling out one point in the resolution
[242 (1967/l of last November, the Soviet Government
demands that we deal with it and ignore all the others. This
is what it calls a political solution. However, the Security
Council’s resolution of 22 November 1967 referred not
only to withdrawal. Withdrawal is one of a list of principles
on which a just and lasting peace is to be based. We still
eagerly await a pronouncement on the part of the Soviet
Government that it favours a just and lasting peace
agreement in the Middle East, that it supports the establishment of secure and recognized boundaries to replace the
cease-fire lines and the demarcation and truce lines which
preceded them, that it ranges itself on the side of the
internationally accepted right to freedom of navigation,

“Over 60,000 men, women and children, mostly of
Christian tribes, fled from Pakistan in recent weeks. The
exodus, due apparently to religious persecution, began
suddenly on 18 January. Good luck did not always
accompany the fugitives: on 6 February some 3,000
Pakistanis fell in an ambush prepared by the police of
Pakistan which degenerated into a veritable slaughter.”
58. The Reverend N. A. Kirkwood, Liaison Officer for the
Church World Service, states in his report of March 1964:
“A book could be written on the atrocities, shooting,
bayoneting, baton attacks and raping inflicted by the East
P&istap Rifles and Anzar personnel of the East Pakistan
border forces upon the fleeing refugees. Stories of looting
and of the abduction of tribal maidens by Muslim men of
the area are common,”
The Danish newspaper, Berlingske Tidende, of 27 February
1964, writes:

62. The Soviet representative has also made certain allegations regarding the conditions of life among the Arab
inhabitants of Jerusalem. The Security Council would
undoubtedly be expected to consider any such allegations
with due attention were it not for the strange anomaly in
the Soviet attitude towards human rights. The discrimination and disabilities from which the Jews of the Soviet
Union suffer are generally known, In Moscow alone , . ,

“The Danish Church Relief Committee, whose president is Bishop Gudmund Schilor, has received reports of

63, The PRESIDENT: I give the floor to the representative of the Soviet Union an a point of order+
7

but if he requires me to be more specific I would ask him to
confine his comments to the question of Jerusalem, which
is before us, and not to import into our debate other
questions which are not on our agenda.

64. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): What we are supposed to be
discussing here is Israel’s aggression and illegal activities in
Jerusalem. The arrogant and cynical intrusion of the
representative of Israel into the internal affairs of other
States-Pakistan, the Soviet Union and other members of
the Security Council-is impermissible. Its sole purpose is to
divert the attention of the Security Council and of world
opinion from all that Israel is doing to prevent a settlement
in the Middle East in accordance with Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967. The members
of the Security Council, including the Soviet Union, voted
in favour of that resolution and consider it binding upon
Israel. The attempt to divert the Council’s attention to
what has been done or is being done in Pakistan, the Soviet
Union and other States has nothing whatsoever to do with
the subject under discussion. The Security Council must
demand an answer from the representative of Israel to all
questions arising from the acts of tyranny, terror, violence
and lawlessness perpetrated by the Israel occupation
authorities in the occupied Arab territories. This is the
subject under discussion in the Security Council.

72. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr.President,
if I may be
allowed to proceed it will become clear that I am referring
to the question on the agenda and drawing a comparison-a
legitimate comparison-between
the situation of the Arab
inhabitants in Jerusalem and the unfortunate situation of
half a million Jewish inhabitants in Moscow and other cities
in the Soviet Union.
73. The PRESIDENT: I would ask the representative of
Israel to proceed, certainly, with his statement, but since he
makes it impossible for me to do otherwise I must rule that
we are not discussing any other question than that before
us on the agenda. I would therefore ask him to confine his
comment to that question.
74. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I was about to ask a question, I
believe ‘a simple one. How can the Security Council
consider as of any interest or validity Soviet views on the
unhindered continuation of Arab cultural, religious and
public life in Jerusalem if the Jewish citizens of MOSCOWare
deprived of such freedom? How is the world expected to
consider the objections expressed by the representative of
the Soviet Union about the operation of Moslem religious
institutions . , .

65. The PRESIDENT: I will ask the representative of
Israel to continue. I will also ask him, as I would ask all
members of the Council, to ensure that what we say in this
debate is specifically directed to the subject before us as
stated in our agenda,
66. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Thank you, Mr. President. I do
beg your indulgence to be able to finish my statement as
other speakers before this Council have done before me. I
do not think that the Security Council will accept that the
representatiye of the Soviet Union has more right to speak
of the situation of the Arab inhabitants of Jerusalem than
the Israeli representative has to express his views on the
situation of Jews in Moscow.

75. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
Soviet Union on a point of order.
76. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): I strongly protest against the
attempts made by the representative of Israel to divert the
Security Council’s attention from the subject under discussion. I fully support your ruling, Mr. President, that he
should confine himself to the substance of the question
under discussion. We are discussing Israel’s aggression
against the Arab countries, we are discussing the lawless
activities of Israel and the Israel authorities in the occupied
Arab sector of Jerusalem. There is no connexion between
this matter and the status of Jews in the Soviet Union or in
any other country. To raise these questions is simply to
divert the Security Council’s attention from the subject
under discussion, Members of the Security CounciI have
frequently noted the Israel representative’s arrogant and
cynical attempts to speak on behalf of Jews throughout the
world. No one has ever given or will ever give this right to
Israel.

67. In Moscow alone there are half a million Jewish
citizens, not 60,000 , . .
68. The PRESIDENT: I have been asked to deal with a
point of order which was raised in this Council, and in
accordance with the ruling that I must give I would ask that
the representative of Israel confine his comments in his
speech to the subject before us.
69. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): May I suggest, Mr. President,
that, as there has been rio interference on points of order
with expressions of views heard in this Council ranging far
and wide in history, policy and philosophy, I should be
allowed to finish my statement which questions the right of
the Soviet Union to speak on behalf of the human rights of
the Arab inhabitants of Jerusalem. The questioning of the
credibility or the qualifications of any member represented
here and taking the floor is, I believe, a legitimate right of
the representatives of any State Member of the United
Nations. If I may, I shall now proceed in this spirit.

77. In regard to the status of Jews in the Soviet Union,
they enjoy the same rights as all citizens of the Soviet
Union. Therefore, the attempt to divert the Security
Council’s attention to this matter is an impermissible
method of. discussing the Security Council items which are
on the agenda.

70. As I pointed out, there are half a million Jewish
citizens in Moscow, and not 60,000, the number of Arab
inhabitants in Jerusalem . , .

78. The PRESIDENT: I have listened to the point of order
raised by the Soviet Union, and I have given the ruling
which I am required to give as a result of that point of
order, and I will now ask the Ambassador of Israel to
proceed. Certainly in this Council it is our custom to allow

71. The PRESIDENT: I would appeal to the representative of Israel to proceed, certainly, with his statement,
8

wide latitude in debate; I would not seek to interfere with
it, However, when a point of order is raised concerning the
relevance of the questions before us, it is necessary for a
ruling to be given; I have given that ruling. I will ask the
Ambassador to proceed, to state his case, and I will not
seek to interrupt him again, Nevertheless, I must again
remind him that we should take special care to confine
what is said in this debate to the subject on which we are
cdled. I ask the Ambassador to proceed.
79. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Thank you, Mr. President.
Moslem religious institutions in Jerusalem, Arab schools,
Arab clubs continue to operate normally. The Arab
inhabitants of Jerusalem enjoy full freedom of movement;
not only are they allowed to move into any part of Israel,
they are permitted to visit Arab States; there is a regular
daily bus service between Jerusalem and Amman. More
than 6,000 Arab inhabitants of Jerusalem have availed
themselves of these services in the last few months. The
Arab citizens of Jerusalem are free to visit their families
anywhere in the world, including the Arab world. The Arab
inhabitants of Jerusalem are free to communicate with their
families, to reunite with their families. When the Soviet
Government grants similar rights to its Jewish citizens, we
in the world at large shall be able to recognize its right to
speak on behalf of human rights.
80. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Mr. President, we have had
quite an outburst from the representative of Israel. I do not
wish to reply to him. But, lest the Council be under any
wrong impression as a result of his statements, let me say
that I shall be 8lad to submit to the Council statements
made by respected leaders of the Christian community, and
other minorities in Pakistan, about the treatment that they
have received from the Government of Pakistan and the
people of Pakistan and about the respect that we have for
their human rights. I might point out in parentheses that
the Chief Justice of the Islamic State of Pakistan for many
years was a Christian. He was the supreme interpreter not
only of all our laws-including
the law of the Constitu-

tion-but also of matters which regulate the personal status
of the Muslim community. He was the chief interpreter of
the law as applied to the Muslims.
81. I can also quote statements made by the leaders of
these minority communities about certain happenings
which took place. But I should like to know where this
newspaper, El Tribunu, is published in Argentina, and what
its circulation is. Against what has been quoted from such
dubious sources, I can place authentic and authoritative
material.
82. My statement was based on certain arguments brought
forward by the representative of Israel. I had no desire to
go into the philosophy of history, but it is not the exclusive
prerogative of the representative of Israel to quote or to
expound philosophies of history which are attempts to
undermine the positions of other States. I was therefore
merely replying to the matters that he himself had raised.
X3. I should like to thank the representative of the Soviet
Union for intervening to uphold the Charter principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of States. The
subject before us is Jerusalem-the status of Jerusalem, the
situation in Jerusalem, the Thalmann report-and my
statements and remarks were confined exclusively to this
subject. And I should hope that we will all confine
ourselves to the point, to the main question before the
Security Council, which is that of the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by war, by force, by military
conquest.
84. The PRESIDENT: There are no further speakers on
my list for today. I have consulted members of the Council
as to our next meeting, and I understand that it is generally
agreed that we should adjourn our present meeting and
meet again tomorrow afternoon at 3 o’clock. If I hear no
objection, I shall proceed accordingly.
The meeting rose at I.20 p.m.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE

PROCURER

Les publications
des
dCpositoires
du monde
Notions
Unies, Section

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Las public&ones

Notions
Unies
rant
entier.
Informer-vaus
des venter,
New York

PUBLICACIONES
de

las Naciones

en todar
porter
del mundo.
Conrulte
Ventor,
Nuevo
York o Ginebra.
.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

‘I

en vente
dons
ler
libroirier
ouprbs
de votre
librairie
ou
ou GenBve.

DE LAS NACIONES
Unidos

UNIES

ertrin

en venta

a su librero

o dirfjore

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

et

les

ogences

qdresrez-vow

b:

UNIDAS
en

librerfas

y cosos

a: Nocioner

in other

currencies)

Unidar,

distribuidoror
Seccicin

de

356624eptember

1972-2,100
