United NatiOlU

ression
settlef arms
s or of
hrough
:ounter
l stipu~ plane
ich the
ing its
of the
sembly \
: adopt
ch the
nscend
unttions.
hall be
r there
of its
earth,
I there

's;

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
ELEVENTH SESSION
Offi~ial Records

UN. LIBRARY

~l
'E~
UN!S,~, COLLE
24

0

(;1

PLENARY MEETING 668th
Friday, 8 March 1957,
at 3 p.m.

New York

CONTENTS

to' independence within the Commonwealth. It is infused with the conviction, based on ~rience, that
disparity in race or tradition, far from being a bar,
Agenda item 25:
is a powerful incentive to continue to nurture our
Admission of new Members to the Ucited Nations
common interests on the basis of mutual· esteem.
AdtUission of Ghana to membership in the United
4. It is a matter of deep satisfaction to us that Ghana,
:IS' ations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 1305
at its own wish and with tl~e agreement of all other
Agenda item 66:
members,
has become a full member of the CommonQuestion considered by the first emergency special seswealth. The grant of independence which has brought
sion of the General Assembly from 1 to 10 November
1956 (conti111led)
~314
this about is not just an isolated act of state. It is not
a ,single event with no antecedents. It is the final stage
Agenda item 25:
in a steady process directed towards the achievement
Admission of new Members to the United Nations
of self-government, of the building up of a sound
Admission of Ghana to membership in the United
Nations (Clmcllld'ed) .•..•..•••••.•••.•••••••.••. 1326
foundation of democratic institutions, and the establishArrangements for future meetings of the eleventh sesment of economic Cl.nd social stability.
sion of the General Assembly........................ 1326
5. Independence carries with it heavy responsibilities.
Suspension of the eleventh session of the' General AsIt
is not ,thoughtlessly granted, nor lightly assumed. I
sembly
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 1331
think that the debates in the Houses of Parliameut
in Westminster and the statesmanlike remarks made
by Mr. Nkrumah, Prime Minister of Ghana, at'the
President: Prince WAN WAITHAYAKON
independence
celebrations about the ,task that now lies
(Thailand) •
ahead of his country are sufficient proof of this.
6. In the former Gold Coast this process has been
renlarkable in its swiftness. By ?eace£U1 and constituAGENDA ITEM 25
tional means, but in. a very short space of years, the
statesnen of Ghana and other officials have gained
.the ~per:i"'nce in democratic government and adminAdmission of new Members to the United Natinns
ADMISSION OF GHANA TO MEMBERSHIP IN THE
istration which now enables them to take their place
UNITED NATIONS
on the world stage well equipped to play the valuable
and responsible role that Hes ahead of them.
1. The PRESIDENT: Members will have learned
7. The United Nations is particu1~r1y well placed to
with gratification that the Security Council has conbe able to judge the fitness of Ghana for membership
in the United Nations. From the very foundation of
sidered the application of Ghana for admission to memthe United Nations, the Trusteeship Council and the
bership in the Uniterl Nations rA/3566] and has
unanimously recommended that Ghana be admitted.
General Assembly have been observing the measured
The Council's decision is to be found in document
development of self-governing institutions in the Gold
A/3567. Today the Assembly ha'S before it a draft
Coast, as it then was. This was by virtue of the fact
resolution submitted bv Australia, Canada, Cevlon,
that the Trust Territory of Togoland under British
India, New Zealand, Pakistan and the United Kingadministration was administered under the terms of
dom rA/35691, which when adooted will admit Ghana
the Trusteeship Agreement as an integral part of the
to membership in the United Nations.
Gold Coast. As Sl1ch, it enjoyed the same political
2. Mt:. NOBLE (United Kingdom) : Two days ago,
advance and the same democratic and liberal anstituon 6 March. 1957, historic ceremonies in Accra . tions as the Gold Coast itself.
marked the celebration by the first British dependency
8. Members willrecaU that the General Assembly
in tropical Africa of its independence within the Comconsidered the question of the future of Togoiand
under British administration in great detail in the
monwealth. They were attended by her Royal Highness the Duchess of Kent, representing Her Majesty
early :part of this session and reached the conclusion
the Quel:'!1, and by representatives of Her Majesty's
that the ohjectives of trilsteeshiphad been achieved
for the first time in the case of this Trust Territory.
Government in the United Kingdom and of all other
It further recommended that the Territory :should be
Commonwealth countries. It was ,indeed a proud day
in the history of, the Commonwealth of Nations.
united with an independent Gold Coast [resolution
3. Ghana"s emergence to 'state{-;,ood and independence' 1044 (XI)].
is the latest example of the· flexible and democratic
9. This judgment of the General Assembly coincided.
process by which the Commonwealth developed, a
With the views of Her MaJesty's Government in the
process animated, by love of freedom and by respect
United' Kingdom, which L-·q two years previously,
for the individual and for the democratic way of life.
at the ninth session of the General Assembly, made
This process has, over the years, and particularly
kno,,:n its prOpOSals for the future of this Trust
since the Second Wor,ld War, brought many people
Territory.
P/J9tl

130S

1-2,200
.. _"..""~

AjPV.668

1306

668th meeting--8 March 1957

18. Tbis is a proud day for the United Nations, for
10. The steps whkh were taken by the General Assembly following the presentation to it of the United
our Organization has played a considerable role in
Ghana's evolution towards independent nationhood.
Kingdom memorandum of 1954 [Aj2660] are well
As was pointed out yesterday in the Security Council,
known to Members, and I need not repeat them now.
Ghana is a State formed by the union of a former
But I 'should like, however, to make a special mention
Trust Territory with a fornler Non-Self-Governing
of the constructive part played throughout by the
Territory, administered under Chapter XI of the
Indian delegation and, in particular, by my friend Mr.
United Nations Charter, but in fact treated by the
Krishna Menon.
.
United
Kingdom in a spirit fully in accordance with
11. On Wednesday, 6 March I was glad to be able
the provisions of Chapter XII. These two Temtoriesto notify the Secretary-General that the final measures
Togoland under British administration and the Gold
required by the General Assembly in relation to TogoCoast-through the efforts of their own people and
land under British administration had been completed.
with the guidance and help of the United Kingdom,
At its 775th meeting, the Security Council, by a unanihave moved rapidly to a 'Stage which enables them to
mous vote, recommended to the General Assembly
take full control of their own affairs. Evidence of their
that Ghana should be admitted to membership in the
political maturity was given last year in the general
United Nations. I am confident that t.'le General Aselections to Ghana's Parliament, as well as in the
sembly will endorse that recommendation by a una.'liplebiscite in Togoland which took place under United
mous vote this afternoon. By so doing, it will happily
Nations supervision. These important undertakings
complete an ordered progr'ss in which· the people and
were conducted in a manner fully in accordance with
leaders ()f Ghana, successive Governments in my own
the best democratic traditions.
country with the approval and good will of all our
19. This is alsO a proud day for the Commonwealth.
sister nations in the Commonwealth, and the United
We in Australia, who are strong supporters of th3
Nations itself, have all played their full part.
Commonwealth ideal, are happy that Ghana, having
12. My delegation is honoured to join in 'sponsoring,
obtained its independence, has decided to remain within
together with other members of the Commonwealth,
our free association of independent peoples of different
the draft resolution which is now before the Assembly.
backgrounds and races, dedicated-as is recognized by
13. Two days ago, Ghana became an independent
everyone-to the ideals of justice, progress and
member of the Commonwealth. Today we of the Comfreedom.
monwealth will, I trust, welcome it into the United
20. The United Kingdom, in assisting 'So skil£Ullyin'
Nations.
this happy development, deserves our gratitude and
14. The United Kingdom has, of course, been in a
our thanks. The Australian delegation takes this 0pspecial position in its relationship with the Gold Coast.
portunity to express its congratulations to the United
It has worked with the Gold Coast in the most close
Kingdom delegation on this occasion.
and friendly' co-operation towards the goal which it
21. Independence Day has been celebrated in Ghana
has now achieved. It has naturally been able, because
with appropriate ceremony and popular enthusiasm.
of this position, to play a greater part in the developAustralia was represented by a !special delegation, led
m~t of that country than other members of the Comby,the Australian Minister of State for Air, the Honmonwealth could do. Now that Ghana has come to
ourable F. M. Osborne.
full statehood as an equal member of· the Common22. Ghana now faces the future with all the problems
wealth conununitY, our 'special position has, in one
that independent nationhood brings in this modern
sense, come to an end. But the affection we have
wor-Id. But in this international community of the
learned to have for its people and the gQOd will built
United Nations, Ghana will find many friends and,
up in. the past will continue undiminished. In this new
we are 'sure, will acquit itself well. On behalf of the
relationship between us, we shall continue to offer
Australian delegation, I warmly welcome Ghana to
Ghana whatever assistance we can, and we can assure
the Assembly.
it of the utmost good will in the years ahead. I know
23.
Mr. MlR KHA} (Pakistan): It is with great
that Ghana itself has a valuable contribution to make
pleasure
that I join with representatives who have alboth to the Commonwealth and to the United Nations.
ready spoken in welcoming Ghana as the newest Mem15. I hope that very shortly, in fact in a very few
ber of the United Nations. With Ghana taking its
minutes, we shall welcome here Mr. Anthony, the
place in this world Organization as an independent
<representative of Ghana to the Assembly. My deleganation, one more step will have been taken towards
tion looks forward to the closest and most friendly
the realization of the universality of the United
co-operation with the delegation oi Ghana in the
Nations.
future.
24. The emergence of Ghana-an ancient State rich
16. Mr. WALKER (Australia): In a broadcast to
in tradition and cultur<.--as a ·sovereign State and
the' people of Ghana on Independence Day, the AusMember of the United Nations will be all the more
tralian Minister of State for External Affairs, Mr.
welcome to us because it will surely lead to the reCasey, said: "I want to assure you that you can count
newal of many historic ties between the countries north
on Australia as a friend of Ghana:' I speak today in
of the Sahara and the countries south of the Sahara.
evidence of this friendship and in support of. the draft
25. Ghana is in that region of Africa whose voice,
resolution which Australia has sponsored tog-ether with
in the past, nas not been heard and whose influence has
the .United Kingdom and other members of the
not been properly felt in the United Nations. We are
Commonwealth.
sure that, with Ghana as a Member of the United
17. Yesterday the Security Council '!.tnarJmuusly Nations, the void will be amply filled, 'since its repre:adopted a draft resolution recommending Ghana's adsentatives will now be in a position to make construcmission which had been put forward by the United
tive contributions by bringing to the deliberations of
~ Kingdom and Australia. I have no doubt that the
the United Nations the particular viewpoint of its
Assembly today will give its unanimous approval to . p~ple in the solution of the many problems facing
tht: Security Couilcil'·s '1"ecommendation.
the Organization.

26. It is a
Kingdom
transition 0
one. It is
dominion 0
that territor
such a Pow
is built up
ture. The
of this con
forward wit
tion in it.
27. Even
independenc
interest the
ship of its
veloping in '
on democra
strides in ed
Now that G
confident th
spirit of fre
the emblem
28. We h
the honour
admission 0
29. Sir Le
Zealand dele
j;or, and mo
draft resolu
providing fo
in the Unit
expectation
will be una
30•. Ghana'
emergence
question its
conditions la
this Organi
Nations see
guide its ac
of Ghana, fo
purposes an
the purposes
the Trust T
istration-th
people to ac
place in the
31. In offe
to the newes
ernment wis
tribute to th
and sympath
Ghana, as els
and swift tra
and freedom.
32. Ghana's
for New Ze
eighty-first
become the
Nations, of
member.
33. The Co
stature and
peoples of d'
proud nation
them, three c
Commonweal
and will take

General Assembly-Eleventh session-Plenary Meetings

ns, for
Ole in
nhood.
ouncil,
Eormer
erning
of the
y the
e with
}riesGold
e and
Igdom,
lem to
f their
reneral
in the
United
alcings
e with

~ea1th.
of th~

having
within
fferent
zed by
s and

1111yin
le and
ds opUnited

Ghana
lsiasm.
}o, led
: Honohlems
lodern
of the
sand,
of the
ma to
great
l.ve alMemng its
endent
lwards
United
:e rich
:e and
: more
he rei north
rrara. '
voice,
Ice has
'Ve a:re
United
repr~

lstrt1Cons of
of its
facing

26. It is also my pleasure to congratulate the United
Kingdom Government for making possible the orderly
transition of a dependent territory into an independent
one. It is not often in history that a Power holding
dominion over a dependent territory has relinquished
that territory willingly and with understanding. When
such a Power does so, however, the confidence which
is built up between the two nations is of a lasting nature. The Commonwealth of Nations is an expression
of this confidence, and, as a fellow member, we look
forward with great expectation to Ghana's participation in it.
27. Even before Ghana attained its full measure of
independence, we in Pakistan had followed with deep
interest the progress made under the inspired leadership of its Prime Minister, Kwame Nkrumah, in developing in 'So short' a time a ·sound government based
on democratic principles, as well as in making rapid
strides in education, social welfare, trade and industry.
Now that Ghana has become fu~:'y independent, we are'
confident that this progress will be continued in the
spirit of freedom and justice which has now become
the emblem of the new State.
28. We hope that the draft resolution which we have
the honour to co-sponsor and which recommends the
admission of Ghana will be unanimously adopted.
29. Sir Leslie MUNRO (New Zealand): The New
Zealand delegation welcomes this occasion to co-sponsor, and most warmly to commend for adoption, the
draft resolution now before the General Assembly,
providing for the admission of Ghana to membership
in the United Nations. It is our confident hope and
expectation that the support for this draft resolution
will be unanimous.
30. Ghana's history and the circumstances of its
emergence as a sovereign State established beyond
question its willingness and its abiIit-j to meet the
conditions laid down in the Charter for admission to
this Organization. The purposes ~hich the United
Nations seeks to achieve and the principles' which
guide its activities will not be strange to the people
of Ghana, for it was in full conformity with all those
purposes and principles-including the fulfilment of
the purposes of the Trusteeship System in respect of
the Trust Territory of Togoland under British administration-that assistance was given to Ghana and its
people to achieve their statehood and to take their
place in the community of nations.
31. In offering its congratulations and best wishes
to the newest of Africa's great free States, my Government wishes at the same time to pay a sincere
tribute to the United Kingdom, whose wise policies
and sympathetic understanding have done so much in
Ghana, as elsewhere in the world, to ensure an orderly
and swift transItion from dependence to full sovereignty
and freedom.
32. Ghana's independence has a double 'significance
for l'ifew Zealand. Not only will Ghana become the
eighty-first Member of this Organization: it also wiII
become the ninth member of the Commonwealth of
Nations, of which my country is, of course, also a
member.
33. The Commonwealth has acquired an inerease<1
stature and vitality with the addition to its ranks of
peoples of diverse race and culture. In Asia, many
proud nations have achieved independence-among
them, three countries which are valued members of the
Commonwealth. Now, in Africa,. Ghana has been born
and will take its place iliour Commonwealth partner-

1307

ship. The Commonwealth has grown to include within
its unique association Governments and peoples from
all the continents. These Governments and peoples are
not bound by any formal ties, but they share certain
basic beliefs and ideals; they have a common devotion
to a democratic way of life, and their common purpose
is the 'strengthening of peace and the enlargement of
human freedoms.
34. New Zealand believes that Ghana has much to
gain- from its association with the Commonwealth
family of nations, just as it has much to contribute. We
believe, equally, that, in assuming the obligations and
in enjoying the benefits arising out of membership in
the United Nations, Ghana will have much to gain,
as well as much to contribute. We wholeheartedly
support its admission and we look forward to welcoming its representatives :in this Organization.
35. Mr. LALL (India): It gives the Indian delegation the very greatest pleasure and a sense of pride to
be associated with this occasion when the General Assembly will decide unanimously-we are certain-to
admit the re-emerged, reborn State of Ghana tJ the
United Nations as a Member.
36. In our view, and in the view of the Indian people, 6 March 1957 is a day of great imp,,~i:ance. We. do
not look upon that day as one marking the birth of
a nation; we look upon it rather as the date COmmemorating and marking the reemergence, the rebirth of an
ancient culture and an ancient State which has lain
donnant, because of the accidents of history, for the
last several hundred years.
37. This is part of the process of t,. .~birth of Africa.
In our view, this rebirth of Africa should go on
at a quickening pace so that Africa should take its
proper place in the councils of the world. Too long has
this heen delayed. Too long has the world got used to
looking at itself from certain selected vantage points
on the face of the earth, and too long has this given a
distorted picture of what happens and what the peoples of the world want and what it is that has to be
done today in the world community. So, we welcome
the rebirth of Ghana.
38. We admire the people of Ghana for the way they
have conducted their .struggle for independence. It
has been a movement of interaction. Names such as
those of George Grant, the great leader in Ghana, Sir
Alan Burns, Mr. Nkrumah, now Prime Minister, and
Sir Charles Arden-Clarke, now the first Governor~
General of the new Dominion of Ghana, come to mind.
These names I have mentioned also symbolize the
wisdom of the United Kingdom, on the one hand, and,
on the other, the courage and fortitude of the people
and leaders of this reborn State in West Africa.
39: We are also extremely happy that, on this occasion, we can congratulate the people of Ghana and. the
people of the former Trust Territory of Togoland
under British administration, which is now part of the
independent State of Ghana. Here, on a basis of equality, the inhabitants of these two erstwhile· dependent
areas will go forward as members of the Commonwealth of Nations, to which we are happy to belong.
40. It is in this spirit that we welcome here in our
midst Mr. Anthony to represent Ghana, and we know
that the thinking and the contribution whi~ he will
make to this Organization will be something for which
we shall all be deeply grateful. Indeed, may I, on this
occasion when Ghana will first take its place as a
Member of the United ..Jations, ·say that it behooves
.all of us to listen with great care and attention to what

1308

668th meeting-8 March 1957

51. I do no
wiN be said to :us in the future by the ·representative
great country of Ghana fur a number of years. We
a very progr
of Ghana. It is countries 'Such as his, which have not
had the same t"~rience as Crown Colonies; we
higher than 1
been heard in the past, which must be listened to with
walked along the same path of constitutiolial develop.
is the bigges
special attention because, while we other Members
ment; and it is therefore doubly a pleasure for us to
Thus it does
have got used to hearing what we say in this Organizasee that Ghana has already-on the heels of Ceylonfrds
team, tt'J
tion, we have a special duty to see to it that the views
blossomed forth as a full self-governing unit within
feet for ·some
of new Members, particularly from those areas of the
the Commonwealth of Nations.
and is able t
. world where representation has been sadly lacking, are
46. Ceylon and Ghana have been together in many
great Asseml
H'Stened to with 'special attention.. It will be in that
matters pertaining to the welfare of the world, in
52. OH beh
spirit that we shall welcome the new representative of
economic development and in other ,spheres. We have
been asked t
Ghana:, ·and we wish him and his 'COuntry and his
sometimes shared the ·same Governors, and we have
can and A'Sia
Government great success in their future life, might I
thel'e£ore watched Ghana'·s historical rise with' great
We hope tha
say, as a Member of the United Nations.
attention. It was a Ceylonese who established the first
future
and,
41. Mr. MACKAY (Canada): Two day'S ago the
secondary school in that area. I refer to the Reverend
maintenance
Prime Minister of Canada, speaking in the Canadian
A. G. Frazer, who had ~aboured for many years in
all believe.
ParHament, expressed the great pleasure with which
Ceylon as head of a famour. institution, Trinity Col53. Mr. AS
the people of Canada welcomed Ghana as a new memlege, and who established the secondary school in the
ship .Council
ber of the Commonwealth. of Nations. Today it is my
Gold Coast which blossomed out into the University of
and best wi
~'ery great privilege and pleasure to speak on behalf
Achimota, which has played a vital 'role in the training
Ghana. I we
of Canada as one of the sponsors of the draft resoluof young men in that part of the world. Ceylonese
the family of
tion now before the Assembly. This is .a straightstaff also follo;wed and amongst them I remember
fOlrward document and one which, I am 'Sure, will
54. The wa
parti'CUlarly a Ceylonese who was in charge of sports
1"a1~Se no controversy. It takes note of the unanimous
all the Arab
and coached the young African boys of that area in
1"e\::ommendation of the Security Council that Ghana
sion of GhatJ
cricket.
should be admitted to membership in the United Nacannot passU
47. It has also been my privilege, in Ceylon's short
ti<Jins and recommends that Ghana's application be apIf I wish to·
period of membership in the United Nations during
that ~dmissi(
pr1i)ved. I have no doubt that we all 'share this
the tenth session of the General Assembly, to cast my .about it; I \V
sentiment.
vote for a plebiscite in Togoland and to express my
I, in my cap~
42.. On 6 ~arch, when Ghana became a iully indepleasure that my first act in the Assembly wou~d be
dent of the ''1
t,endetif State, recoghized by a,11 Commonwealth Prime
to make 'some contribution towards the development
cance of this
Ministers as a member of the Commonwealth, the
of the Gold Coast and Togoland under British adminNations.
Government and people of Canada were represented.
istration as a :self-governing unit of the Commonon international television by the Canadian Minister
55.
Sopeac
wealth. It was also the privilege of Ceylon to be asof Mines and Teclmical Surveys. The Canadian Govof
Ghana
to
sociated with the observation team which conducted
ernment considered. it an honour and a rare privilege
often do we
th~ plebiscite.
to have this representation at the ceremony marking
example of
48. Our association with Ghana has been long, and
the final 'step in the evolution of the Gold Coast into
"creative aibd
we therefore take parti'CUlar delight in welcoming it to
the fully self..governing nation of Ghana..
to forget the
this great assembly of nations. We also welcome
43. This develOpment in the G'old Coast has -been an
us who come
Ghana to that great family known as the Commonin modern ti
orderly and constitutional process. It is one which
wealth of Nations. I have not the slightest doubt that
suffered und
Canada fully under-stands, since the peaceful developfor what it ,r
ment from colony to nation has been an essential part .Ghana will play a leading role in the Commonwealth
and in the United Nations. Over the years it' has
of our own tradition.' In the debates in the General
the people 0
acquired administrative training and has produced men
Assembly concerning evolution towards -self-governas a whole, i
of intellect and of oo.tstanding ~bi1ity who are prement, Canada has consistently urged the desirability of
gole, the end
pared to play. an important role in the affairs of the
sight. :It is th
Pl"oceeding by peaceful. 'Stages to the ultimate goal of
country. In those cir'CUmstances. I feel that Ghana protheir nationa::
independence. Vole know .that this constructive apvides an object lesson for other countries on the Afrius be ,sure of
proach has ,been the consistent policy 9f the United
can continent: they, too, may follow the same path
than the ,stru
Kingdom .for a great many years. I believe, therefore,
of constitutional development and they, too, 'may dedividual freel
that, in warmly welcoming the people of Ghana to
velop along the same economic lines and, in the not~
Powers, hea
self-government, to national freedom and to membertoo-distant future, achieve self-government themselves.
that this is 311
ship in the United Nations, we 'should pay high tribute
-individual
to the United Kingdom for the enlightened attitude
49. Ceylon and Ghana are proud to have -been able
and instituti(
which has led to these happy ·results.
to achieve self-government without any undue hardlook
at the II
ship
caused
by
leaving
the
beaten
track
of
constitu4A. Although I believe that it is hardly necessary to
surrounded b
tional education, and to have achieved it by proving
do ,go, I join with other -'Sponsors in heartily recomrole, whose
our fitness to ,undertake and manage the affairs of our
mending that the General Assembly 'should give the
satisfied by
countries.
draft resolution before us its tuUest ·support. I have
framework
0
complete confidence that Ghana has all the qualifica50. I take this opportunity to congratulate the Gov56. But is t
tions for membership and that this new Mrican State
ernment of the United Kingdom on the great statesto liberate t
will make a most useful contribution to our Organimanship it has displayed in giving the right of full
within thef
zation.
self-government to Ghana. Ghana will enrich the Cornown? Ghana
monwealthand will also bring to the 'discussions in
45; Mr. GUNEWARDENE (Ceylon): The Govus, and has
Commonwealth conferences a new light; it will present
ernment of Ceylon considers it a great privilege to be
peoples
repre
a
new
face;
it
will
present
a
picture
of
Africa
as
it
associated with the other members of the Commonand
defend
0
should be. And to the United Nations, Ghana, with
wealth in -sponsoring a draft resolution which would
The
answer
its
ripe
~xperience,
will
bring
a
knowledge
of
affairs
admit Ghana to membership in the United Nations.
in the great Mrican continent about which, I think,. yet keep his
- In doing so, I am particulady privileged to be able
the Africa., '1:
to 'state that my country has been associated with ::he. a:11 of 'Us have a great deal to learn•
• - - - -• • • • • • • • • • • • • •_~~.1,.'!'t~i!ii·"• •

!1!!11

p
General Assembly-Eleventh session-Plenllry Meetings

,

',:~, ~

",' '

51. l do not think many people know that Ghana is
a very progressive country. Its per capita incorne is
, " , ' higher t~an that of India, ç:ey10n or Pa~dstan.Ghana
: ":.'; }": 1 is the. blggest cocoa-producl11g country m the world.
" "',:': :.ci''',' Thus lt does not come mere1y as a new member to
, ":-';':';_'.~ ~:;, this team, trying to get on its feet; it has been on its
'~feet for sorne time and has now attainedfull maturity
. and is able to play a vital mie in the affairs of this
.'.' :~)~~·I great Assemb1y.
,,~:: ·.\'.i:~, 52. On behalf of the African-Asian group, l have
::'; ;.;; 1 been asked, to 'convey: the felicitations of all the Afri' , ' ;-;. ,,: 1 can and ASlan cauntnes to the great country of Ghana.
:,',; ~,';: We hope that Ghana will have a bright and prosp-erolls
.:,~ :,~~: future and will make no smaU contribution to the
". maintenance of the standards in which we of this wor1d
_t :::"1:
~ <:~ [';. ail believe.
, ,:::: 53. Mr. ASHA (Syria): On behalf of the Trustee., '_: :,-, ship Council, l extend the warmest congratulations
'::;'~::-~~ and best wishes to the people and Government of
Ghana. l welcome the new, rebom State of Ghana to
., ,~:::,~ the fami1y of the United Nations.
,:;:i::r~ 54. The warm and wholehearted vote of Syria and
! ',~:: :'~i
aU the Arab States in favour of the Immediate admission of Ghana to membership in the United Nations
_,:"., ~"':;':: cannot possibly be in doubt-it goes without saying.
,. ::,,, If l wish .to.speak at aU, it 1S not to argue in favour of
"-",1
:.' :...... '.':1 that a~lnllSslO:1, for there can ~eally be no argument
"~::. about 1t; l wIsh, rather, to put 111tO a few words what
,. :,: , 1, in my capacity as representative of Syria and Presi,: :.,;, ::; ·1 dent of the, Trusteeship Council,. fee1 about the 'sig~ifi, , , : . '. ,':,. cance of thlS great event for Afnca and for the U mted
~':d ~,-,,' '. •,,: 1 Nations.
"'f "',:. 1; 55.
Sa peacefully bas this 18:st phase of the emergence
" ; : ::,? of Ghana to full national sovereignty taken place, so
often do we hear the whole process described as an
.. :.~
: . ' " •• f
exal11rple of en1ightened colonial administration or
r' ,i"':;: "creative érhdication," t1~at some ?f 'ilS may be tel11pted
"1 ta forget the rea1 :mean1l1g of thlS event. But those of
: '_. __ . us who come from the vast zones of the world which,
'_._ : ";,:-~ '/ in modern times or older times, have seen, felt and
• .,
, . ',~ 1 suffered under ca.10nial ,domination, know this event
,,:::~;:~'~~ for what itreally is: a vict<;ry, a great vi~tory won ~y
. :.;'.-::, the people of Ghana and mdeed of Afnca and ASla
, '.- ..: as a who1e, in the course of a long anddiffiCl11t strug:::; :fi';•. ':<~~~/~; gle, the end of which is certain, but 110t yet fully in
,
sight. It is the strugg1e of peop1es to ,be free, to express
"

: 'l'

JO

.:",;,T

,

i , .

1
il·

','''; -!-" .. :~~t~~ 'j ~~e~~ 1:~;~~1~'l1 ~~1~~:tL;~~'clg~1{~a~~~~;~I~~~~rreifi7 ~;~~

,•. , : J.• 1 than the ,strugg1e of the individua1 man to achieve in';"
.....'.~" \. dividua1 freed0111, There are voices among the colonial
.
" "";":' ., _', '~~' 1 Powers, heard again in very recent days, who daIm
. ,,,-,;: 1 that this is all the freedol11 that the African really needs
,,'" " '~ -, t: r -ill~ivi~ual. liberty within t1~e framework of the.1aws
, ,', :',' ':;~', and 1l1stltutlOns of the co1ol1la1 Power. Indeed, If we
:i''-' : i ; :::::;:::,;, r look at the map of Afriea, we see that Ghana itself is
-. "'.' .-> :c'.;:; i surrounded by millions of Africans, 'still undel' colol~ial
.• ',":, ~,' :';'L-,:{ ü:: 1 mie, whose needs are suppo-sed ta be capable of bemg
s~tisfied by this. thesis of. indivicluaI liberty within a
',:] " :i"' "'1':.',-.. il arnework of alten authonty,
.. r' \ ;.:~ ~i:~;'
56.. But is this kind of freed~m sufficient? Is ,it e~ough
!;;
'-,': Cc te! .• to 11 berate the man, but sttll ta confine hls hberty
. , "'-','". ~'~ C:C- within the framework of a nationality that is not rus
,f"'::5;J
own? Ghana has answered these questions again for
, ,,': ;,,'t:~ .' us, and has given the same answers as have ail of our
,
:u rr
peop1es represented here today, old and new, who daim
If
"J. ~:-.~;
and defend our national sovereignty and independence.
- 1;
:~~ J L7;'~;
The answer is "No." Ta ,liberate the individual man,
,,;",,' \::i:",! tE:',;
yet keep his people confined, is notenough. To gr~nt
the African liberty circumscribed by loyalty to an allen
_,

"

i

'/
1,1

;

i

1309

State, equality within the limits of aIien laws and
fraternity based on an a1ien patriotism-this i~ not
enough, for ~t sti~l denies him his highest aspirations:
to be one wlth hlS {)wn people and to finc1expression
and destination with them as a nation.
57. The statements which the Prime Minister of
Ghana, Mr. Kwame Nkrumah, has made in the past
few days of celebration in the new State -show that
he knows these truths .perfect1y weil. For his OWn
people he has achieved that full liberation of which l
have spoken, that liberation, not only of the individual
but aIso of the nation ; but he remains profound1y con~
scious that the ,strugg1e to achieve it still has to be
fought by and for nùllions of others in Africa for whom
Ghana, and other new nations before it, are 1eading
the way.
58. l recognize the realism of the policy the United
Kingdom Government thenfollowed of co-operating
to the utmost with the e1ectec1 leaders of the Gold
Coast to bring about the earliest fu1fillment 'Of their
aspirations. It has provided anexample ta 1>e universally acclaimed, and-if on1y this were true-to
be universally emu1ated.
59. l do not need to dwell further on the very great
'significance, which aU of us 1111.1St sure1y appreciate, of
the attainment {Jf nationhood by Ghana, which cu1minates today in its aoceptance, by the Assemb1y, into
the international community. But l feel that this historie moment shou1c1 not be allowed to pass without
recalling how close a Iink the people of Ghana a1r·eady
have with the United Nations.
60. We have treatBd Ghana for the past ten years as
the Go1d Coast, a Non-Self-Governing Territory under Article 73 of the United Nations Charter. We have
100ked at the statistics of its economic progress, the
symptoms of its social problems, its struggles against illiteracy and against shortages of technicians. We have
examined this information with increasing interest for
its achievements in these so-called non-politica1 fields,
and we have come to think of it as setting the pace for
large parts of Africa. And all the whi1e, within the
confines of Article 73 e of the Charter, we have been
thinking of its increasing1y vital l'ole in the vanguard
of the po1itica1 emancipation of Africa,
61. But if we had no business-wl1ich is a matter for
argument-in thinking these political thoughts or putting them into speeches or into draft resolutions as far
as the Gold Coast proper was concerned, we at 1east
had every right to do so, unde-r the trusteeship provisions of the Charter, in regard ta that part of Ghana
which was, until midnight on 5 Mar,ch, the Trust Territory of Togo.land 1.1nder British administration.
Whether for gond or m, Togo1and was administered
a's an integra1 part of the Gold Coast, and because it
was 50 thorough1y integrated, it gave us a most convenient observation point-thl'ough the back door, so
tosrpeak-to watch what was going on in the Gold
Coast.
62. If weenjoyed having this observation post on the
Gold Coast, there were at least sorne of us who did not
fee1 happy about the circurnstances which gave rise to
it. We feh that the Integration of Togo1and under British administration with the Go1d Coast was too complete and too thorough ta Clillow the aspirations of the
Trust Territory to have free play, and to give its people the fullest possible opportunity to àeate, if they
wished, a State of their own in company with Togoland under French administration. But within these
Iinùts, the matter was eventually reso1ved by the peo-

1310

668th meeting-8 Mareh 1957

pIe of Togoland themselves, who decided by a majority
in the plebiscite held in May 1956, the first held under
United' :t;rations sup~rvision, that they wanted to, unite,
at least lU the first mstance, with the people o·f an 1ndependent Gold Coast.
63. Togoland under British administration has at!ained a full measure of independence as part of the
mdependent Ghana for two good reasons whichsatisfy
the African aspirations of which l have spoken earlier:
first, because these people are one and the same; and
'Secondly because this association is based on self-determination, not only in principle, but also in practice,
through a plebiscite controUed at aU stages-from the
phrasing of the questions put to the people through
the ·counting of the votes-by the United Nations itself. We take pride-and in this l feel l am ·speaking
for a11 Members-in the attainment tlnder these circumstances of the objective of independence by the
first Trust Territory todo 50.
64, But the Togoland story has not yet been closed.
It cannot be c10sed until a11 of the peoples of the two
Togolands, the great majority of whom still remain
under trusteeship, are allowed in the same free, enlightened and unfettered spirit to determine their own
destiny. Togoland, for Africa and for the United Nations, is a piece of unfinished business; we look to the
new State of Ghana to contribute in no sma11 way to
its solution, as it will contribute, through its own vital
experience and its own genius, ta the solution of aU the
remaining problems of Africa and the world as a
whole.
65. Mr. DE MARCHENA (Dominican Republic)
(translated front S panùh): As Chairman of the
Fourth Committee at the eleventh session, l am particularly grateful to the President for al10wing me to
speak. l shall be very brief.
66. The admission of the new State of Ghana, which
appeared upon the internatio::al scene only a few
hours aga, displaying its national emblem and ready
to carry out a11 the obligations which the world community of nations imposes on its members, is an event
which we cannot disregard. It is a very dramatic, a
great and historie moment for the United Nations,
which has been instrumental in gaining recognition
for this African State, aState which is steeped in ageold traditions and culture j and only a few weeks ago
this Organization had to consicler the termination of
the Trusteeship Agreement which, since 1946, had
protected part of the territory now fonning the new
State.
67. The principle of universality is still bearing fruit;
but it involves something more tangible and more beautiful: Ghana-a large part of which used to be the
Gold Coast, where the Ragof the United Kingdom
Rew, and the rest, Togoland under British administration, where the f1ags of the Unitecl Nations and the
United Kingdom were twin symbols of the same aspirations and struggle towards self-government and
independence-is adding its share to the African contribution to the world Organization and oifering to
play its part in the family of nations..
68. Thanks to hard thinking and devotion to thesame
ideal, independence was achieved and a new State
established. A tribute Ï's a150 due ta the United King40111, for having prepared the country, j udidously,
without haste and without changing the concept of the
formation or structure of the State, for its transformation into the new and independent conmlUnity.

~

69. We must congratulate Mr. Nkrumah, the Prime
Mil1ister of Ghana, and his colleagues, the c1etermilled ArQ.~ .. !
champions of an ideal which now has become a reality;ol ()lt 1
they deserve the praises heard from everycontinellt cent l'
expressing satisfaction at the birth of a new nation.
:~.t~

~~khT~ea~e.l~h:f~~a~: i~h~a~fc~l::I;nha~;~u~;ic~o~~~Jew l~r

gratulate the State of Ghana, as this new entity re~ " 78. Q::)
ceived its first support from the United Nations. l t of th.13
was in the Fourth Committee, under my humble chair~ Ki
' 'nd~J(
manship, that the constitutional position was con· un ~l'
·sic1ered and an important step made towards the Terl'it(
achievement of independence through the termination r~ai
of the Trusteeship Agreement after the inhabitants of S1on~ ~
Togoland under British administration had shawn tc;r ~ th.!
their desire to form a new State by union with the becntorie~
Gold Coast.
°lQi
71. We must also congratulate the United Kingrlom, 79. '"l:'
as Ghana brings new blood into the British Common- territo:r
wealth, thus proving its ,devotion and gratitude to the preparee
nation which was formerly the guardian of its destiny; assuto.e
and the United Nations, in the midst of the vicissitudes at Sa:r
of our times, has won a triumph, for it recognized the States
new nation and admitted it to membership in aIl the BO.
splendotlr of its youth and strength.
Jics~ l '.
72. Mr. TSIANG (China): Yesterday it was the Gover1;
pleasure of my delegation in the Security Council to countri(
vote for the admission of Ghana to membership in the AsselLl.·lJ
United Nations. It will again be the pleasure of my Elizabe1
delegation to do likewise today. Our vote in connexion of Nati<
with this question is, 'first of all, an expression of the a part,
good will which the people and Government of China contribt
feel towards the people and Government of Ghana. We8L
Al
wish this new, independent nation, Ghana, prosperity Cûtne i l
and progress.
tainly~ ;
73. Mr. Asha, the President of the Trusteeship Coun- of the 1
cil, in addressing Us a moment ago, expressed a very 82.
M::
important viewpoint. My country has been among the jl'o1n F1
foremost in the fight against colonialism. Our vote port of
from this viewpointis cast as an expression of appre- Canada,
ciation for the good work of the Government of the the Uni
United Kingdol11 in the Gold Coast and Togoland un- new St
der British administration, whieh together form the Nations
iudependent Ghana.
83.
As
74. Togoland under British administration was a cil, aH t
Trust Territory. It is evident that the United Kingdom mission
has faithfu11y fulfilled the trust that the United Nations the clay.
placed in il. The independence of Ghana and its ad. come vV"J
mission to the United Nations are at once a vindication session "
of the soundness of the International Trusteeship Sys- account~
tem and of the good faith of the Government of the 84.
Tb
United Kingdom.
.
ber of t:
75. The Gold Coast was a colony. l know very wel1 provid ec
that colonialism has not enjoyed a good reputation. It the stav :
is . o?vio~1s to us a11 that the United Kingdom, in ad- ister, a t
1111l1istenng the Gold Coast, has actua11y conducted its value io
administration in accordance with the principles and 85.
W t:.
:spirit of the Charter.
of Gha!l
76. The evolution of Ghana rnakes us aIl pause and Charte~:r1
r~frain f~O-?l pa?sing sweeping j.udgments on a11 colo-;." tained5 é
t
mal adnumstratlOns. The evo1utlon of Ghana makes itii [A13
poss~ble for at leas~ sorne .of. us ~o obelieve that it i~cjlsembl~~:
possible for a colol11al ad1l11l11strat:1on to be ,both cotk\\l yester
's~ructive and beneficent. From this angle, the admi~::S6. 'T!l~
s;on. of Ghana ta the United Nations has additiona~fjthe fu tÔe
151gl11ficance.
.' the Ag:;;
77. Mr. URQUIA (El Salvador) (translated fro~li~elegati~
Spanish) : It is a great honour for me, as representa.l'Ïii~n~~a~e

à

6

;8t':'~

General Assembly-Eleventh aes8ion-Plenarr Meetinge

tive of El Salvador and on behalf of the other LatinAmerican Republics, to express the sincere satisfaction
of our peoples and our Governments at bath the Tecent establishment of the independent State of Ghana
and the unanimous admission of Ghana into the United
Nations, which will certainly become a reality in a
few moments.
78. Bothevents have crowned the prolonged efforts
of the peoples of the new State and of the United
Kingdom, and the efforts of the United Nations itself
unde: whose International Trusteeship System th~
Terntory of Togoland under British administration
remained for several years and under whose supervision, within the framework of Chapter XI of the Charter, the Gold Coast also was administered. Both Territories are now part of the new State, which is now
becoming a Member of our Organization.
79.. T~e United Nations should be proud that the
terntones and peoples for whose administration and
preparation for a free political life the United Nations
assumed responsibilities when the Charter was signed
at San Francisco are now becoming independent
States.
80. On behalfof the twenty Latin-American Republics, l should like to congratulate warmly, not only. the
Government and people of Ghana, but also all the
countries of the African-Asian group in the General
Assembly, the Government of Hel' Majesty Queen
Elizabeth, the members of the British Commonwealth
of Nations of which the new political entity has become
a part, and all those who, in one way or another, have
contributed to Ghana's entry into international life.
81. Allow me also to extend the most cordial welcome to the representative of Ghana, who will certainly, as from today, belong to the diplomatic family
of the United Nations, to the joy of us all.
82. Ml'. GEORGES-PICOT (France) (tmnslated
tram French) : The French delegation will vote in support of the draft resolution submitted by Australia,
Canada, Ceylon, India, New Zealand, Pakistan and
the United Kingdom in favour of the admission of the
new State of Ghana ta membership in the United
Nations.
83. As l mentioned yesterday in the Security Council, all the procedural difficulties arising from the submission of this application, which was drafted only
the day before yesterday, appear to have been overcome with unusual rapidity. The fact that the eleventh
session of the General Assembly is drawing to a dose
accounts for this achievement.
84. The fact that this new State is becoming a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, the guarantees
provided by the sponsors of the draft resolution and
thestatements made by M. Nkrumah, the Prime Minister, at the inaugural ceremony, are pledges of great
value in the eyes of the French delegation.
85. We are thus prepared ta recognize that the State
of Ghana meets the requirements of Article 4 of the
Charter and to acknowledge that the declaration contained in the telegram of the Prime Minister of Ghana
[A/3566] is for the time being sufficient for the Assembly to take a decision as the Security Council did
yesterday.
86. The French delegation offers its good wishes for
the future of the new State and, as Vice-President of
the Assembly, l shall associate myself with the other
delegations who welcome Ml'. Anthony when he cornes
to take his place amongst us asrepresentative of the
new Member State.

1311

87. Jyfr. VITETTI (Italy): On hehalf of the representatlves of European countries, l wish to extend our
full support to the Araft resolution introduced by the
members of the Bntlsh Commonwealth of Nations to
the effect that Ghana be admitted to the United
Nations.
88. There areseveral reasons why we shou1d view
this event with particular satisfaction. Ghana is a
newly barn State which, on the very day of its birth
has asked to join our Organization and declared it~
readiness to assume aU the responsibilities that are
inherent therein. This means, in our view that the
body of mies of a high moral standard which are contained in our Charter are becoming more and more
the standard of behaviour for aU peoples, so that nowadays no nation feels like ignoring them any more. Such
a process cannot but strengthen the allthority of our
Org:anization and enhance the l'ole it plays in world
affalrs.
89. Another reason for gratification is that Ghana
is an African State, ready ta contribute its share to the
a.ctivities ?f the United .Nations and 'Y0rld co-operatIon. l thmk few countnes can apprecIate the importance of sueh a contribution more than Italy, because
of its geographical position, the close relations we have
had for centuries with the peoples of Africa and the
fact that Italy has been entrusted by the United N ations with the challenging task of bringing one of those
peoples to independence.
.
90. There is, finaUy, a partÎcular reason for rejoicing
by the United Nations at today's event: it is the fact
that Ghana inc1udes the former Trnst Territory of
Togoland under British administration, which is thus
thefirst Trust Territory to attain the objective of the
Trusteeship System. This proves the basic soundness
of thissystem and augurs weU for its future working.
91. In concluding these remarks, my delegation
wishes to express its very sincere praise to the people
and Government of Ghana and to the United Kingdom
administration for the great work they have accompIished. In welcoming Ghana among us, we express
our most sincere wishes to the people of Ghana and
look forward to the most fruitful friendship and cooperation with the new StiLte of Ghana, both inside
and outside the United Nations.
92. Ml'. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated fram Russian): The Soviet delegation warmly congratulates the people of the new
African State of Ghana on their attainment of national
independence.
93. The creation of a new State on the African continent cannot fail to call forth the warmest approval of
aU peace-loving peoples in the world, who feel a deep
sympathy with the ever-growing movement among the
African peoples towards their national liberation.
Ghana is the fourth African State to have gained admission to the United Nations during the past two
years.
94. At the present time powerfulfactors are at work
in the world, irreparably shattering the moribund colonial system and inciting the peoples of Asia and Africa
ta strive for their freedom and independence as States.
95. The Soviet delegation earnestly hopes that the
day is not far off when ail those peoples who are still
in astate of colonial dependence will throw off the
,sbac1des of the imperialist system of colonialism and
attain national independence.
96. The participation of the State of Ghana in the
activities of the United Nations will undoubtedly help

1312

I

668th meetiJ1g-8 March 1957

it to solve many of the tasks confronting it as a new
State ann to develop its international ties on the basis
of equal rights and respect for national independence
and sovereignty. Vve are, at the same time, convinced
that the admission or the State of Ghana into the
United Nations will help increase the Organization's
authority and further the realization of its purposes and
principles.
97. These were the considerations which prompted
the Soviet delegation to vote in the Security Council
for the admission of the State of Ghana to membership
in the ·United Nations. The Soviet delegation will vote
the same way in the Assembly.
98. Mr. LODGE (United States of America): The
United States will vote here in the General Assembly
for the admission of Ghana to the United Nations, as
we did in the Security Council. We look forward to
friendiy relations at the United Nations with the
representatives of Ghana.
99. The United States sees dn Ghana a peace-loving
State which accepts the obligations of the Charter and
is able and willing 1:0 lcarry them out. We were happy
that this opinion was shared unanimously in the Security Council yesterday. Today's vote, I am sure,
will confirm overwhelmingly the Security Council's
judgment.
100. In the Security Council yesterday, I had the
pleasure of paying tribute to the wise policy of the
United Kingdom which has led to Ghana's independence and to the happy relationship which exists today
between the United Kingdom and Ghana. Let me
again pay tribute to this example of British >statesmanship.
101. Ghana'-s independence is also of special interest
to Americans. The ancestors of many of our fellow
Americans came from there. Many Americans of whom
I was one, visited Accra during the war. Prime Minister Nkrumah studied here in the United States. The
Vice-President of the United States, Mr. Nixon,
headed a delegation of distinguished Americans to be
present at Ghana's independence day.
102. Ghana joins the United Nations at a momentous
time in the history of this Organization. The responsibilities which this new State assumes by its membership are heavy, but the weight of responsibility is over·,
shadowed by the opportunities which United Nations
membership offers for constructive efforts to prevent
war, to harmonize international relations and to cooperate in solving problems of an economic, 'Social,
cultural and humanitarian character. The United States
wek:omes the opportunity to co-operate£ully with
Ghana in these United Nations efforts.
103. We extend to the people and to the Government
of Ghana and ,to Ghana's associates in the C~mmon­
wealth our 'sincere congratulations and best wIshes,
104. Mr. ESKELUND (Denmark): On behalf of
my own delegation and the delegations of Finland,
Iceland, Norway and Sweden, I am very happy to
welc!'me to our family of nations a new Member: that
rebon.:. Afdcan land of great traditions, the independent State of Ghana.
105. During the tenth session of the General Assembly, I ,represented my country in the Fourth Committee during its discussion of the problem of Togaland under British administration. I had the :pleasure
then of listening on -several occasions to a ,repr~senta­
-tive of the Gold Coast, and I vividly recall how impressed I was with the great po1itica\ wisdom and the

very 'Constructive spirit which permeated those
speer..1les.
106. My country, like the other Nordic countries,
has always held -strongly to the principle of the universality of the United Nations. For that reason, we
are highly gratified at the fact that another country
from the African continent, having won its complete
independence, will now be admitted to the United
Nations.
107. May I, in this connexion, also express our
heartfelt congratulations to the United Kingdom for
this latest result of a far-sighted and wi'se policy towards hitherto non-self-governing peoples-a policy
which has already produced so many important
achievements beneficial both to the British Commonwealth of Nations and to the world at large.
108. In conclusion, I wish merely to recall the ancient
relations which link my country, Denmark, to this
country which -since 6 March has been called the State
of Ghana. A castle ,bearing the old Danish uame of
Christiansborg, which was, about two hundred years
ago, the centre of a tiny Danish trade settlement on
the coast, is still a picturesque and ·beautiful l"eminder
of those days.
109. Mr. ALEMAYEHOU (Ethiopia): The EthiCl"
pian delegation whole..~eartedly supports the 'SevenPower draft resolution providing for Ghana's admission to the United Nations. No country could be happier than Etbiopia at seeing Ghana, a ,sister African
nation, win its independence and sit among all the
sovereign States of the world in this great Organization.
110. The great empire of Ghana was an ancient and
poVl'erfu1 State with a high degree of civilization until
it was ovenun and devastated by foreign :invaders in
about the e1eve~th century. Even in the darkest period
of their history, the people of Ghana never lost their
courage. They fought for a long time to maintain their
independence-until they met the common destiny of
of African people in later years. Now the rebirth of
Ghana to independent nationhood constitutes a torchtight showing the lost way of free life to the Mrican
people still under colonial domination, and a new way
of co-operation to the colonial Powers. Whether the
colonial Powers will see this new way before it is too
late depends upon their wisdom .and the statesmanship
of their lead~rs.
111. My delegation is sure that the reborn Ghana
will bring new vigour and vitality to the United Nations and thereby contribute a great deal to the
strengthening and enrichment of this Organization.
112. May I take this opportunity to congratulate the
people of Ghana on this historic event in their national
life, and to pay a tribute on behalf of my GoYernment
to the United Kingdom Government for its wise and
far-sighted guidance in promoting Ghana to full, sovereign statehood. My delegation also conlft'atulates the
United Nations for the very important part it played
in the promotion of the independence of Togoland as
a component part of the free and sovereign State of
Ghana.
1:13. Mr. EtBAN (Israel): The Government and
people of Israel cherish the relations of friendship
which they enjoy with many countries ot' the continent
of Africa. Our -representatives l·ejoiced. to attend the
recent proclamation ~d c~lebration of Ghana's independence.
114. Once again, we are reminded of the swift rise
of new political and culturalw:nts to the duties and

respon
the iut
United
opmen
are p
uplift
tnto

115.
foundl
thee
is all
hazard
tra.vell
especi
has ob
rather

116.
techno
lSirable
Org
no str
contri
devel
peace
so ard

117.
Ghana
uniqu
the p
amen
accom
eleven
our
a mu
of Gh
their
us on
and 0
118.
stalwa
fering
future
with
[eader
give u
winb
maint
the v
certai
ways
and c
Africr.
119.
cast it
Ghan
120.
Frenc
shoul
Ghan
Memb
indep
ltUani
symp
signifi
coloni
Afrie
sover
12l.
mirati

.

..

General Assembly-Elcventh session-Plenary Meetings

resp~msibilit~es of soverei&llty. This rapid expansion of
the mternatLOnal commul1lty under the guidance of the
(~,I~J.n.t'rif'~
United Nations has been one of the momentous developl11ents in the international history of this decade. We
~b'e tr.1.Ï"
~..t,)n-", 'i\~t
are preud, therefore, to add Israel's voiee to those
~ (:~jf!JI~~'
uplifted here today in we1coming a new sovereign State
~j?~!'n!etê
into the family of nations.
e.~ l:~Jt.~d
115. Ml'. KI N G (Liberia) : My delegation is profoundly moved and deeply touched to see and we1come
the el11ergence of another State in Africa. This feeling
is aU the more significant since wecan appreciate the
:or
hazardous road that the people of this new nation have
~'~:<:,tY ~~o­
travelled in their aspiration for independence. This is
:-03 ~j]t:;
especial1y noteworthy when one realizes that Ghana
(~,~~~~~:
has obtained its objective through routual co-operation
rather than through violence.
116. In an agerapidly advancing in scientific and
;. ! 'IJ th:;
technological development, it ·becomes increasingly de~,,(~ 5~J!~
sirable that the ful1est effect should be given to our
Organization's universal character. Since the chain is
~'4'7:~ C<l
no stronger than its weakest Enle, it will require the
~l';t ~'ta.T3
contribution of great and small, developed and uuder'~:r:~:r:1 ü:l
deve10ped nations of the world to achieve universal
peace and security, for which the rpeoples of the world
so ardently long.
'~,,~
\~'l"~!'''
117. The remarkable development of the State of
Ghana while it was under guardianship provides a
{~~ t.1,..'f:!'1.: s..
unique examrple of what can be accomplished through
f ~~~ ~hi~
the processes of mutuai co-operation and good will
~ .\fzE,ti,
al110ng peoples. We have only to look back on the
:,t: ;;i.:~ the
accomplishments of the United Nations during the past
eleven years ta realize some of the benefits of pooling
our efforts and labouring together to make the world
a mach better place in which to live. As the people
of Ghana well know, my country has always welcomed
their men and women who have worked alongside of
,. ~, ~~~t~~ :'.:~
us on an equal footing in our commercial enterprises
;" ;. ~. ~ :~;~:
and our social, religious and national institutions.
,
. 118. To the people of Ghana, therefore, and to their
i:!',,~~.~':':.~ rjl
stalwart and progressive leaders, Liberia joins in of~.~ ~~-~::,~; c·f
fering hs hand in friendship, with the hope that the
~ future will binc1 our two peoples even doser together
1 with ties of understanding and good will. Theil' wise
',. leadership and approach to achie:ring. indep.enc1ence
give 11S u fair indication of the contnbutlOn wluch they
will he able to l11uke towards our efforts to secure and
] maintain pence and prosperity in the. world, throu&h
1 the variotls organs of the Umted .Nabor:s, q-hana 'YlIl
7""~ (; ;~~:'.J
certainly assist the o~her St~tes 111 Afma m findmg
~;!.~~'r.~i: ~;Ji"
i
ways to present Afnea aS lt .should be pre~ented­
;~~: ~ J trie
"\ and œrtainly from the viewpomt of the contment of
Afrien..
~~'.{;,~t~ d;e
'1,
119. My delegation will proudly: a~d enthusiastical1y
:.~ C'7,"$~~.0r!.al
cast its vote in favour of the admlssl.on of th~ State of
1 Ghana to full mel11bership of the Umted NatlOns.
<P~::ht ;a.nd
(Romania)
(!ranslated. from
120. Ml'. JOJA
~ :~.:' ,~,~~&~e"
1 F1'ellch): On behalf. of the Rom~l11an delegatlOn, l
Î should like ta assOclute myself with the welcome to
~~ 'O~~7i""~i
·.f;;c!:,:i::-; i as 1 Ghana the new African State which has '~ecome a
-:-;::>.1.;: ci 1 Mel11b~r of the United Nations. Ghana's attamment of
independence, on 6 March, ~as greeted. by ~he Romaman people with deep. feellI;gs of sabsfactlO11 and
s)'111pathy. In connexion, wlth thlS event, we. salllted t~e
~1i~n~bjp
. significant progress WhlCh has beell made 10 the antl~ ~;,(!~:",:.ï~lé11t
eolonialist strl1gg1e and the efforts .of the peoples of
~~~,,~::r,ftl the ',.'.
. Afriea to achieve their national mdependence and
.:t:tl:il mittsovereignty.
.
1 121.
The people of <!hana have won u111versal ad\i:l1r:it riS!
j miration by their herolc struggl e for the 110ble cause

.

••

w

. .

ll'.lÜt5 ~rj

l
,j

1313

of freedom. The Romanian Govemment hasshown its
interest in establishing friendly relations between our
countries by appointing an official delegation ta participate in celebrations at Accra.
122. In voting for the admission of Ghana to the
United Nations, we wish to emphasize our conviction
that the new State will be able to fulfil all its obligations and that it will, by its presence in the United N ations, make an effective contribution to the work of the
Organization.
123. Ghana-the name conjures up the fiourishing
mediaevalcivilization of Africa mentioned in history.
As Ward, the well-known English historian, has said
in his Short History of the Gold Coast,! the civilization
of Ghana and of the other empires of the Sudan was
more advanced than Europe's at thesame period;
splendid buildings were constructed, codes of' laws
were drawn tlp, rpoems and stories and books on agriculture, medicine and science were written, mainly in
Arabic, and there were many universities. The State
of Ghana will be able to draw sustenance .in its future
development from this rich storehouse of history,
and from the invigorating experience it has gained in
its recent struggle.
124. l an1 particularly happy, on this occasion, to be
able to convey to the representatives of Ghana our
congratulations and our most sincere good wishes for
the consolidation of the indepel1dence and for the
prosperity of their country.
125. Mr. FAWZI (Egypt): May 1, on behalf of
Egypt, join in welcoming to the United Nations the
sister African State of Ghana, whose attainment of
full nationhood and freedom symbolizes the spirit of
our times and warms the hearts of all who believe in
~nd stand for the growth of the dignity of all the peepies of the earth and their inborn and natul'al right to
be free. Ghana's independence marks still another
most welcome stage in a process which is in sharp
and healthycontrast to the old and rapidly disappearing system of domination and exploitation. Among
other things, it is in sharp contrast with Africa's partition in the nineteenth century among the then big
Powers, and it is also an expression of a great element
of foresight and wisdom in the world which points
the way to freedom and to comradeship an~ c?-operation among the peorples of the world as dlstmet and
apart from the other system of domination at;d exploitation. The world is more and m.0re. spee~l1y becoming aware of the fact that explottatlOn glves t~e
poorestdividends and that, on the c~mtrary, the ma~lc
wand of freedom is capable of creatmg and produc1l1g
wOl1ders. Co-operation, teamwork among. free peoples,
with the aid of its new allies modern SClence and the
new light of the Charter of the U!lÎte~ Nations, can
make this a l'eally happy world to hve 111. Let us hope
and work for that.
126. The United Nations today, wit.h the adn;iss!on
of Ghana, will be a richer and happler Or~a111zatlOn
and will have more reason to be proud of l.ts accomplishments and of ~he 'Yidening and hroadenmg of t~e
horizons from whlch 1t looks at the world and l~S
problems and the future. Wea,re sure that Ghana wlll
contribute ahtmdantly and coplOusly ta our work and
we hope that ail will unanimo~s]y appr?ve.and applaud
the admission of Ghana to thlS Orga11lzatlon.
127. Mr. MUSTAFA·MEDAIN (~udan): When
my delegation takes the floor to show ItS pleasure and
~ E. F. Ward, Short I-listor31 of the Gald Coast (Lendon,
j~l1en and Unwin, 1952).

1314

668th meeling-8 March 1957

pride in connexion with the a;dmission to the United
Nations of a new country Iike Ghana, we know that
bath the Government and the people of Ghana know
beforehand our great happiness and profound gratification on this happy occasion. Our cordial and friendly
relation with a sister African country, and our natural
and everlasting ties with the Go1d Coast, now the
proudly free Ghana, are sufficient to indicate our infinite pride on the occasion of the admission of free and
independent Ghana to the United Nations, and th?se
corc1ial relations are sufficient in themselves ta dec1de
our attitude.
128. Indeed, our pride and pleasure exceed those of
many others. The admission of free Ghana is a new
sign of an Africa marching towards freedom and national inc1epenc1ence in gigan tic strides. The admission
of Ghana is, furthermore, another invitation to ail colonial people in Africa ta struggle for their independence..
For those reasons only, among so many others, my
'delegation is prolld to vote for the admission of Ghana
to the United Nations. Its vote for the admission of
a sister country is one which invites the nations of
Ait'ica to co-operate with my country and others in
pursuit of the legitimate and honourable cause of freeing a1l African peoples from the yoke of colonialism.
We are extremely proud ta have here this new and
reborn country of Ghana, and my delegation will vote
in favour of its admission to the United Nations,
1mowing that it will only add to the cause of peace
and justice, which we ail wish to see prevail everywhere on earth.
129. The PRESIDENT: The Assembly will now
vote on the draft resolution submitted by Australia,
Canada, Ceylon, India, New Zealand, Pakistan and
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Irelanc1 [A/3569].
130. The vote will be taken by roll-cali.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Luxembourg, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to vote first.
In favowr: Luxembourg, Mexico, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Spain, Sudan, Sweden,
Syria, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Irelanc1, United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugo'Slavia, Afghanistan
Albania, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Boli~
via, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burma, Byelol"Ussian Soviet Socia~ist Republi~, Cambodia;, Canada, Ceylan, Chile,
Chma, Colombla, Costa R1ca, Cuba, Czechoslovakia
Denmark, Dominiean Republie, Ecuador Egypt Ei
Salvador, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gr~ece G~ate­
mala, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, I~donesia,
Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, J apan Jordan Laos
'"
Lebanon, Liberia, Libya.
Against: None.
The draft resolution was adopted by 76 votes to
none.
131. The ~RESIDENT: Before calling on the next
speaker l 'Y1sh to annou~ce that the representative of
Morocco w1~hes Mor~cco s vote to be inc1uded among
the affirmat1ve votes m the roll-call on the admission
of Ghana.
132. I am pleased to announce therefore that it is
the ;1l1animous decision o~ t.he General {\ssembly ta
adm1t Ghana to membersh1p 111 the Orgamzation.

The representative of Ghana was escorted to his
place in the General Assembly hall.
133. The PRESIDENT: It is a happy privilege and
a particular pleasure for me to welcome the representative of our eighty-first Member, the sovereign and
independent State of Ghana, which celebrated its nc\vly
won independence on 6 March 1957.
134. The national independence of Ghana is of special
inter est to the United Nations, for it is a concrete evidence of the happy application of Chapters XI and
XII of the Charter involving gen uÎne co-operation
among ail concerned, who are, therefore, warmly to he
congratulated. This is truly the United Nations way.
135. The experience of Ghana, I am confident, will
be of great value ta the General Assembly, not only in
regard ta develorpment towards free<1om, but also in
regard ta the general problems of peace, justice, fundamental human rights and the econotl1.Îc and social ndvancement of peoples. I therefore look forward ta the
fruitful participation of the representative of Ghana in
the deliberations of the General Assembly and, on behaH of my fellow representatives and myseIf, I ofFer
our sincerest good wishes ta him, as weU as to his
country and people.
136. Mr. ANTHONY (GhSlua): l Sh011I<1 Iikc to
express ta the President and ~to the representatives in
the General Assembly, on behalf of the Government
of Ghana, the deep regret that, because of the celebrations in Accra, the consequent heavy air bookings
between West Africa and the United States, and the
shortness of time, the Government was Ilot able to
send a senior representative ta the United Nations for
this happy and auspiciotls occasion. But l Wtlllt ll1Y:ielf
personally fortunate that the honour of represe1iting
my country today has fallen on me.
137. Yesterday, in the Security COllllcil, l watclwd
with great happiness while mel11bc r aftel" rnember
w~lcol11ed 111Y country's application for 1l1cmhership in
thls august body. Toda)', l have listened with t'motion
to the warm speeches of welcome and the trilmtcs adodressed to my Government. l can assure the Assel11hlv
that l will convey all these sentimen ts ta the Prime'
Minister, the chiefs and people of Ghana. I am stJr~
l may say, on behalf of my Government. that on
some appropriate occasion in the future, a suitahk
reply to the we1come which the Assem hl\" has accorder!
ta Ghana on its first appearance in this'Assell1hlv \Yi 1\
be made.
•
AGENDA l'I'EM 66

QU~8tioll cOllsidered by the first emergE.~UCY !lpc.
CIal session of the General ASSCll.lhly from 1 10
10 November 1956 (continueel)
•

138. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: The General
Assembly has before it a report on the Israel withdrawal. [AI3568]. I wo~ld li~e ta snpplement the report w1th the latest av:ulable 1l1formation.

13~. The ,last Israel troops cleared Rafah Camp nt
16. ~5 hoU! s GMT yesterday, 7 Mareh. Thercait(,f.
there were no Israel troops in the Gaza strip.
140. United Nations Emergency Force troops cnteree! Sharm el Sheikh at 16.00 hou l':; {; :"!T l( Ilkt\' /'{
March. The Israel withdrawal by sea is proceeding' as
pSlha~ned. By now, no Israel forces rel11aill in ~hûrm (,1
•
of,
. e1kh ' .or on T"1ran .1S1an d '. However, a numbcr
1;10p~ratJve Israel vehlcles, wlth a sl11all IK1I·t\' of 11Wc lamcs and dock personnel, will rellla in in Shann el

General Assembly-Eleventh session-Plenary Meetings

d to his

ilege and
reJ?'reseneigtl and
its newly

)f special
:rete eviXI and
:>peration
nly to be
ns way.
lent, will
,t only in
t also in
.e, funda,ocial adrd to the
::Ihana in
:1, on be:, I offer
~s to his

l like to
:atives in
\7ernment
the celebookings
and the
: able to
Ltions for
tIt myself
resenting

watched
member
ership in
: emotion
butes adl\ssembly
le Prime
an1 sure
that on
suitable
accorded
nbly will

Sheikh until they can be evacuated by sea, on 12
March.
141. Having taken the floor for this addition to my
report on the withdrawal, I would ask the President's
permission to elaborate on another point mentioned
in the report to which I feel entitled to direct special
attention for reasons which I hope will be fully appreciated by the Members.
142. In the report, I have referred to the important
role which will be played by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) in assisting the Force in its
immediate task in tlle present phase of its operation.
For the past several years, UNRWA has been charged
by the General Assembly with the task of aiding the
Palestine refugees in four different areas. In Gaza, the
refugees number about 220,000, some two-tlllrds of the
total population. The Agency has fed them, provided
shelter for those who needed it and, in co-operation
with the civilian organization, provided or paid for
their medical eare and welfare. Of the remainder of the
population of about 100,000 people, about 60 per cent
have required assistance, and this has nonnally been
provided by the civilian administration. In this initial
period, UNRWA will now necessarily be called upon
to extend its 'services to include the distribution of
rations to the needy non-refugees in Gaza. I envisage
a similar extension of its activities in respect of the
operation of hospitals, schools and welfare activities
for all of the population.
143. Although these extended responsibilities go beyond UNRWA"s terms of reference, which apply only
to services to Palestine refugees, the Director of
UNRWA, as indicated in tL'le report, has agreed to
assume these tasks within the limits of practical possibilities and within the framework set by the present
obligations of the Force.
144. The Assembly certainly shares my view that
UNRWA at this moment plays a role which is more
important than ever. Without UNRWA's contribution, the task of the Force in this initial phase would
have presented insuperable difficulties. Its position is
considerably strengthened by the stocks, facilities and
trained personnel that UNRWA has on the spot.
145. In the circumstances to which I have referred,
I feel entitled to draw the attention of the Assembly
to the very grave and urgent problem of UNRWA's
finances. The DireCtor has already 'stressed and explained this situation in his annual report [A/3212],
A/321 21Ad 1
. h'
d. ] and2 111 IS statein his special report [ ~
ments to the Special Political Committee. I have not
gone into the financial problems arising at this stage of
our work, but it should be obvious, in the -light of
what I have 'said and of the explanations given by the
Director, that substantial payments are required lmmediately in support of UNRWA s activities. The
Members of the Assembly will certainly appreciate
that the United Nations cannot contemplate curtailing
its operation for the Palestine refugees elsewhere while
continuing or expanding its services in Gaza. 1£
UNRWA's budgets were fully subscr~bed, this would
provide, at least temporarily, reserves urgently m:eded
for the increasing responsibilities in Gaza. It is therefore imperative that outstanding pledges be paid immediately and that pledges and payments be increased
to the fu11 extent of the capacity of Member Governments.

1315

146. Mr. LODGE (United States of America): Today marks compliance wit..l} resolution 1124 (XI) of 2
February 1957, with the withdrawal of Israel from
Egypt. The way now lies open to carry out resolution
1125 (XI), which aims at achieving peaceful conditions after withdrawal.
147. This is an event in the history of the United
Nations which is full of deep meaning for all people
in the world, wherever they may be, who ,vish to be
saved .from the scourge of war. It is an event which
reflects credit on Israel, a nation which has heeded the
call of world opinion. It is an event which reflects
credit on those Members, notably Egypti~,which, hy
patience and forbearance, have demonstrated ,heir
steadfast faith in the United Nations. It is an event
which reflects credit on the skill" wisdom and devotion
to duty of the Secretary-Genera1. It is an event which
proves agaiIJ. the value of the United Nations as an
Organization which plays an indispensable part in
causing the world, as in this case, to take a turn away
from war.
148. The United States welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General and pledges its support to assure
that what has now been achieved will be used as a
f
d'
h'ch
b 'ld fu
f
th
I
oun atIon on w 1 to U1 a ture or'" e peop e
of the Near East free from the danger of conflict. As
is fitting, the report dwells on the constructive purposes of resolution 1125 (XI) of 2 February., This
resolution stated that, after full withdrawal of Israel
from the Shann el Sheikh and Gaza areas, the scrupulous maintenance of the General Armistice Agreement
between Egypt and Israel [S/1264/Rev.1] required
the placing of the United Nations Emergency Force
on the Egyptian-Israel armistice demarcation line and
the implementation of other measures proposed in the
Secretary-General's report of 24 ]atluary 1957
[AI3512] to assist in achieving situations conducive
to the maintenance of peaceful conditions in the area.
149. The steady worsening of conditions along the
armistice demarcation line, which culminated in the
hostilities of October 1956, demonstrated how fear· of
aggression on one side begets fear on the other, and
out of this fear comes danger for the future. It was to
h
h
h
d
d h
ead off this danger t at t e Assembly en orse t e
deployment of the Force on the armistice line and in
the area of the Straits of Tiran. It was with this
danger in mind that I pointed out on 28 January
[645th meeting] that the deployment of the Force must
be such as to assure a separation of the armed forces
of both sides, as required by the Armistice Agreement.

150. Now that we approach tl,:" ne", stage in the
deployment of the Force, the United States appeals to
all c0ncerned to co-operate in giving effect to the practieal and sensible measures which are set ont in the
reports of the Secretary-General of 24 January, 22
General
February [659th meeting] and 8 March and which
!lel with.t the re- .
are called for by resolution 1125 (XI). The United
States, in particular, is convinced that the continued.
deployment of the Force, in accordance with that resoCamp at
lution, affords the best hope of allaying the fear which
lereafter,
has animated both sides and thus the best hope of
establishing a basis for further progress towards peace
and tranquillity in that part of the world.
oaps elltoday, 8
151. In conclusion, :let me say this. We havemade a
~e:~~ ~i
wonderful beginning. We have nursed. a patient
wber of
through several crises, Now let us give him a chance
y of me-.
2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Eleventh Sesto 'P?'t some fles~ on his bones and build up an im::~"'S:'dol M"iol C'-It", 23,d an: 35th roe,~" . . nnnuty to future umess.

!ley spe·
om 1 to

'-"=-

.

~>\!!~lf!'~~$tI!I!'M_"~ _ _.It]I'.!k_JIIII!.( • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

1316

668th meeting-8 M&-eh 1957

152. U PE KIN (Burma): Patience, it is 'Sometimes
omy is linked with the Suez Canal in one way or an~
said, is its own reward. But today we have an occaother, should not be forgotten because of the violence
sion when there are extra dividends for all those who
of that reaction. Thirdly, Israel did not want to be
have exercised patience since October 1956, when the
pushed into the sea. So Israel pushed back-as if
United Nations was faced with aggression in the
words of pushing or deeds of pushing, each acting as
Middle East. \Ve have, after four months of concern
both cause and effect, ever really settled anything.
157. These things are clear, at least to my mind.
felt throughout the world, been able to reach that
point where armed force has withdrawn from posiAnd they have consequences within the United Nations won by actions which the General Assembly has
tions. We have struggled for four months with these
declared a violation of fhe United Nations Charter.
consequences and today we -can register partial satisWe cannot say that now the statzts qu.o ante is refaction. But we must also realize that, if we solve the
established. In such affairs where bloodshed, property
current problem, it is not the end of our labours; it is
damage and destruction have taken place, we never
the beginning of them. \Ve have made progress: that
rea-lly restore the original state of affairs. We can,
is, the Suez Canal may soon be functioning again for
however, say that the United Nations has brought
the benefit or all users; Israel's acceptance of the
about a, new situation: first, aggression has been
United Nations position makes it possibl p not only to
stopped; secondly, the United Nations Emergency
settle the immediate problem of free passage and
Force is present and in being; thirdly, the areas over
tense borders, but also to look toward a long-term
which so much difficulty has arisen are, temporarily at
settlement.
158. But though these may be gains, they are small
any rate, under the control of the United Nations; and
fourthly, the -controversy over the question of free and
gains. What is -generally at stake and what, I am con~
innocent passage may well be settled by international
vinced, is dear to the hearts and heads of many dele~
legal authority.
gations in the Assembly, and what is really the major
153. These are no mean achievements. Though diploconcern of my Government, is something larger than
rtacy has been utilized at a level and with an intenthese gain5.
159. May I be permitted, Mr. President, to indicate
sity rarely witnessed in the mid-twentieth century, we
have been assured that no "conditions:' no "secret
this larger concept 'by historical analogy. All of you
protocols," and no "deals" have Ibeen made to conhere who have lived through two world wars have
sU:11l1ate this resolution of our difficulties.
seeri the deep enmity that existed between France and
154-. Israel, despite hemming and hawing and despite . Germany. And yet during recent months we have wit~
difficulties, some real and others imagined, has at long
nessed an extraordinary series of events. France, re~
last accepted the decision of this body to withdraw its
sponding to a plebiscite, has yielded the valuable Saar
forces behind the demarcation line' of the 1949 Armiarea to Germany. France and Germany entered into
stice Agreement. Israel could do no ·less. If it wishes to
European coal and 'steel agreements. France and Gerretain the regard and respect whicll is due every sovemany are even now planning, along with other Euroreign nation within the United Nations, Israel has
pean nations, a genuine Western European union for
to atcept the overwhelming majority of the opinions
economic and other peaceful purposes.
160. I venture to suggest that the !ideas inherent in
of mankind as registered in the repeated support fer
United Nations resolutions pertaining to unconditional
what I have 'Called a genuine Western European unbn
withdrawal. Israel might feel that it also is an agare pertinent to the Middle East. There, Israel on the
grieved party and that the fact that it elected to. con"
one hand, and Egypt and others on the other hand,
'sume four months in arriving at this decision points up
each ",~"uggling to achieve sovereign via;bility, must
the difficulties inherent in it. But Israel must not lightly
repair the ravages of past antagonism. Both are old
forget that it has clearly and rightly been charged with
and new nations capable of contributing to world civiliaggression.
zation not only their ancient splendid glories, but also
155. Egypt has, during this same period, conducted
modern, if modest, new ones.
its case with patience and restraint, a fact that has
161. But even more is required than this, if my analnot been sufficiently noted in the Assembly. When
ogy with Europe is accepted. It is time, I suggest,
occasionally its friends have uttered fierce phrases in
that Europe-be it Western or Eastern~should stop
condemnation of Israel's most 'recent acts, these. utregarding the Middle East as the "Muddle East", an
terances must ,be read or taken in the context of the
area capable of useful unities, comparable to Europe.
situation that has prevailed. But fierce phrases are
The Middle Eastern countries would benefit from such
luxuries of temper. They solve nothing.
unities. Is it not time, therefore, that "':c: Member l\J",156. This is not the time to review the past, though
tions of the United Nations gave ~lore reality to the
the past must necessarily concern us if we are to ,!>lan
"United" part of our name? Is it not time for the
for a peaceful future. Nor is it the time for talldng of
great democracies to help remove the muddle from the
rewards and punishments. In any summation of the
African and A:sian new nations instead of setting one
significance of the ,long, difficult first emergency speup against the other for purposes of selfish endl1? Is it
cia! session and the eleventh session of the Assembly,
not time. to help them achieve bilateral and multilateral
'several things are clear. They are both causes and
unity without Fl11ling them now to one side, now to
effects.. If we 'look at them, stripped of legal and other
another? Rather than derive temporary satisfactions
enctiinbrances, we shall find: first, that Egypt, strugout of divisions within the Middle East, rather than
g:1ing to achieve sovereign viability, determined to
accept such divisions as permanent features of the
break with the nineteenth century. It nationalized the
!pOlitical landscape, should we not better employ our
Universal Suez Maritime Canal Company. This was
resources for resolving, instead of· perpetuating, such
an effect, but it was also a cause, though it should not
divisions? These questions, I believe, answer them,have been so. Secondly, the United Kingdom and
selves-and affirmatively so, each time. Just as France
. France reacted violently to. this event. This was unand Germany have reoriented t.l'lemselves to each other
fortunate. But the needs of the United Kingdom and
and to European unity, so. too, a simiiar reorientation
France or, for that matter, other nations whose econ- must take place within the Middle East and to the
~~tl!'1.•_.1!Kl!2UIIII!!JS!l_!!rffiC;<"")f~Jl')"""'~~,.,

Middle I
a directi
United ]
will not

162. M

paying a
of this a
guided a
devotion
humanit)
thanks 1
served t1
such con
[or me, t
the Presi
whose e
occurred
163. M
ment of
heard an
of the Is
Sharm
tragedy
States J\
its final
164. T
against
parts of
for the
the Unit
act of 0
decisions
confined
United]
been sor
tunately,
definitio]
out unde
the Gen
sessions,
that the
a negati
Nations
Member
165. A
restorati
dation 0
United
of the ac
certain p
to the p
is, there
acts of
liquidate
gression.
Nations
progress
166. T
finBJl wit
territory
United -]
and sati
the reas
sad for t
167. Fi
war in
Sta.tes VI
by mean

General Assembly-Eleventh ses!!ion-:Plenary Meetings

y or an·

violence
at to be
k-as if
Lcting as
ling.
.y mind.
too Na:th these
a1 satis·
iolve the
Irs; it is
~ss: that
.gain for
of the
on1v to
1ge -and
lUg-term
re small
am con·
ny dele"
le major
~er than

indicate
of you
.rs have
lnce and
ave wit·
nce, re)le Saar
red into
nd GerI' Euromon for

erent in

In uni'.:ln

lon the

:1" hand,

y, must
are old
ld civilibut also

ay analsuggest,
lId stop
ast", an
Europe.
)m such
ber l\JaT to the
for the
rom the
lng one
In? Is it
tilateral
now to
:factions
.er than
of the
,lay our
.g, such
: themFrance
:h other
entation
to the

Middle East. If these four months can lead us in such
a direction, then the price which the people of the
United Kingdom, Fl"ance, Israel and Egypt have paid
will not have been too high.
162. May I conclude my remarks, Mr. President, by
paying a deserved compliment to you who, as President
of this august body during these troublous days, have
guided all of us with tact, patience and unswerving
devotion to duty, not only to the Organization, but to
humanity at large. We in the Assembly also owe our
thanks to the Secretary-General, who has so ably
served the cause of peace with such impartiality and
such complete devotion. It is, at the same time, fitting
for me. to record the appreciation of my delegation to
the President of the United States of America, without
whose efforts and patience this day may not have
occurred.
163. Mr. JAWAD (Iraq): In the light of the statement of the Secretary-General which we have just
heard and of his report [A/3568], the final withdrawal
of the Israel armed forces from the Gaza strip and the
Sharm cl Sheikh area is now complete. Thus the
tragedy which was ph.nned and executed by three
States Members of the United Nations has reached
its final phase.
164. The last phase of the aggressive conspiracy
against Egypt has given reason for rejoicing in many
parts of the world. It has been interprete(l. as a triumph
for the forces of peace and justice within and outside
the United Nations, and it has been claimed to 'be an
act of obedience hy the three Member States to the
decisions of the General Assembly. If the matter is
confined to these aspects of the problem with which the
United Nations has been confronted, there would have
been some l"eason for a feeling of satisfaction. Unfortunately, the matter goes f~.r beyond the limits and
definition set for it during the last four months. Without underestimating the spirit and efficacy with which
the General Assembly, in its emergency and regulal'
sessions, has tackled the question, it should be recalled
that the question raises a number of pOints which have
a negative bearing on the objectives of the United
Nations and the degree of the desire of some of its
Members to ahide by the rule of law.
165. Although satisfaction has been felt albout the
restoration of peace in the Middle East and the liquidation of aggression in that area through action by the
United Nations, the fact remains that, after ten years
of the active life of the United Nations, there"stiH e~st
cert~jn people and Powers who think and act according
to the principles and teclmiques of power politics. It
is, therefore, not only a matter of liquidating certain
acts of aggression; it is, in fact, a matter of how to
liquidate the forces which give birth to all kinds of aggression. This is the fundamental task of the United
Nations and rf all States which work for peace and
progress.
166. The tripartite aggression against Egypt and the
finBJI withdrawCl!I of all aggressive forces from Bgyptian
territory and the Gaza strip under the pressure of the
United Nations leave us with mixed feelings of sadness
and satisfaction. I should :first like to refer briefly to
the reasons which cause a feeling of sadness. We feel
sad for these reasons.
167. First, we recognize that, after a destructive total
war in the age of the United Nations, there exist
States which still believe in solving t..'1eii- differences
by means of war.

1317

168. Secondly, this particular act of aggression by
Israel has been instigated, plannt-d and executed by and
in collaboration with two great Powers, permanent
members of the Security Council, which according to
the Charter bears the primary responsibllity for the
promotion and maintenance of peace in the world.
169. Thirdly, this act -of aggression has confirmed
more than ever that the imperialistic, vested interests
are actively behind all kinds of trouble which afflict
the world at !>l"esent; that the Second World War,
which had been fought to put an end to power politics,
had not taught Governments the lesson of the danger
to world civilization inherent in total wars; and that
it had not sufficiently opened the eyes of the common
man to the perilous situations concealed by sweet
words in ~urrent use in certain quarters.
170. Last but not Jeast, this act of aggression has
~aused enormous material destruction 'both in Egyptian
territory and in the Palestinian-Arab areas. Although
material destruct on can be repaired, there is no way to
redeem the killing and murdering of innocent Arab
people and the suffering of those who were subjected
to planned terror and deprivation.
171. Now that the curtain has ,fallen on the last ad
of this tragedy, VlThic.'1 has been a challenge to the
Charter of the United Nations and to all humanitarian
prinQpl~s, it becomes the duty of this august body and
of all those who work for peace and civilization to
ponder the shortcomings of our machinery for peace
with a v1ew to its completion and perfection. If the
events of the last four months would lead to 'Such constructive action as I have suggested, it could then
be said that the satisfaction demonstrated by some
has certain justification. But in case our ·satisfaction
is confined to our success in averting the spread of the
war to other parts of the world and to the temporary
triumph of the rule of international law, we would
be indulging in nn more than wishful thinking.
172. In. any case, it is hardly necessarv for me to
refer to the forces which have brought the aggressors
to order. They had better remain unspecified to avoid
what some people call "ideological argumentation".
But are the memory and foresight of man so short as
to be able to forget how the two world wars were
started? Or how certain circles acted from behind
the scenes? The memory of man is not so short. While
some people are misled by the inculcation of false ideas
and conceptions through educati~al systems and
propaganda of all description, others are positively
aware of the misrepresentations made of the truth.
There is nothing more illustrative of the ·latter type of
people than the British people, who reacted under the
leadership of the Labour Party, against their Government's act of aggression, and thus hrought about L~e
downfall of Sir Anthony Eden and his Government.
Moreover, the fact that .the tripartite aggression has
been condemned practically everywhere in the world.
shows dearly that the false campaigns of propaganda
,launched by the aggressors in justification of their
criminal action were not able to lnisIead world public
opinion as to the true intentions of the aggressors. The
various decisions of the Assembly have received unqualified -support the world over. It gives us a large
measure of satisfaction to know that at least fourfifths of the human race 'Stood ben ' t the resolutions
of this august body. This covers all Asia, Africa, Latin
America and the greater part of North Ameri<;a, the
Soviet Union and the people's democracies, and' the
overwhelming majority in Western Europe, as welt as

1318

668th rnccting-8 Mal'ch 1957

a considerable section of British and French public
opinion.
173. Is that not clearevidence that humanity ,detests
and loathes aggression and war? This situation gives
us reason ta be satisfied with the withdrawal of the
Israel forces. We hope that this has taught them, together with their partners, that war does not pay, that
the world in general, and the Arab East in particular,
have realized more than ever the fate that awaits small
States which ·do not willingly sacrifice their national
sovereignty and their human dignity at the altar of
imperialism. But we Arabs are determined to fight
imperialism in aIl fields of life.
174. There are other reasons why we feel satisfied.
First, the termination of this aggressive act indicates
the triumph of the United Nations and, we hope, heralds a new era for the rule of law and civilization.
Secondly, the United Nations, in which we smal1
States have put our trust and confidence, has been able
to expose and explode the conspiracy of certain big
Powers against world peace in general and the integrity of small States in partieular. By this action, the
United Nations has been able to show clearly to certain imperialist Powers that there will be no return
of imperialist domination and that the world must
keep on with its march forward. Thirdly, this act of
aggression has shown that States practising an imperialist policy have no respect for international law
and order and that,consequently, the danger of a
third world war emanates solely from allowing such
States the opportunity of manoeuvring the United Nations into such positions. Fourthly, the way in which
the Assembly dealt with the problem, especially in its
1ast stages, has deterred certain Powers from playing
a double game in this tragic affair and from preparing
the ground for the realization of their particulaI' interests and policies. It is hardly necessary to say that
in their present state of development, the Arab coun~
t~ies ,,:e1come aIl kinds of assistance, provided it is
glven 111. a regL11~r way. We refuse to be parties to
any dealmgs 1;>ehm~ ~he counter, as we have paid
dearl:y for aIl Impenallst black-market and s111uggling
practIces.
175. Last but not least, this aet of aggression has
proved to the world, in the most practical way what
we have been telling it for the past ten years n'amely
t?at Israel constitutes a constant danger to the estab~
lIshment of peaceful conditions in the Middle East. We
have often pointed out that the creation of Israel was
nothing but an imperialist device to be utilized for the
economic and politieal domination of the Arab Middle
~ast ~n~ that it is ~othing but a bridge-head for future
amp.enallst aggresslO~, not only against us but also
agamst other <:ount:les. Tt has often heen repeated,
~nd l h01?e not 111 vam, that, unless peace is maintained
111 the MIddle East, the danger of world war will never
he averted. Let it 'he known that there is nothing more
dear tD the heart of every Arab than to live in peace
and to be able to benefit from the fruits of modern
pro~ress .. Yye have been prevented first by domination
by ImpenalIsts and lat~r ~y the creation of their puppet
~tate, I.sra~l, from aChleV1l1g our peaceful and progresSIve obJ ecbves.
I7? T~s ~s a.:11 the outcome of a decision based on
unJust pnncIples. The United Nations instead of suggesting th~ assimilation of the Jews of the world into
th.e countnes where they were liv:ing, decided to open
Wlde ta them the doors of Palestme, to the detriment
of the people of that country. How happy they wou1d

he if, instead offighting nature and the original Arab
people of Palestine, they were in the countries of their
birth; they would mostly be enj oying life in countries
where democratic, peaceful and materially advanced
conditions exist. But no, the imperialist logic is comp1etely different from that of civilization and progress.
For that and other reasons, the Arab countries had to
pay the price; and perhaps-though l hope not-the
world will one day share in the payment.
177. l do not propose to dwe11 any longer on this
tragic phase of our life in the Middle East, but l
should like to draw the attention of the Assembly ta the
fact that what affliets -us afflicts the whole world. Let
it he remembered that peace is indivisible and that
progress-and l mean real progress, not the making of
atomic and hydrogen bombs for war purposes---cannot
be achieved without peace. l leave it ta you ta draw
the conclusions.
178. Before concluding, it is my duty to mention how
d~eply we A:abs have .been ~ol1ched by aH the support
~lven to us m COnneXlOl1 wlth t~le question of Egypt
m the Assembly. Many delegatlOns have manifested
a spirit of profol1nd understanding and appreciation
of the just cause for which we stand. Our thanks go
to the African-Asian States, whose relentless efforts
f?r the cause. ~f peace and justice surpass a11 descriptIon, The untmng efforts of the Indian delegation, and
of ~r, Krishna ~enon in particular, deserve special
mentlOn. The Umted States and the Latin-American
States have, no doubt, made considerable efforts in
support of the United Nations Charter and in bringing
about the results we have witllessed. The United States
in particular, h,as assumed the greater part of the burden of obtammg the settlement of the confliet in a
spirit cOl:sonan~ with its poliey of peace and justice.
The SOVIet Ul1l0n and the people's democracies have
demonstrated a profound understanding of the real
causes of the conflict in the Middle East and have been
co-operative in bringing about the results achieved by
the Assembly.
179. No one who has fo11owed the events of the past
four months could have failed ta note the leading l'ole
played by the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Words of tha~ks !Jo doubt fa11. short in expressing our
pro.found ac1mIratlOn and gratitude for the manner in
",:hlCh he has accomplished his duties in most difficult
Clrcumstances.. Ml'. Hammarskj old has proved once
more .that he IS not only a distinguished inte11ectual
and dlplomat, but also a great humanist.
180. In conclusion, l1:ay 1. be permitted ta express the
h?p~ that no peopl.e 111 thls world shall again be the
vlctuns of aggresslOn as the Egyptian people have
heen and. that, no people shall be obliged to live as
refugees 111 thelr owncountry as the Palestinian Arabs
have been living for the past ten years.
181. Ml'. THORS (Iceland) : It is indeed gaod news
to. the worl~ that all foreign fighting forces have been
wlthdrawn from the territory of Egypt and that an
e?d ~as thu? been put to a most serious situation, a
sltuatlOn WhlCh could have led ta renewed fighting in
the Middle East and which would have entailed untold
ma,ssacre of human life and destruction of property.
Tt 1S good n~ws to a11 people and a11 nations that desire
~rue peace 111 the world-peace in practice, not only
1:1 wor~s and th~ory. If the war-like situation had cont111ued m the MIddle East, it would soon have changed
to an ali-out war th~re, and in a.:ll likelihoocl. that war
would have spread wIdely, not only to the neighbouring
Arab countries but elsewhere as weIl, for the great

Powers
ners in
cipants,
would r
il82. 1
Jeast-a
the WO]
peace rr
183. T
Can it,
arrange
tian? l
-roots 0fore, th
and the
creating
their liv
that is r
184. V
Nations
voices 0
of Isral
1948 Wl
1949 g,
establisl
carne tr

1956 w

titude 1
oot iny
sequenc
that ho~
until th:
To keel
perienc(
185. Il
statesml
The Pl'
stated
Mar<:h:
"v\
fact;
are tl

186.

C

area aIs
he und,
saddest
Arab T
to who
granted
lsraelis
generol1
in this!
187. V
nlent ~
made bStraits
gatioo:
passage
be settl
by no 0
188. l'
has bee
goes by
means
their pr
coexistE

189.

1

great a

IAJ

If their
untries
\"anœ:)
i rom·
ogress.
had tG
,t-the

l,,:,
•.•·

tlUs
but
to the ,
1. Letl
Il

'1

l~ l

1 how

1
1

pport
:':g}'pl

tesleJ

iation
{S gOj
lTorts
;crip- -1

~l1

ts in

~~~lt
bur·

i

~~ 1

[>ast
role

ms.

our
, in
:ult

Ilce

ual

the
the

Lve

as
.bs

vs

m

a
in
Id
y.

'e

}'

l-

i

r

l

!

General Assembly-Elevenlh session-Plenary Meetings

Powers of the worlel Gould have become covert partners in this game of demolition and, later, overt participants, and the third world war in its fuE terror
would have begun.
182. This has now been averted-temporarily at
least-and well-meaning and honest people all over
the world pray and ,desire that a stable and -lasting
peace may be found.
183. There is a saying "aU's weU that ends weU".
Can it, however, truly be said now that the present
arrangements constitute the end of a dangerous situation? Unfortunately, that is far from the case. The
roots of the problem have not been reached. Therefore, the tree of evil grows on and spreads its thick
and ~horny branches over the heads of the peoples,
creatmg shadows of doubt, fear and even hatred in
their lives. The roots of the conflict must be eliminated:
that is now the problem before the United Nations.
184. We who have foUowed the work of the United
Nations during the past years well remember the
voices of protest raised by the Arab nations at the time
of Israel's birth in 1948. The war against Israel in
1948 was a tragic event. The Armistice Agreements of
1949 gave us hope that peaceful conditions could be
established in this troubled area. That hope never
came true. Israel's invasion of Egypt on 29 October
1.956 was the saddest consequence of the hostile attItude prevailing among the nations concerned. It is
not my intention to try to evaluate the causes or consequences of this state of affairs. 1t suffices to know
that hostilities broke out and that war has raged even
until this very day. That war is now over, thanIe God.
To keep the peace, it is well for aU ta learn from experience and to consider a few aspects of the situation.
185. It has been repeatedly asserted by many leading
statesmen in many lands that Israel is there to stay.
The President of the United States, Mr. Eisenhower,
stated at a press conference in Washington on 7
March:
"We 111 ust recognize that hrae1 is a historical
fact; it has got to be dealt with, and its problems
are those of any other nation."
186. On the other hand, the Arab nations in this
area also have their very serious problems which must
be understood and solved satisfactorily. One of the
saddest problems is that of the approximately 1 million
Arab refugees, for whom homes must be found and
to whom fair and firm conditions of life must be
granted. About this burning question the Arabs and
l'sraelis must come to tenus. It is a source of hope that
generous help and sincere assistance have been offered
in this grave matter by many leading nations.
187. With regard ta the Gulf of Aqaba, my Government wishes to associate itself with the declarations
made by many delegations here that the Gulf and the
Straits of Tiran should be open for international navigation and that vessels of aIl nations have a right of
passage. Any dispute in that matter could and should
he settledby the International Court of Justice-and
by no other means.
188. Now that the fighting between Egypt and Israel
has been brought ta a haIt, let us hope that, as time
goes by, the Arab nations and Israel will find ways and
means of arriving at an understanding and of solving
their problems, and thus will find the road to friendly
coexistence.
189. The last four months have been a period of
great anxiety for the world, and the United Nations

1319

has been tested as never before. The United Nations
has, 1 think, emerged from this perilous j uncture in its
life stronger and in a position which, more than ever
before, challenges ail its critics in many lands. A great
dea-l of the credit for this and all the recent achievements is due to our distinguished, hard-working Secretary-General, whose skill, tact and devotion are
deserving of our complete appreciation and sincere
thanles. His many able assistants in the Secretariat
. should also not be forgotten in this respect.
190. It is true that the United Nations can never be
stronger, or in fact anything more, than its Members
want it to be. We must ail acknowledge that the President of the United States and the able United States
representatives here in the United Nations and its
spokesmen in Washington have shown great patience
and statesmanship in steering past the many obstacles
in this matter and in bringing about a satisfactory solution. It is encouraging that Israel and the United
States have deaIt with this matter in an atmosphere
of mutual confidence and that the Prime Minister of
Israel has based bis ,difficult decisions on bis trust in
the United Nations.
191. The patient and tactful way in which the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt has conducted himself during the most critical moments of this dangerous
chapter that, fortunately, has now been c1osed-we
hope-also augurs weIl for the future.
192. ",Vith aU that in view, let us have confidence in
the future, and trust that peace and progress will at
last be the share of all the peoples in the Middle East
for aU time to come.
193. Mr. SHAHA (NepaI): It was with a feeling
of relief and satisfaction that my delegation heard the
announcement made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel on Friday last [666th meeting] concerning the withdrawal of Israel troops from the Gaza and
Sharm el Sheilch areas. We were happy to learn from
the Secretary-General this afternoon that, in pursuance
of this annoul1cement, considerable withdrawals have
already talcen place from the Gaza strip and that the
withdrawals will be completed by 12 March.
194. It is truly heartening to find that our Organization's efforts to restore a peacefuI and normal situation
in the Middle East have, however belatedly, heen suc·
cessful. The success of the United Nations in tlùs respect will, 1 am sure, strengthen the faith and confidence of aIl countries in the efficacy of this Organization as an instrument for securing peace and justice in
the world.
195. Some people might still ,doubt that it is possible
for the United Nations in the same way ta solve and
settle aIl the intricate issues of the Middle East: the
Palestine question, the question of the Suez Canal,
and other related prohlems. My delegation, however,
feels that, given good will and understanc1ing on aIl
sides and with faith in the ideals of the United Nations and a determination to abide by this hody's majority decisions, whatever may happen, it will not be
difficult to arrive at a peaceful and just settlement of
ail the long-standing issues in the Middle East.
196. 1 must add, however, that, had it not been for
the commendahle forbearance and restraint shown by
Egypt itself in this long and protracted period of negotiation and cle1ay, the solution would not have been
so s11100th and peaceful.
197. The difficulties inherent in the Secretary-General's efforts to secure the implementation of the provisions of resolution 1124 (XI) call for sympathetic

·~:L

1320

668tll meeting-8 Mareil 1957

Gaza strip of full military and civilian authority by
consideration by aIl. With the same sort of co-operathe United Nations Emergency Force will ensure and
tion and understanding whieh Egypt, we have no
make safe lasting conditions under which no raids of
doubt, will continue to show, it should not he difEcult
any kind across the armistice line will again take place.
to bring about also the implementation of resolution
1125 (XI) and to achieve a just and lasting peace in
205. The sad history of the last few years shows the
the Middle East in due course.
paramonnt importance of this. It a1so shows that unless
the permanent unrest can be brought to an end, not
198. The efforts made outside the United Nations by
on1y will fear and 1l1utual suspicion be rife and everthe President of the United States, as well as by the
increasing, bnt they will lea:d to a constant danger of
United States Government and its delegation, ta bring
wodd-wide conflagration. My Government, therefore,
about the desired results within the framework of the
attaches the greatest importance to the endeavour now
General Assembly resolutions have indeed been
beillg ma·de to paeify once and for a11 these troubled
commendable.
areas. This endeavour must not fail.
199. Let t11e also takc this opportunity to put on re206. With these as our assnmptions and our expectacord, on behalf of 111Y delegation, our sincere appreciations, we look to the United Nations with hope and
tion of the steady, unobtrusive efforts of the Seeretaryconfidence that it will not hesitate in tackling the
General in bringing about the successful implementaunderlying problems in the Middle East, extremely
tion of the resolutions of the General Assembly in a
difEcult and complicated as, of course, they are. Hesireal and proper spirit. We are fortunate in having
tation and the passage of time not l1tilized will only
a great statesman and diplomat such as Mr. l?ag
make matters worse and the problems even more inHammarskjold as Secretary-General of onr Orgamzasoluble. May it not be long l1ntil we actl1ally begin that
tion. His impartiality and integrity, together with bis
tact and confidence in handling delieate international
great task.
problems, have alrea,dy received wide acc1aim through
207. Mr. SUDJARWO (Indonesia): My delegation
the world.
welcomes the report of the Secretary-General dated 8
200. Final1y, l should Iike to congratulate you, Mr.
March 1957 in which he stated that he was now in a
Presi'dent, for the ability and wisdom which yon have
position to report full cOl11pliance with General Asshown in conducting the ·debates and deliberations in
sembly reso111tion 1124 (XI), which demanded the
the General Assembly during this most difficnlt sesfull and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from Gaza
sion, with the parliamentary ,diplomacy which is the
and Sharl11 el Sheikh; the latter withdrawal has been
praetice of our Organization in the solution of quescompleted today, accOl'ding to the Secretary-General's
tions involving breaches of rpeace and arousing fears
supplementary statement at this meeting.
and passions among nations.
208. At last-at long last, l must say-wise counsel
201. Mr. ESKELUND (Denmark): My Governhas prevailed and has triumphed in the interests of
ment and my delegation welcome with great joy the
peace. This is a good day for the United Nations.
report of the Secretary-General of today's date, where209. 1 am aware that vall1able efforts ontside the
in the Assembly is informed of the "full compliance
United Nations have contributed to tbis achievement,
with General Assembly resollltion 1124 (XI) of 2
bnt it is eql1ally true that, had the United Nations not
February 1957" [A/3568]. So now the door is flung
taken a iirm stand to bring to an end, at least physwide -open to an effective start on the implementation
icalIy, this aggression; had the United Nations not
of a constructive policy which could, in the near and
been firtn in defending and upholding the Purposes and
the distant futme, create satisfactory conditions in the
Principles set forth in the Charter, despite all the difwhole area and for the States and the peoples of the
ficulties and emotions involved, this end would never
area.
have been achieved.
202. Indeed, as Mr, Lodge, the representative of
the United States, said a few minutes ago, this is a
210. My delegation is, of course, grateful for the
very important moment in the history of the hitherto
unceasing attention and assistance of the Secretarytroubled Middle East.
General and his staff, whose invaluable contributions
have indeed aided incakulably in this achievement.
203. My ,delegation and my Government wish to
The United Nations has now achieved what its resolustate that we assume and we expect that, from now
tions, since the olltbreak of the aggression against
on, not only will the Armistice Agreement of 1949
Egypt, have set forth, although they were primarily
be scrupulous1y observed by both parties, bl1t also, and
limited in ,character; that is to say, the termination of
consequently, that there will be no more vaUd reasons
the aggression, at least in the physical sense.
for strife and controversy on questions of compliance
or non-compliance with the dauses, ·both written and
211. Several problems have, however, been 1eft beunwritten, of that Agreement.
hind by this aggression. No account has been taken of
the ,damage done ta Egypt and its' people; the loss of
204. Two special proiblems have, for many weeks,
many lives is certainly irreparable. Relations between
loomed over and abave a11 other problems in the con'several nations have been damaged as wel1, and further
flietbetween Israel and its Arab neighbours: the quesinternational efforts will be needed to repair them in
tion of the Straits of. Tiran a1'ld the9.t\~sti,91.},9Lensur­
ing that therè""wîlT. neC no :ili.qtë"peUigerent.. a:cts .aGt:Qss. the interests of peace and co-operation. We know weIl
enough by now what aggressiol1 means in this already
the irontiers of the.. Gazastrip.. We assume and we
·expect that these two problems will.ll010nger cause
troubled and divided world. There is also a kind of
difficultieswhich. could, by any stretch of imagination, li problem about the United Nations Emergency Force.
he called serious. We. assume and we expect that the ~: Certainly that Force has been instrumental in bringing
question of the freedom of passage through the Straits ~ about the present accomplishments, and my Governof Tiran and the Suez Canal will in fact be solved, b ment is happy to be able to make its contribution by
land solvedpositively. We also--and in this l am sure
partidpating in this Force for peace. Here l should
Iithat most, if not an, Members of the United Nations
like to 'pay tribnte ta the Commander of the Force,
Il General Burns, who in difficult and delicate cÎrcumcssume and exp,et that the take-ovcr ;n the 1

stances has bee
satisfaetory way
212. That the
Sharm el Sheikl
entirely within
Sure the withdr
porary and em
never be disreg
n1.Y Goverl1111ent
of the Force its
emergency char
delegation 'Said
February:
"Whi1e we
to secure som
pIete withdra
tention that
unreasonable
exceeding the
established an
an occupying
definitely not
213. 'Certainly,
could not stay i
stationed withot
Egypt. This ha
the Secretary-G
General also dr
the General As
·ing] ~ ta the fad
military and thE
has been the ca1
c1usively by the
it had been e1se
nexion that the
24 J anuary, stail
"Deploymen
resolntions of
he on the sar
arn1istice !ine
:function for it
the Armistice
of internatiom
Egypt. A wid
istrative respo
sponsibilities f
ta be based c
para. 14.]
214. ,;Vith reg,
will go into effec
withdrawal of
Illay recall that
the resolution. ~
the remaining F
in the area afte
dealt with in con
the Charter. ThE
l believe everyc
the vvay best ·c~
peace and stabt1J
tne1'1t has cOll?e
.bel· ,Cf
and "agal11
b,
the Force on t
tion line", as t
should notbe
employ this Fon
ct finite1y ·011 the
e
. t'
f t
juris.dl~ 10~ 0
OrgaulzatiOI1.
.L

General Assembly-Eleventh session-Plenary Meetings

.rity by
.lfe and
'aids of
e place.
)WS the
l ullless
nd, not
cl everIlger of
erefore,
ur now
roubled

1

xpectape and
ng the
lremely
. HesiiIl o~ly
ore Ill:in that

1
1

egation
late<! 8
,w in a
'al .Ased the
Il Gaza
lS been

1

1

1

~l1eral's

1
l

:ounsel

csts of

ms.

de the
'ement,
ms Ilot
• ph)'sns Ilot
,cs and
he dif!lever

Jr tbe
:etarylutiollS
Cillent.
,'esolllIgainst
maril)'
.ion of

~ft

1
f

1

'

1)
1

j
'1

1

'j

be-

ken of
oss of
:tween
urther
em in
v weil
Iready
ind of
[t'oree.
ingillg
)Vern·
on br
hould

~orce,

rcum-

1
,
1

1

l

"1

stances has been able to carry out his task in the most
satisfactory way.
'
212. That the Force has now enterecl Gaza and
Sh~rn1 el ?h~ikh is naturally, as we have stated before,
entIre1y w1~hll1 the scope of its task, which was to ensure the w1thdrawa1 of the Israel forces; but the temporary and emergency character of the Force should
never be disregarded. Tt was indeed on this basis that
111Y Government decided to participate in it. The name
of the Force itself is explanatory of its temporary and
emergency character. 1 need on1y refer to what my
delegation 'said before the General Assembly on 1
February:
'
"While we may agree that it may take some time
to secure some stability in these regïons after complete withdrawa:l, it neverthe1ess cannot be the intention that the Force remain there over any
unreasonable length of time, since it would thus be
exceeding the temporary functions for which it was
estab1ished and, in effect, assul11ing the character of
an occupying force, a purpose for which it was
definitely not created." [649th meeting, para. 155.]
213. Certain1y, it was a1so agreed that the Force
could not stay in any of the areas in which it is now
stationed without the consent of the Government of
Egypt. This has been repeated1y emphasized a1so by
the Secretary-Genera1 himself; in fact, the SecretaryGeneral a1so drew attention, in his statement before
the General Assembly on 22 February [659th meeting], to the fact that the take-over of Gaza from the
military and the civilian control of Israel which, as
has been the case, in the first instance would be exc1usively by the Force, should be orderly and safe as
it had been elsewhere. 1 will al-so recall in this connexion that the Secretary-General, in his report of
24 January, stated:
"Deployment of the Force in Gaza, under the
reso1utions of the General Assembly, would have to
he on the same basis as its deployment along the
armistice line in the Sinai Peninsu1a. Any broader
function for it in that area, in view of the terms of
the Armistice Agreement and a recognized principle
of international 1aw, would require the consent of
Egypt. A widening of the United Nations administrative responsibilities in the area, beyond its responsibilities for the refugees, would 1ikewise have
to be based on agreement with Egypt." [A13512,

para. 14.]
214. With regard to resolution 1125 (XI), which
will go into effect after the complete and unconditional
withdrawal of Israel troops, the General Assemb1y
may recall that Indonesia was one of the sponsors of
the resollltion. My Government shares the view that
the remaining problems affecting peace and security
in the area after the complete withdrawal should be
dealt with inconforn1ity with our responsibilities under
the Charter. There is the Armistice Agreement, which
1 believe everyone agrees should be implemented in
the way best ca1culated to secure better conditions for
peace and stability in this trouh1ed area. My Government has consented ta the necessity, for the time
being, and again with the consent of Egypt, to station
the Force "on the Egyptian-Israel armistice demarcation line", as the resolution put it. This, however,
shou1d not beconstrued as consent on our part to
employ this Force, in whi~h In?onesia.par!icipates, indefinite1y on the dema;catlO11 l:ne, Wh1Ch lS unde~ ~1e
jurisdiction of the Umtecl Nahons Truce SupervlSlon
Organization.

1321

215.. There is, therefore, for my de1egation still a
q~1est10n as to what the Secretary-General means in
h1s report when he says that "the functions of the
Truce Supervision Organization in the Gaza area will
be plaœd under the operational control of the Force"
[A/3568, para. 14L although 1 agree with his state1l;1ent that a close co-operation between the Organizat~on and the Force will be maintained, that is to say
S1l1ce the functions of the two more or less over1ap at
this moment.
216. With regard to the work of UNRWA in the
area, 1 welcome the statement made just now by the
Secretary-General and share his appreciation for the
work and the assistance given by the Director of
UNRWA and his staff in Gaza in these difficult days
for the refugee and non-refugee population of Gaza,
My Government being a constant contributor, however small, to the finances of UNRWA, 1 should like
to support strongly the appeal which the SecretaryGeneral made to a11 Member States to supply the funds
which are 50 badly needed for carry1ng out the noble
task of UNRWA.
217. In regard to the other matter proposed in the
Secretary-Genera:l's report of 24 January 1957 [AI
3512), the General Assembly may reca11 that different
and conflicting Interpretations have been placed upon
the scope and intent of these matters. My delegation
is of the opinion that, whatever further measures or
arrangements may be made, it should be cIear that they
cannot and should not vio1ate the sovereignty of Egypt
-which, by the way, was the victÎln of the aggression
on its own territory, incIuding the Straits of Tiran,
which are c1eady within the territorial waters of Egypt
-and the rights of Egypt in the Gaza strip under the
still-valid Armistice Agreement. It is, however, my
Government's hope that the parties directly concerned
will, given the necessary conditions for co-operation,
be able to malœ their contribution to the solution of
these difficult and comp1icated issues in a way which
will be conducive to the promotion of peace and
stability in the area.
218. In this respect we ShOllld also not forget the
fate and indeed the human rights of the hundreds of
thousands of Palestine refugees, rights guaranteed by
the Charter and indeed by United Nations resolutions,
not only in the Gaza strip, but a1so in other areas bordering Israel. Without a solution of this problem, even
on a temporary hasis, no satisfaetory peace, let alone
a permanent peace, can be achieved in that part of the
wor·ld. 1 do not think that it is fitting at this moment
to discuss or elaborate in detail upon all these problems, or upon what should or should not be done, since
we do not want to comp1icate the efforts of the Secretary-Genefal1 who, as 1 understand from his report of
today's date, intends to Btudy these matters further
in the light of the opinions already expressed in the
Assemb1y and in consultation with the parties directly
concerned. My delegation is prepared to leave them
for thorough study and consultations by the SecretaryGeneral, while naturally reserving its right ta consider
the questions in the way in which it has taken its stand.
219. 1 may end this statement by e:lGpressing my
highest regard for and appreciation of the efforts now
to he undertaken by the Secretary-General. Let us
. hope that, if the General Assembly is ta consider these
questions again at a future date, a better olimate will
have been produced-which we always believed it was
possible to create after the complete withdrawa1 of
aIl invading forces-so that the Assemb1y will have a

.'.
"

1322

I
I

668th meeting-8 March 195'7

better opportunity of finding the ways and means for
the solution of the remaining problems under more
favourable conditions, which would be not only in the
interests of the parties in the Middle East, but also in
the inte.. .ests of all nations concerned.
220. FiIla}.ly, at this last stage of our General Assembly session, let me pay tribute to you, Mr. President,
who have conducted the work of the Assembly during
all these diffic~(t months in such an able and awJrable
W2'!. Your devotion to your duties, your patience,
grace and wisdom have always been a light in the
deliberations of the Assembly. We are deeply grateful
to you and wish to thank you.
221. Mr. MACKAY (Canada): At our ~ast meeting
on this subject [667th meeting]. Mr. Pearsou, the
Chairman of the Canadian delegation, expressed the
hope that we had reached the turning point in the
crisis which has been facing the Assembly for so many
weeks. Today I am glad to be able to welcome the
Secretary-General's report [AI3568] which, in its
first part, records the full compliance by Israel with
General Assembly resolution 1124 (XI). Mr. Pearson
has aiready expressed in the Assembly our satisfaction
with Israel's decision to follow this wise and responsible course.
222. Part II of the Secretary-General's rc?Ort points
out that, with the withdrawal of Israel from Sharm el
Sheikh and the Gaza strip, resolution 1125 (XI) becomes operative. In view of statements which the
Canadian delegation has made earlier in the course of
the Assembly debate on this subject, I need hardly reem:phasize the 'support with which the Canadia-ll delegation welcomes this part of the report. We have consistentiy urged that withdrawal should immediately be
followed by the implementation of measures proposed
in the Secretary-General's reports, particularly in his
report of 24 Janua..ry [AI3512]. We believe that those
constructive measures will help to achieve the conditions of peace and security which are so necessary if
we are not to return to'the very unsatisfactory situation
which existed in the area prior to the fighting last
November.
223. We believe that the essential elements of the
arrangements for securing and supervising the cease
fire and withdrawal will be the interposition of the
United Nations Emel"gency Force between the armed
forces of the opposing sides. The Canadian position in
this regard is too well known to require detailed repetition. I need only refer to remarks made by the Canadian S{:eretary of State for External Affairs in previous debates about the deployment of the Force on
the armistice line. We still believe that, after the
.withdrawal of Israel, there is a need for the scrupulous
observance of the Armistice Agreement of 1949 and
for the deployment of the Force to assist in the achievement of that end. We have in mind, in particula'.', that
the Force should assist in preventing incursions, raids
, and retaliatory attacks from either direction a~ross the
demarcation Hne.
. 2240 Part HI of the Secretary-General's report
speaks about arrangements for the initia!l take-over in
Gaza by' the Force and about the assistance which it
and UNRWA will extend in the civilian administration of the, Gaza strip. We recognize that these functiqns. will be complex and difficult. They will add
. greatly to the responsibilities of the Secretary-~neral,
.the Commander of the Force and the Director, of
UNRWA. We urge' that a~l·Governments concerned
·should co-operate .fully with the various United Na-

tions agencies in order to ensure that the arrangements for take-over proceed smoothly. Arrangements
like this were envisaged in the programme which Mr.
Pearson suggested to the Assembly on 26 February
[660th meeting]. and we hope they will have the fullest
support of the Assembly.
225. I should not like to dose these brief remarks
without some reference to the future. We all k..'10W
that, in the efforts to bring about the complete withdrawal of Israel, the resources of the Assembly have
been severely taxed. We can rightly sigh with relief
today ,because this difficult phase is past, at least as
far as the Assembly is concerned. In our relief at this
time, however, we' should not forget our continuing
i"esponsibility for ensuring that events in the areas
concerned may move forward. Conditions must not be
allowed to slide back into the unhealthy situation
which led to the explosion and fighting last autumn.
We earnestly hope that today marks the beginning of
constructive development, and we believe the Secre··
tary-General's rep.orts, and in particular this latest one,
lay the groundwork for progress. 'Progress will not
be easy, however, and it should not be assumed. That
is why we have a continuing responsibility to see that
progress is made.
226. As the Canadian delegation has frequently suggested during this crisis, real progress can only be
made when the parties to the dispute have made up
their minds to settle their differences. We are not
suggesting that this can be an easy or a sudden development. We recognize the deep apprehension among
the Arab States, derived primarily from the displacement of Arab peoples when Israel was established.
We 1U"e conscious, too, of the anxiety and frustration
in Israel, which sees itself as being surrounded by
hostile neighbours. We have suggested before in the
Assembly that the time may have come, however, for
the :Arab States to accept the fact of Israel's existence
and to give fresh consideration to what their relations
should be with the new State. In return for this recognition, however, the Arab nations are entitled to assurances that Israel has no expansionist ambitions.
This is not likely to result in the use of force or the
threat of force as a means of achieving nationaJ aims.
227. A!lthough these observations may be regarded
as an oversimplification of what we all recognize as a
very complex question, I suggest that they are not
altogether inappropriate at this time, when the Assembly is taking 11.ote of compliance with its resolutions on withdr:lwal and of constructive measures
which Vie all hope witl bring about a new and improved
atmosphere in t."lat sorely troubled .area.
228. Mr. ULLRICH (Czechoslovakia): World public opinion, which unequivocally condemned the aggression against Egypt, expects from the United
Nations, the full liquidation of this aggression and its
consequences. It e:x:pects that the brutally violated,
sovereign rights of Egypt, the victim of aggression,
will be fully restored and that, in particular, the General Assembly wiU not permit any solution which
would reward aggression or per,mit the aggressor ta
take advantage of the present situation. The last of
the aggressors, Israel, after several months of concentrated effort by the General Assembly, has now
been forced. to withdraw from the positions gained
. unlawfully by acts of aggression.
229. , It is only after unending obstructions a,.t1d delaying manOe1..w'res that the Israel troops are being
withdrawn, as we learned from the report of the Sec-

~

I

retary-General. N
United States, as
outside the Unite
purpose of substi
United States for
price for the wit
could not be achic
tion of the large
United Nations it
plished now by ci
230. The main ~
viously is to preve
taken against Isra
ditions put forwar
ditionspreviously
when it insisted, i
mediate and unc(
troops and the re
Egypt. According
territory illegally
drawn from the
taken over by the
231. This would
tory is to be taken
but also that the F
occupation of thi
have not been assi
are now being arti
according to the I
any circumstances
232. The Force
the invaders as a
functions of the 0
can onlly be assig
conditional withd
maintaining quiet
Egypt and Israel
tions consented t<
Force would be in
of the United Na
sovereign rights 0
233. The Weste
their intention of
of the Israel dem
an international ,
within the territor
234. We are full
restoration of pea
a number of out
solved urgently. r
Jimited to the Isra
them, which Israe
the present situati
the support for St
its main partners
ganization (NA
France. The outs
portant and inten
tions of such pari
painfull pt...b~m.,p!
235. It would b~­
aggression and 0
if, from the whole
those questions s
elevates to the fo
on Egypt unilate
of all its "c.andit
"expectations", in

'.,

....
,

Gelileral Assembly-Eleventh leasion-Plen...~ Meetinp

retary-General. Negotiations between Israel and the
United States, as is well known, have been conducted
outside the United Nations, with the main goal and
purpose of substituting unilateral guarantees by the
United States for the conditions put by Israel as the
price for the withdrawal of its troops. Thus, what
could not be achieved because of the resolute opposition of the large majority of Member States in the
United Nations itself, is being attempted and accomplished now by circumventing our Organization.
230. The main concern of this American plan obviously is to prevent certain stern measures from being
taken against Israel and tu meet, on the side, the conditions put forward by Israel for the withdrawal, conditionspreviously rejected by the General Assembly
when it insisted, in several of its decisions, on the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of the Israel
troops and the restoration of the sovereign rights of
Egypt. According to the American plan, parts of the
territory illegally occupied by Israel are to be withdrawn from the sovereign control of Egypt and be
taken over by the United Nations Emergency Force.
231. This would mean not only that a part of territory is to be taken away from Egyptian administration,
but also that the Force would be misused for indef.nite
occupation of this territ-ory. These units, how';.vF,
have not been assigned any powers such as those which
are now being artificially attributed to them and which,
according to the United Nations Charter, cannot under
any circumstances be accorded to them.
232. The Force cannot, therefore, in any case replace
the invaders as an occupying force or take over any
functions of the occupants. The United Nations units
can on[y be assigned the task of supervising the unconditional withdrawal of the Israel troops and of
maintaining quiet on the demarcation line between
Egypt and Israel for the time being and under conditions consented to by Egypt. Any other use of the
Force would be in gross contradiction to the principles
of the United Nations Charter and in violation of the
sovereign rights of Egypt.
233. The Western Powers equally do not conceal
their intention of proclaiming unilaterally, in the sense
of the Israel demands, that the Straits of Tiran are
an international waterway, although these straits are
within the territorial limits of Egypt and Saudi Arabia.
234. We are fully aware that, in the interest of the
restoration of peace and security in the Middle East,
a number of outstanding questions will have to be
solved urgently. These problems cannot, however, be
aimited te;> the Israel demands for solving only some of
them, which Israel prefers to raise now while utilizing
the present situation brought about by aggression and
the support for such claims by the United States and
its main partners in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) , the United Kingdom and
France. The outstanding problems include many important and interrelated questions, among them questions .of such paramount im.POrtance as the deep and
painfulI pr"b~':.\l..,.?! the Arab -refugees.
235. It would b~~ tantamount to putting a ?!P.nUum on
aggression and offering advantages to the aggressor
if, from the whole complex of unsettled problems, only
those questions should be singled (,\ut which Israel
elevates to the forefront, while attempting to impose
on Egypt unilateral demands which are at the base
of all its "conditions", "hopes", "assumptions" and
"expectations", in the sense in which they are spoken

IS23

of, both in the Israel declarations and in the statements
of the United States and its partners as regards the
so-called guarantees.
236. Although the resolutions of the General As"
sembly requested an immediate and unconditional withdrawal of the Israel troops and the restoration of the
sovereign rights of Egypt over its territory, Israel has
in fact not given up the provocative conditions it put
forward in connexion with compliance with General
Assembly resolutions. It is obvious that the demands
which Israel wants to dictate, not only to Egypt, but
also to the United Nations, and which it still puts as
a price to be paid for the withdrawal of its troops from
the territory of the victim of aggression, are the bitter
fruit of the interference of the ·J:,ig Western Powers,
particularly of the United States, into the affairs of
the Middle East, with the purpose of fostering at the
same time the politica:1 and strategic objectives of the
main parh1ers of NATO in the explosive area of the
Middle East.
237. In offering guarantees to Israel, the United
States went far beyond its legitimate rights and interests and acted unilaterally on its own, in the ab!l~nce
of any authority to make such promises to Israel on
behalf of the United Nations. It is a pa.rticular cause
for regret that the United States should attempt to
impose its policy, as expressed in the aggressive Eisenhower doctrine, on the United Nations and, above an,
on the Arab countries and, first of all, on ~oypt, the
victim of aggression.
238. The Israel Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mrs.
Meir, when announcing the "wit.1.drawal of Israel
troops", did not conceal the fact that the Israel Govel'nment is counting on the United States' guarantees
while putting conditions on its so-called unconditional
withdrawal. The Press has £Ul,ly revealed that the joint
manoeuvres of the United States and Israel C-.overnments for the circumvention of the United Nations
went so far that even the official declarations which
each of the' parties concerned have made had been
agreer1 upon beforehand,
239. It has become more and more obvious that the .
United States intentiona.l1y circumvented the United
Nations in seeking a unilateral solution of the conflict
in the Middle East and that it is attempting to impose
on Egypt and other countries its own concepts and
formu~as also with regard to the problems of navigation in the Gulf of Aqaba and in the Suez Canal. These
actions, which are being carried out with the purpose
of fostering simultaneously the aggressive plans of the
United States in this area, undermine the authority of
the United Nations and create a serious' threat to
peace and security. They raise a. justified question as. to
whether the next stage of the implementation of the
Eisenhower doctrine will threaten anned intervention.
240. We consider that a just 'Solution of the con~ict
in the Middle East is, above all, a task of the United
Nations, which is the only body competent to take all
necessary measures to bring about a full liquidation of
the aggression and the complete restoration and protection of the sovereign rights of Egypt and other Arab
countries. Any unilateral agreements between some
of the Member States, .particularly between t.~ose
which indulge in e!1couraging and rewarding. aggression, cannot be binding on our Organization, which
must unequivocally insist on the fulfilment of the letter
.and spirit of the General Assembly ·resolutions and
-the full liquidation of the aggression, for which the
aggressors must not escape responsibility.

~~~~~,m'!'I!!'!!'I~"·"'"~~~~~'·i~~:",.~,~_Jj·'.~.'! i ~.'! i J"',! ! .~~,~.. ~,!tll,,~.~~~·~~~m

. _• • •_

1

t1
v.
d
a
o
ti
y
n

o
a
2

t1
a
a
s
c
a
p
q
o

c
I
2
d
a

a
c

II
I

I

.--.

1.

IS

t

s
t

-:- T- .......

,'\,'

~:>-.

,;j.', '-'-

1824

have withdrawn from Gaza and the Shann el Sheikh
area, the last remmmts of the invading forces against
Egypt are finailly removed. In coming to a turning
point in. the develupments of t.be problem before us,
the oroan dp.legation was aware of the thoughts and
vie\va which were expressed by certain representatives
during the ·jast two meetings of the General Assembly
and at this meeting. These views envisaged, on the
one hand, future changes in the adminisi;rative conditions in the Gaza strip. They cannot, however, go beyond the scope of hopes and wishes because they are
not in conformity with the provisions of the Armistice
Agreement, which governs the general conditions in
the Palestine area. Our views on the matter and those
of other Arab Gov~rnments have been stated in detail
at previous meetings and are still maintained.
242. On the other hand, hopes and expectations were
expressed concerning free passage for Israel ships
through the Straits of Tiran and in:..l1e Gulf of Aqaba.
Such an Israel claim is subject to juridical decision. It
also represents an aspect of the Palestine problem as
a. whole, which problem has not yet been settled. There
seem to be some Governments which try to follow a
plan by which they think they can 'solve the Palestine
case pIecemeal. I must say in this c01l.11exion that such
a concept is very unrealistic and departs from the
path of justice. The various aspects of the P8!lestine
question are interrelated in such a way that the settlement of each of them is dependent upon the settlement
of .'~e others. This fact sho\011 throw light on our
work here at the General Assembly whenever we
come to deal with the specific issues of the ArabIsrael conflict.
243. It is in line with these remarks that the Jordan
delegation views the relevant resolutions of the Genera!l
Assembly and today's report of the Secretary-~neral,
as well as his previous reports. On this occasion I
wish to extend on behalf of my delegation our sincere
appreciation to Mr. Hammarskjold for his valuable
contribution to the success nf the efforts of the Genera!!'
Assembly throughout the stages of the present -discussion, and our admiration to you, Mr. President, for
the excellent manner in which you have conducted
our debate.
244. Mr. NINCIC (Yugoslavia): This afternoon
we have r~ceived confirmation from the SecretaryGeneral that the withdrawal of the Israel forces from
th,~ remaining parts of the territory they had invaded
has finally been completed. A tragic chapter of the
Middle Eastern crisis that was opened more than four
months ago with the attack against Egypt has thus
been brouuht to a close. This is indeed a sign8!l triumph for the Unitd Nations and may well prove to
be a mi1:'!stone in the .endeavours to strengthen the
pe.a;;e of t 1.le world.
~45. The United Nations has emerged victorious
from what has clearly been a crucial test case. When
l.h,~ Secu.::i.ty Council, ont.l-te proposal of 'b.'1e Yugoslav
de1(~gai:~on [ S/1719], decided to call the General Ass\'m1bl)r .!lit\} emergency &pedal session to deal with
tbe s~tu,\tion in the Middle East [S/3721] , it was
~lt.~ar1y taking a bold 'step; yet it was taking the only
stf.:P that it was possible to take in the circumstances.
Eventshavt~ proved that it was fuLly justified in taking
this step.
.
246. The Gel~eraJ1 Assembly-I think it is not an
oversta\tel".1ent to say-has magnifice21tlyHved up to the
hr-avy l'f:spons.ibilities that were placed upon its 'shoul-

r

I

I

I

a."••

1fl• •

- ,'::

.

668th meeting-8 March 195'7

.241. Mi". RIFA'I (Jordan): Now that the Israelis

,

~ .....

ders. With the invaluable and indispensable co-operation of our Secretary-General, whose efforts on this
as on previous occasions have earned hUn the lasting
gratitude of all States Members of the United Nations, the General Assembly has achieved the task that
was set before it on that momentous night of 2 November. In doing so, I think that the General Assembly has done more than solve a crisis, however serious
and however acute; it has made a signal contribution
to the strengthening of the broader textures of world
peace and security.
247. It has been conclusively shown that settlements
cannot be achieved through the use of force contrary
to the principles of the United Nations. At the same
time, what we hope will prove to be a decisive blow
has been deallt to the theorv of the so-called local "cold
wars" or actions on a limited scale.
248. \Ve are now faced with the necessity of taking
further steps in the direction upon which the General
Assembly has already embarked. The first and foremost 'step, as provided in resolution 1125 (XI), is
directed towards the strengthening of the structure of
the Armistice Agreement. The question has been posed
of the role that the United Nations Emergency Force
will be called upon to play. In this connexion, I would
like to recall the views that have been stated by. my
delegation on several occasions with regard to the
role and functions of the United Nations Emergency
Force. These views can very briefly be summarized
as foHows.
249. In the first place, the use of the Force will have
to remain strictly within the confines set by the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly. Further, it
is obvious that the Force can only be used with the
consent of the State within which it has to operate and
can under no circumstances assume the functions of an
occupation force. Finally, as has been repeatedly made
clear by the Secretary-General in his successive reports, the Force cannot be ~L1sed to impose the settlement of any controversial issue, whether political or
~egal. It is the confident hope of my delegation that
the United Nations wiH make the same progress in
the implementation of the further phases of its effort
that it has made in these early phases.
.
250. As regards the other, the more long-range or
$ubstantive, issues that have for so long plagued the
tonnented Middle Eastern scene, my delegation, of
course, has never denied the existence of these issues
or the need to tackle them in due course. I would, in
this connexion and by way of conclusion, like to quote
from a statement made on 26 February by the Yugos[av Secretary of State ·for Foreign Affairs in the
National Assembly of Yugoslavia. He said:
"These issues will have to be approached constructively following the withdrawal of the Israel
al"my. I am certain that the United Nations, hy exercising its great authority and relying on the efforts
of all peace-loving countries, will do its utmost in
this directi0l1. A positive solution by pea<::eful means
of Arab-Israel differences is the only way of achieving a settlement in that region as well as a realization of conditions for indepenKlent political and
economic development of the people who live there.
This would be at the same time the safest way of
preventing future interference from the outside and
bringing to an end the conditions whereby this region is a battlefield of conflicting interests and
harmful struggles among the great Powers/'

111.

I:• •,...
:'• . • • •
11111_11·~511111• • •llr.JI!l!!It!l!!J!rI!llUII·IiI!·I]I·.·I··I!IlIII_.I)IIIJ!JIIII!I,nl!!1IIIt.llI!l·!!!.III[!lI!_!t~_!!!!.
I·I·1!llJ.illlltllll!• .•1f!J!!!!IIIl!!!!!!D~\!!!!li~!i!.~"""'::1l
..!IIfl!Ili!.i""E..
..'..•~"'1
.•

I

That is a quotatio
Parliament.
251. Mr. EBAN
statement made ·b
Affairs to the Gen
meeting], Israel fo
Sharm el Sheikh a
end the action wh
four months ago in
and their sovereign
252. The General
considerations whi
the question at issu
exercise, together
right of free passa
Straits of Tiran.
able eA-pectation th
by the United Naf
the interests of peac
of Gaza until that
by definitive settl
253. We share th
r'i;ates that there i
e.cercise of belliger
have noted the a
world statesmen th
belligerent acts wiI
welcome this assu
good .faith upon it.
surely be aroused
after the dangers 'VI
party were to have
exercise of a state '254. On 28 J anu
the General Assem
ment and people 0
this debate. The th'
seek no Egyptian t
interest. We seek t
children being <liabl
throats from Gaza
in the Negev and
peace that they ha:
be brought back in
an Egyptian occu
have our ships sail
ternational waterw
own ports. We wi
and commerce wit
strangulation of bl
These are not acts
and we shall resp
these terms that Is
the General Assem
255. The people
the wave of symp
its just and righte
of a great part of
higher than today
countless multitude
256. I express Is
tained us in the 0
the words of tribut
to the Government
States and to its S
l;areful hours in t
problems. The emi
the Government 0
solving this ,dead!

..

.

: .......,-,
..~: ~.~~--.: ,

'-'.

-";.-.-

;.

General Assembly-Eleyenth 8e1luon-Plenary Meetings

That is a quotation from Mr. Popovic's statement in
Parliament.
251. Mr. EBAN (Israel): In conformity with the
statement made ,by the Israel Minister for Foreign
Affairs to the General Assembly on 1 March [666th
meeting], Israel forces have been withdrawn frem the
Sharm el Sheikh and Gaza areas. This brings to an
end the action which the people of Israel instituted
four months ago in defence of their lives, t~lelr homes
and their sovereign rights.
252. The General Assembly is fully aware of the
considerations which have guided my Government in
the question at issue. We uphold and will continue to
exercise, together with the entire maritime world, the
right of free passage in the Gulf of Aqaba and the
Straits of Tiran. We have given voice to our reasonable expectation that the responsibilities now exercised
by the United Nations in Gaza will be maintained in
the interests of peace and of the welfare of the residents
of Gaza until that peace and that welfare are assured
by definitive settlement.
253. We share the deep conviction nf all peace-loving
·'~2.tes that there is no room or Ole or right for the
e..~ercise of belligerent acts by land or sea or air. We
have noted the authoritative declarations of leading
world statesmen that there is no reaSon to assume that
belligerent acts will be practised by land or sea. We
welcome this assumption and shall, of course, act in
good ,faith upon it. The conscience of the world would
surely be aroused to vehement shock and protest if,
after the dangers we have faced and surmounted, any
party were to have recourse to the assertion or to the
exercise of a state of war.
254. On 28 January [645th meeting], I defined for
the General Assembly the objectives which the Government and people of Israel have sought to achieve in
this debate. The things we seek are simple things. We
seek no Egyptian territory. We threaten no Egyptian
interest. We seek to live without our men, women and
children being 'liable to sudden death springing at their
throats from Gaza and elsewhere. We wish our homes
in the Negev and the coastal plain to maintain the
peace that they have known for three months and not
1;>e brought back into the inferno that any prospect of
an Egyptian occupation would involve. We seek to
have our ships sail freely, equally with others, on international waterways. We seek lawful access to our
own ports. We wish to be able to develop our trade
and commerce with all nations, free from the warlike
strangulation of blockades. These things are our rights.
These are not acts of grace. Let us have these rights,
and we shall respect the rights of others. It was in
these terms that Israel's objectives were defined before
the General Assembly a few weeks ago.
255. The people of Israel has been deeply moved by
the wave of sympathy that has 'flooded towards it in
its just and righteous cause from the public opinion
of a great 'Part of the world. Never has Israel stood
higher than today in the trust and the affection of
countless multitudes of mankind.
256. I express Israel's tribute to all who have sus""
tained us in the ordeals of recent weeks. We join in
the words of tribute spoken here to the President and
to the Government and the delegation of the United
States and to its Secretary of State, who spent so many
careful hours in the study and elucidation of these
problems. The eminent leaders and representatives of
the Government of France played a decisive role in
solving this ,deadlock at a Ja.ter, crucial phase. Not

. . . &f2M:M;m!IJJ!,J)liM

II

1325

least, our admiration goes out to the delegation of
Canada, led by its eminent Secretary of State for
External Affairs, for constantly focusing the attention
of the General Assembly upon its affirmative and
constructive tasks.
257. The sha..-p, clear light of internationa!l scrutiny
now comes to bear upon the actions and demeanor of
our neighbour. Will Israel's faith be rewarded so that
others may have faith in the integrity of international
processes? Will the predictions of frose who have assured us that Israel will have no reason to regret its
difficult choice be fu1fitlled ? We do not doubt that those
who have solemnly pledged their honour to work for
non-belligerency and tranquillity in the Middle East
will rise to the full level of their opportunity.
258. On 1 November, at a sombre and tense moment in Israel's history, our aspirations were expressed
in the following terms: "Our signpost points not backward to belligerency, hut forward to peace" [562nd
meeting, para. 159]. Israel is ready for this historic
journey.
1259. Peace is the duty of all States and of all regions, but it ca!lls with special insistence and compulsion to our venerable region, from which the call of
universal brotherhood first came down across the ages
to successive getl,uations of mankind.
260. Mr. FAWZI (Egypt): Please allow me, Mr.
President. at this moment when we are near the end
of the present stage of our deliberations, .to present to
you, to the Secretary-General, and to the members of
the Secretariat my delegation's and my own profound
h'lanks for the tireless and selfless efforts which :you
have aH ungrudgingly ma.de through long and tedious
days and nights during the .Jast several months and
which have largi;;ly and abundantly contributed to the
success of tJ le Assembly's work.
261. The Assembly has been informed by the Secretary-General that Israel's withdrawal from territory
it had invaded since'29 October 195f1 is virtuallycomp[ete. Thus one page of history ends and another begins. At this turning point, and in the brief breathingspace that the quiCK succession of events affords us,
the lessons of the ~ast few months are certainly vivid
in all minds, and their emotions accompany the beat
of every heart.
~
262. Along with the whole world, the United Nations has gone through and is still going through an
extremely severe test. It is with pride and enhanced
hope that we can rightly say that, in stormy weather
and raging seas, this Organization has so far proved itself to be seaworthy and weatherproof. It has staunchly
upheld the Charter principle that problems shottld
be resolved and disputes settled by peaceful means,
not by armed force. It has taken a strong position on
the principle forbidding aggression as an instrument
of policy or a means of reaping benefits.
263. The United Nations and its Members have
shown a full awareness of how significant and vital
these days and moments are, of how much these days
and moments are likely to mean for the future and the
very sunr iva1 of the human. race. The United. Nations
and its Members have fully recvlized the magnitude
of the values and principles involved; they. have fully
realized that these values and principles·belong to all
humanity arid are not· the exclusive property of any
of us, to dispose of at will.
264. Together .with its fellow travellers on this road
that is charted for all of us by the Charter, Egypt.:....:....
in all humility, yet with faith and· resol've---has

13

th
of
be

~h

26
ta
to
r
ou
yo
26
de
ev
an
m

th
fo
yo

I

to

I

r:~

on

.;

........ -.

,

-·'II1··__- .._------..-"'P

.-.1.3·2·6--..-----j""··i-ii.~i'·i·.''.·,-'..
• ;Ili·-~~.~iA··liliii~iii::ie··~·tii·~iig_8.·."·j-·'.'MIiIi··ar·ch-·19·~1II7 ..
throughout kept in mind and in heart this bloodstream
of principle and of high ideal, without which there can
be no life worth living. no safeguarded honour and no
civilized world -community
, of nations.
265. How awesome and dreary. how utterly intractable the road for Egypt would have been if it had had
to tread that road alone. without your help, fellow
representatives, and the help of your countries; without the encouragement and solid support of you and
your countries.
266. When I venture to tell you how broad and how
deep will be the gr.atitude of Egypt and its people forever to all of you,vho are taking your stand on truth
and on the Charter of the United Nations, words fail
me; words are insufficient to give an adequate hint of
this, our feeling of gratitude. May I, therefore, be
forgiven if I merely say. on Egypt's behaif: Thank
you and God bless you all.
AGENDA ITEM: 25

Admission of new Members to the United Natiolls
AnMIS~ION OF GHANA TO MEMBERSHIP IN THE
1jNITED NATIONS (concluded)

The PRESIDENT: I should [ike to inform the
General Assembly that the representative of Ghana
has transmitted to me a message which he has just
received from his Prime Minister and has asked
whether I would be willing to read it out to the Assembly. I take pleasure in doing so. The message is
as follows:
"The admission of Ghana to the United Nations
fulfils a long-cherished aspiration of its Gcvernment
and people, and 9n their beha,J,f I should like to
express my warm appreciation of the action of th~
General Assembly in responding so promptly to our
request for admission. It is only two da.ys since
Ghana attained independence as a free democra~y,
and aur entry into the United Nations is the culmination of the process of our advance. I affirm the
intention of the Government and people of Ghana
to observe the principles and further the' purposes
of the Charter. We are proud to take our place in
the company of free nations in this great Organization and will bend our endeavours to pro~ote, in
co-operation with our fellow Members, the common
objects of the preservation of peace and the promotion of the progress, welfare and freedom of mankind."
267.

A.rrangelltents for future meetings 01 the eleventh
.
session of the General A.ssembly
268. The PRESIDENT: A draft resolution on this
question has been submitted by the delegations of
Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Iran, Japan, Norway and
the United States of America [AI3570].
269. Mr. KASE (Japan): Together with the delegations of Brazil, Canada, . Colombia, Iran, Norway and
the United States, my delegation has the honour of
sponsoring the draft resolution
270. This draft resolution proposes, in accordance
with rule 6 of the rules of procedure, to adjourn the
eleventh session of the Assembly temporarily and
to authorize the President of-the Assembly, in consultation with the Secretary-General and with the Memo

convene the Asse,mbly as necessary in order to consider further item 66 or item 67.
271. The General Assembly has approved the SeeretaJ.-y-General's report [AI 3568] submitted in pursuance of resolutions 1124 (XI) and 1125 (XI), adopted
by the General Assembly on 2 February 1957. It is a
source of genuine gratification that Israel has now
fU!lly complied with the first of these resolutions and
that its armed forces have been withdrawn from the
disputed :lreas. We apprec~ate the spirit of co-operation displayed by both Israel and Egypt. We earnestly
hope that this will mark the turning point in the history of the Middle East, ushering in an era of enduring
tranquillity.
272. Future developments, however, may take place
which may necessitate the convening of the General
Assembly again. Our draft resolution is intended to
cope with 'such an eventua!lity.
273. Needless to say, we feel deeply grateful for the
arduous efforts of the Secretary-General and ,,·.ish
him further success in this important assignment.
274. Item 67, concerning Hungary, remains before
the Assembly. We cannot possibly dismiss this important item from our conscience. Our draft resolution
therefore stipulates that the Assembly should meet
again on the item when that is deemed appropriate.
275. As regards this question, my delegation takes
note with appreciation of the interim report submitted
by the Special Committee on the Problem of Hungary
[AI3546]. My delegation happened to be one of the
twenty-four delegations which jointly sponsored the
draft resolution [AI34871Rev.l] which was adopted
by the Assembly on 10 January as resolution 1132
(XI) and which established this Special Committee,
composed of representatives of Australia, Ceylon,
Denmark, Tunisia and Uruguay, with the purpose of
investigating the situation prevailing in Hungary and
caused by the Soviet Union's intervention in that
country's internal affairs. Unfortunate-lT; this resolution has not beea complied with by the Soviet Union
and Hungary, which have denied the Committee their
co-operation. My delegation deplores this 'lack of cooperation on the part of the cQuntries directly concerned and hopes that they will see their way to extending co-operation to the Committee and, in particular, permitting the Committee and its staff to enter
and travel freely in the territory of Hungary. This
will, in our view, facilitate the assembling of reliable
and impartial information which will serve as a useful
basis for an accurate assessment of developments in
Hungary.
276. In the earnest hope that this will prove instrumental in assisting the efforts of the Hungarian people
to reassert their rights, we desire to express our thanks
to the Committee for the valuable work which it has
already done in implementation of the Assembly's
resolution.
277. With these remarks, I would urge delegations
to support the seven-Power draft resolution.
278. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The- Soviet delegation has no objection to the adjournment of this
session of the General Assembly with the possibility of
its being reconvened, as necessary, for further consideration of item 66 of our agenda.

I·=:=·:'=~~=::=:fu

I

Hungary. There is n
sons for our attitude
ready beeD explained
argument is that di
fairs despite the obj
ment is a gross viola
diction and is expres
tions Charter. The ..
same reasons, to the
bly should, at some
cussion of that item
280. The Soviet del
therefore to take a s
item 67 in the opera
lution. If this referen
resolution, the Sovie
abstain in the vote 0
281. Mr. LODGE
United States suppor
a temporary adjour
General Assembly.
viewpoint expressed
item 67, concerning
not be referred to in
and we believe profo
gary has definitely n
not be settled until i
the General Assembl
question. We have a
lem of Hungary, w
work and which has
out in the future.
282. It is perfectl
nothing to conceal a
Soviet Union and th
would certainly hav
vers to go in. By th
that, they have pra
reason, therefore, w
will be adopted, inc1
Hungary.
283. Mr. KING (
port the draft resolu
ers with regar'<;I to I'
agenda until the res
the proposed recess.
284. I should like
upon the interim rep
the Problem of H
Assembly resolution
the view of my d
thorough in its cover
range of investigati
much ,relevant factu
manifestations of di
the violation of hum
Hungary, notwithsta
which the Committe
more valuable becaus
1285. Even if there
regarding the comp
question-the existe
not concede--:-such a
overridden by the 0
upon Member State
rights C!-nd iundame
connexion, could 0
standard' of morality
have ,been the first

.

.

•JI_.- .
~.

General As.embly-E1evenu1. sesuon-Plomary Meetings

Hungary. There is no need for me to repeat the reasons for our attitude on that score, for they have already beeD explained here more than once. Our main
argument is that discussion of Hungary's internal affairs despite the objections of the Hungarian Government is a gross violation of Hungary's domestic jurisdiction and is expressly prohibited by the United Nations Charter. The Soviet delegation objects, for the
same reasons, to the proposal that the Ge~leral Assembly should, at some time in the future, renew its discussion of that item of the agenda.
280. The Soviet delegation would ask the President
therefore to take a separate vote on the reference to
item 67 in the operative paragraph of the draft resolution. If this reference shoukl be retained in the draft
:1100 to
resolution, the Soviet delegation will be cr
abstain in the vote on the draft as a whol:
281. Mr. LODGE (United States of America;: The
United States supports the draft resolution concerning
a temporary adjournment of the eleventh session of the
General Assembly. We differ from and oppose the
viewpoint expressed by the Soviet representative that
item 67, concerning the question of Hungary, should
not be referred to in the draft reso~ution. We contend,
and we believe profoundly, that the question of Hungary has definitely not been settled. We think it will
not be settled until it is settled right. We think that
the General Assembly is still very much seize'! of the
question. We have a Speciall Committee on the Problem of Hungary, which has already cl,me excellent
work and which has important assignments to carry
'
out in the future.
282. It is perfectly clear that, if t.here had been
nothing to conceal and nothing to be ashamed of, the
Soviet Union and the Communist regime in Hungar-j
would certainly have aHowed United Nations observers to go in. By the fact that they have not allowed
that, they have practically pleaded guilt-f. For that
reason, therefore, we hope that this draft resolution
will be adopted, including the reference to item 67, on
Hungary.
283. Mr. KING (Liberia): My delegation will -support the draft resolution submitted by the seven Powers with regar4 to retaining items 66 and 67 on our
agenda until the resumption of the session following
the proposed recess.
284. I should like to make a few remarks touching
upon the interim report of our Special Committee on
the Problem of Hungary, which was established by
Assembly resolution 1132 (XI). This document, in
the view of my delegation, has been astonishingly
thorough in its coverage of a wide and comprehensive
range of investigations, and it discloses prima facie
much 'relevant factual material regarding the recent
manifestations of discontent and dissatisfaction with
the violation of human freedoms by foreign troops in
Hungary, notwithstanding the great difficulties with
which the Committee was faced. The report is the
more valuable because of its unanimity.
285. Even if there were any technical 'legal barrier
regarding the competence of the Assembly on this
question-the existence of which my delegation does
not conced~such a barrier, it seems to 11S, would ·be
overridden by the obligation imposed by the Charter
upon Member States to observe and respect human
rights lJ.nd fundamental freedoms. Objections, in this
connexion, could only stem from a cynical double
standard' of morality. Can it be that some of us. who
have ,been the first and the most outspoken in our
"c'

1327

protests against intervention in the Middle East will
now insist that the United Nations-as Mr. Spaak, a
former P7esident of the General Assembly, has recently charged in the January 1957 issue of Foreign
AffairsS-wiH look on "impassively at the brutal repression of the revolt in Hungary"? Certainly the
violence which has been employed to crush the national
liberation movement in Hungary-as testified by witnesses who appeared before the Committee and disclosed in the interim report under consideration, particularly in chapter IV entitled "Summary Statement
on the Course of Intervention in Hungary"-would
seem no less reprehensible and, therefore, is no .less
suitable as a subject of discussion by this world Organization than .other subjects which it has taken up
with vigour.
286. This course of conduct would seem to be all the
more desirable, not only because of the principle cZ
sovereign equality laid down in the Charter, but, what
is even more important, because all nations. and a:ll
peoples have come to realize the need for a new order
in the world, based on the recognition of equal partnership .among all countries, large or small, in the
interests of world peace.
287. My Government does not take a "holier than
thou" attitude in this or in any other matters before
this body; but it nevertheless does consider it to be
right, and not merely a matter of expediency, fOi its
delegation to associate itself with other Member States
i: - condemning acts in gra\,e violation of fundamental
hwnan freoooms, wherever and whenever they occur.
288. Moved only by these considerations, my delegation supports the draft re~olution submitted by the
seven Powers.
289. Mr. BOLAND (Ireland): My delegation supports the proposal that, in ~r:,ew of the important items
of unfinished business still on the agenda, the present
session of the General Assembly should not ·be brought
to an end but should :be adjourned in such a way that
it can meet again on the summons of the President
if developments should render a further meeting or
meetings necessary or desirable. For that reason my
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution
which the General Assembly now has before it. It is
obviously necessary that the Assembly should continue
to pay close attenoon to developments in, connexion
with item 66. Thanks to the attitudes of the countries
concerned and in particular to the regard paid by the
Governments of France, the United Kingdom and
Israel to the resolutions of the Assembly, the s~tuation
in the Middle East, which has caused us all such deep
concern for the past few months, now gives brighter
promise of a more stable future. That is not to say,
however, that there are not 'Still important issues in
Telation to item 66 which call for attention and re-'
view, and we cannot exclude the possibility that action
by the General Assemblv may be required to deal
with them.
•
290. However, we regard the proposal made in the
draft resolution as being particularly necessary and
important in relation to the question of Hungary. The
Special Committee on the Problem of Hungary, which
the General Assembly set 11p by its resolutiorl 1132
(XI), has a!lready presented us with a. report. Representing as it does the results of a painstaking and impartial inquir'j, this report 13 a valuable and informative document which I am sure we ~ll hope. will be
~ Paul-Henri Spaak, "The West in Disarray",,' Foreign,. Af-

fafrs, Vo1.35, No. 2,p. 1 8 4 . '

.

13

-reI

re]
wo
to
en
HI
tri
to
im

m€

att
Co
fre
wo
to
thl
tht
to
prl

de
er~

29
do
So
tiv.
gr{
im
me
as
tar
of
tyr

th€
tic
29.
ne
tha
US€

bi<J
ex'
Ht
dec
fai
of
rta.l

lie'
to
thr
na
it ~
de
is
res
29.
to
wil
enc
wh
sid
tW(

las
sitt
bef
to
ing

S:J?4

to
gat
deI:

.-

1328

668th meGting-8 March 195'7

read as widely and attentively as it· deseLVes. As the
order to report -its findings to the General Assembly at
its eleventh session, and thereaft(!r from time to time
report is merely of an interim character, however,.~-::
would be hardly appropriate for the Genera!l Assembly . to prepare additional reports for the information of
to attempt to discuss it in detail at this stage. Havmg
Member States and of the Geneml Assembly if it is
in session".
entrusted the task of establishing the facts of the::
Hungarian rising to an authoritative and respol1sible
294. We have now received the Committee's interim
tribunal, our best course, it seems to my delegation, is
orepart dated 20 February 1957, and I welcome this
to leave that body· to pursue its inquiries in complete
opportunity to express the appreciation of my delegaimpartiality and objectivity and to refrain. in the
tion Ior the valuable work which the Committee has
meantime, from formal discussions which might be
already done. Good progress has been made in the
attacll:ed. .as attempts to sway the judgment. of the
questioning of witnesses and in the examining of docuCommittee and might be used in that way to detract
mentary evidem:e. The Committee· has requested the
from the authority of its nndings. For this reason, we
assistance of all Member States in providing informawould merely wish at this stage to pay a warm tribute
tion relevant to its task, and a number of Governments,
to the Committee for its interim report and to express
inclt1.r1ing my own, hr,ve already oresponded to this
the hope that it will continue to pursue its work on
req~. t by' furnishing material which we hope will
the lines it has hitherto followed. It does however seem
be of considerable value to i-11e Committee in its work.
to us important that, as 'soon as the Committee has
We shall continue to prov~ile as much information as
present~ its report, there· should be no unreasonable
is at our disposa!l and to permit the Committee to exdelay in its discussion and consideration by the Genamine important witnesses who ~.lre now living in the
eral Assembly.
UIlited KingdoIr... _
291. I can quite understand, of course, that this idea
295. The Committee has a gre-a.t deal of work still to
does not commend Itself to theorepresentative of the
do to carry out its terms of 'reference, which embrace
Soviet Union, but I imagine that even that representavirtually all the aspects of ~,li~ alined intervention in
tiv,e himself must be conscious of the weakness of the
October 1956 by the Soviet Union in the internal afgrounds on which his objection is based. Even he, I
fairs of Hungary and the tragic developments which
imagine, must sense the harsh cynicism of the argufollowed that intervention. Members of the Committee
ments which he has been called upon· to uphold when,
are now on their way to Europe, where they will conas· the representative of the country which sent its
tinue their investigation by means of the examination
tanks into Hungary to crush the workers and peasants
of witnesses .and direct observation. We wish them
of that country and impose upon them a hated and
e1Tety success in their important work. Vif e can only
tyrannical! regime, he comes to this tribunal to accuse
regret that, as the Committee's report reveals, the
the United Nations of crude interference in the dome,s..;
Government of the Soviet Union and the. Hungarian
tic affairs of Hungary.
authorities have resolutely refused. to co-operate in
any way with our Committee. We must applaud the
292. The agony of Hungary 'still continues. Current
Committee's declaration that it will persevere in its
news reports of wholesale arrests and executions show
efforts
to fulfil the mandate of the General Assembly to
that all the pitiless cruelty of tbP. j?01ice state is being
obtaih information by direct observation in Hungary.
used to punish the Hungarian people for their gallant
bid for freedom.· The· moral condemnation of the worM
296. This, however, is on~y the beginning of the Comexpressed in the Assembly· has not sufficed to preserve
mittee's work. There is still much to be done before
Hungary from these horrors, and the conscience of
the Committee will be in a position to produce its
decent peoples in all countries stands aghast at the
final report which, according to the terms of the resofailure. Yet I believe that out of our debates and. out
ltition, should be presented to the General Assembly at
of our investigations has come ·sornethingof value,
its eleventh session. It is therefore quite clear that the
rtamely a new and sharper rea·lization.-which I 00- . General Assembly should stand ready for a further
lieveordinary people in every land are now coming
discussion of the Hungarian problem as ciTcumstances
to feel more· clearly than ever hefo1"e--of the fearful
require it. As I stated when we were last discussing
threat which Soviet cOl!ununi:;m Qresents to human artd
the Hungarian question l635th meeting J, the Governnational liberties. It is for that reason that we regard
ment of the Soviet Union will be making a serious
it as the duty of this Assembly to continue to focus the
mistake if it· believes that the moderate .language in
clear light of truth on the Hungarhn tragedy, and it
which reso~ution 1132 (XI) was couched implies that
is for the -same reason thal: we supoort this draft
our indignation on this question. is spent. This is far
resolution.·
-~
from the case. Let me recall the words of the resolution
[1004 (ES-·.]l)] we adopted here on 4 November
293. Mr. NOBLE (United Kingdom): I should like
1956
when we affirmed "the right of the Hungarian
to .take. this opportunity to explain why my delegation
people
to a government responsive to its national aswill strongly oppose the proposal to delete the referpirations and dedicated to its independence and well
ence to the Hungarian item from the d:afi: resolution
being".
which is before us so as to preclude any further consider·ation of this item at the eleventh session. Nearly
297. The Special Committee we have set up has detwo months have passed since the General Assembly
clared in its report that "the central stress of the Comlast debated the question of Hungary, but the tragic
mittee's investigation will,however, be directed towards 'the efforts of the Hungarian people to reassert
situation which still exists in Hungary has been ever
,before our minds. The last action we .took here was
their rights'" [",~/3546J para. 17J. This must continue
to Ibe our unswerving- aim. We have a duty to the
topa.ss resolution 1132 (XI), reaffirming the continuing concern of the •United Nations and setting up a
world, a.nd in particular to the gallant peop'le of HunSpecial· Committee of five members to "investigate, and
gary, rtot to slacken our efforts in pursuance of this
to· establish and· maintain direct observation in Hunaim. I believe that if we in the Assembly, with the
gary·andelsewhere, taking testimony,. collectingeviassistance of our Special Committee, do not slacken
dence and receiving information, 'as appropriate, in
our efforts on behalf of the people 6f Hungary, the
d

Soviet Union will be b
of armed intervention
heed the: voice of the f
298. As l' ros the -t
seif, I feel ~!:>und to s
regard the procedure s
tory. A better formul
adopted in similar cir
eighth sessions. The
mously to recess, whi
reconvene the session
tarv-General and with
of "the Members if, in
developments in respec
ranted such a step: or
requested t.lte Presiden
cause of such develop
have been a better proc
The· General Assembly
or less permanent sessi
sure that the sponsors
lution will agree on tha
seems to my delegatio
direction. To my mind
to the Christmas reces
ever, that the formula
sider does' not become
prepared to· go along
exceptional circumstan
fronted.
299. Finally, I feel th
ways from this place
President, our deep s
with which you have
I speak now on behalf
Australia, New Zealan
Ghana, as well as my
conscious that your ta
has been far from easy.
been listening to count!
variety of topics which
siderable feat of endur
the wise guidance whic
and in pa:rticular· at di
tions; at moments w
arouse str-ong feelings 0
of Ibecoming entangled
have come to rely
straighten out our diffi
than 0,1 any qther in
of our long days and
longs a great share of
achieved during. thisp
will now be able to ertj
you so a~ply deserve, a
once agam. the benefit
again.
300. Nor should we
paying our waTm tribut
his devoted staff. Mr.
admiration and respect
which· he has worked
!U0nths and by the ski
111 carrying forward t
expressed in.ourresol
t~e .. heavy Tesponsibili
his..shoulders; he will
from the almost inh
has been carrying.

;,:::

General Aseembly-Eleventh IClslÏon-Plenarr Meeliqs

·t~
...
• . . .•.•. .

Assemblyat
ime ta lime
ormation al
\lbl)' if it is

tec's interim
lelcome this
illY delegaIllmittee has
Ilade in the
ing of docuil liesied the
ng informaovernments.
ded to this
~ hape will
in its \York.
onnation as
liUee to e.,,iving in the

,\'ork still ta
Îch embrace

~rn~ntioll

in
internai afI\ents which
Committee
l'y will con·
exanùnation
wi~h lnem
:e Cdll only
fl:\"('a!" the

c

HUllgarian

'·"perate in
;,pplaud the
n:Te in ils

:\~~t:lI1hl\' 10

! IlmgarY.
of the Corndone before
proouce ils
ei the rnD\s5emblr at
i~Jr l!Jal the
r a iurtner

fi:llm5lanœ3

t di 5<:lJ~5ing
k~ Gorem:1 SeflOlli

'~

Jnguage Jn
imp!ies that
This js far
e rew!llli~rr
XO\'emher
Hungariall
la~ionJ! as~ and weU·

Soviet Union will be brought to rea<1ize that its policy
of armed intervention is bankrupt and that it must
1 heed the voice of the free world.
298 . lAs regards the terros of the draft resolution it1f
1 se,
fee1 bound to say that my delegation does not
regard the procedure suggested as altogether satisfactory. A better fonnula, in our view, would be that
adopted in similar circumstances at the seventh and
eighth sessions. The Assembly then agreed unanimously to recess, while requesting the President to
reconvene the session in consultation with the Secretary-General and with the concurrence of the majority
of the Members if, in the opinion of the President,
developments in respect of the Korean questkm warranted such a step or if one or more Member States
requested the President to reconvene the session because of such deve1opments. This, in our view, would
have been a better proced ure ta adopt on this occasion.
The General Assembly was not intended to be in more
or less permanent session all the year round, and l am
· sure that the sponsors of the seven-Power draft reso,.: lution will agree on tbat, but the wording of their drait
• seems ta mydelegation ta go a little tao far in that
direction. To my mind, rule 6 was intended to apply
j to the Christmas recess and the like. Provided, how1 ever, that the fonnula which we are now asked ta con'~
sider does not become a precedent, my delegatiol1 is
'1.," prepared to go along with it, taking inta account the
exceptional circumstances with which we are confronted.
299. Finally, l feel that we should not go our different
1 ways from this place without expressing ta you, Mr.
President, our deep sense of gratitude for the skill
j with which you have presided over our debates-and
Ispeak now on behalf of the de1egations of Canada,
· Australia, New Zealand, lndia, Ceylon, Pakistan and
Ghana, as well as my own. We have all, 1 think, been
conscious that your task d1.1ring the last four months
has been far from easy. The least part of tbis task has
been listening to countless hours of oratory on a great
J variety of topies which must of itself have been a con· sideraMe feat of endurance. More important has been
1 the wise guidance which you have given us at aH times
1.
and in pa'rticular at difficult moments of our delibera1 tions; at moments when controversy had begun ta
1 arouse strong feelings or when we have been in danger
, of becoming entangled in matters of procedure, we
"1 have come to rely upon your serene advice to
straighten out our difficulties. On you, perhaps more
than on any other individual, has fallen the bUt'den
of our long days and nights of ,labo·ur and to you belongs a great shareof the credit for what has been
i achieved during this 'past session. We hope that you
1 will now be able to enjoy a period of the leisure which
j you so amply deserve, and we look forward to receiving
.,j ~;~in~gain the benefit of your counsels when we meet
' i.

j

1

.l........

..

j'

,1
~lP ho; de·

,j "the Corn·

J.

iiri'C!ed 10'
1-, rl'amr!
-t COlltinue
ul" to Ille
,le 'ol Hun·
ilLe ai Ihis
" with the
lot slacken

1

mgary. (he

300.

Nor should we let this occasion pass without

1 paying our wa'rm tribute ta our Secretary-General and

his devoted staff. Ml'. Hammarskjold has excited our
admiration and respect both by the selfless manner in
which he has worked night and clay for so many
months and by the skill and ingenuity he has shawn
in can;ying for ward the wishes of the Assembly as
expressecl in our resolutions. We trust that,despite
the heavy Tesponsibility which we have placed upon
his shaulders, he will be able to enjey sorne respite
fl'om the almost inhuman weight of work which he
has beencarrying.

1321)

301. Mr. VITETTl (Italy): The Italian de1egation
fullysupports the draft resolution in~roduced by Japan
on behalf of Brazil, Canada, Colombia, United States,
Iran and Norway. This draft reflects, it seems to us,
the real state of things and it answers to our precise
duties.
302. The General Assembly has been confronted with
many important issues and it will be remembered for
its remarkable achievements in dealing with the crisis
in the Middle East. It is gratifying to see that we are
closing this regular period of our meetings-as far as
the crisis in the Middle East is concerned-on a positive note. We have fulfilled that part of our task which
asked for the complete and '11nconditional withdrawal
from the Sinai Peninsula and the Gaza strip of Israel
troops; and we now hend to the constructive part of
our task in order to implement-in accordance with
our reso'lutions and the repDTts of the Secretary-Gener{l;1--:-the measures which we hope will give tranqUllltty to that troubled area and peace to its inhabi·
tants. This is a most gratifying thought. It shows that
whenever the countries involved in an international
iss,ue. agree in earnest and good faith to abide by the
pnnoples of the Charter and the Tesolutions of the
competent bodies of the United Nations, a solution to
s!Jch an issue may be found and peace and good relaflons amongst the peoples {lf the world can he maintained and developed.
303. Unfortunately, on one point the picture becornes utterly dark and negative. It is extremely sad to
have to recognize that one of the most important and
urgent questions before the Assembly-I refer {lf
course to the HungaTian question-bas been the cause
of deep and hitter disillusionment. The will of a single
country has nullified the untiring efforts of the General
Assembly and fou'led the hopes of public opinion of the
entire world, of the whole of humanity. Because of
the Saviet Union's refusaI to abide by the prindples
of the United Nations and to comply with our resolution, we have been unable to give the brave and courageous H ungarian people an answer to their desperate
appeal of 2 November. It may be talcen as symbolic
evidence of this situation that the very persan who
dared to request United Nations assistance has been
taken away fmm his country and we do not even
know where his present dweIIing is and whether he is
free or even aUve.
304. This is one of the thonghts which comes to our
mind in reading the interim report which has been
submitted to us a few days aga by the Special Committee on the Problem of Hungary. This report is very
important indeed and in our opinion deserved a fuller
debate. When, a few days aga, we were wasting our
time in the discussion of an item proposed by the Soviet Union and accusing-incredible but true--the
United States of intervention in the internaI affairs of
certain countries, the Italian delegation stated very
c1early [658th meeting] that in its opinion the time
of the Assembly would he more fruitfuHy and properly
dedicatecl to an examination of the findings of the
Special Committee.
305. We understand, in any case, that this is not the
moment for a thorough review of that report. l will
therefore confine myself to a fewremarks. l believe
that the C0mmittee, notwithstanding the obclurate refù~al of the Soviet Union to admit the Conunittee into
Hungary, ha$ started its work in the properdirection:
It has fully and properly interpreted our resolutions
in setting the scope of the investigation as it appears

•

~.

' .

, , ' : ': "

r

.

~

.'

•

,

'.'

o.

•

.'

,

••

'

~ .i\.,

." ,

____~.'..·-.-."'.'__IIiI·'.'.··~.'·-.··........

. ,} , .' \'

...

' ;' :' "_

"

.:. ,

....~.._ _

668th meeting-8 March 1957

in chapter III and in paragraph 51 of document AI
3546. It has given an outline of the course of the intervention in HungarY' which adheres very well to the
facts. That is exactly what we wanted from it: we
know perfectly well of course, what those facts have
been and what the tragic reality is. But it is impoltant
to have those.facts and this reality officially recorded
in a document of an impartial body, so that nu doubt
whatsoever may remain in any sector of world public
opinion as to the aggression by which the reconquered
freedom of the Hungarians has been crushed and
doomed by the Soviet Union.
306. We want to express our appreciation to the
Committee for its work and we invite the Committee
to continue in its fact-finding research. We hope that
it wiU not be long before the Committee may be able
to produce its final report. In the meantime, we must
never lose our hopes and we must never falter in our
efforts and attempts to deal with the real core of the
situation, which is the Soviet intervention in the inter·
nal affairs of Hungary and the imposition, by armed
force, of a regime in Hungary which does not correspond to the national aspirations of the Hungarian
people.
307. The proposal to have the present session of the
General Assembly recessed and kept ready to convene at any mome-.nt meets with this requir~ent, as
well as with the requirement, if necessary, offoHowing
closely the situation in Palestine. That is the reason
why the Italian delegation will support the draft resolution and will oppose the elimination of the reference
to item 67, as suggested by the Soviet Union.
308. Mr. President, since I have the floor, I wish to
· take this occasion to eXpress to you the deep feelings
of the Italian delegation for the able, wise rnd most
imperturbable way in which you have presided over
the General Asserably. We will certainly aU remember
for Go long time your. charming firmness in regulating
some of the most difficult, involved and subtle debates
which have taken place here since the very beginning
of the activity of the United Nations. You have been
a steady pilot in very troubled waters.
309. I wish also to take this occasion to express the
most sincere appreciation of the Italian deleg3.tion to
the Secretary-General· for his tireless devotion to the
high task of the United Nations, a devotion approaching very nearly to sacrifice. These feelings of gratitude
I also wish to extend to all the members of the
Secretariat.
310. Mr. ULLRICH (Czechoslovakia) : The Czechoslovak delegation regrets that this occasion also has
been misused for unfounded a:llegations attempting to
· justify the fl.1rther consideration of the Hungarian
question as a means of interfering in the internal affairs of the HungananPeople's Republic and to undermine the authority and international reputation of its
Government.
311; Concerning the arrangements for £~ture meetings of the eleventh session, I should like to recall that
my delegation has repeatedly stated its position on
item 67. We have been strongly opposed to any consideration of this item, the so-called Hungarian ques,tion, by the United Nations organs which, under the
· Charter, have no right to interfere in the internal affairs or Member States. We cannot, 'therefore, agree
to ~y ~~rangeme~~ orarran$~ents f~r ,the f~ture
conSIderation of this. matter 'in the United Nations.
.. Such fl1rther cOllsideration would serve only aims
hostile to the Hungar;an people and would be contrary

"

to the interests of th~ maintenance of peace and security. These interests require that the so-called Hungarian problem should at last ,be removed from the
agenda of the General Assembly. It is high time that
the General Assembly should no longer be misused
for a calumnious campaign against Hungary and the
Soviet Union, which has already been carried on for
months and which was witnessed even tcday in the
course and under the guise of a procedural debate.
312. Mr. GEORGES-PICOT (France) (translated
from French) : The French delegation will support the
draft resolution submitted by the seven Powers, which
provides among other things that the General Assembly may continue the discussion of item 67 on its
agenda. I do not wish to reopen the discussion on the
Hungarian question at present, but I feel that the
following comments are called for.
313. The question considered at the second emergency special session was referred in due form to the
eleventh session [resolution 1008 (ES-II)], and it was
thus that item 67 came to be placed on the agenda.
After prolonged discussion of the matter, the General
Assembly adopted, on 10 January, resolution 1132
(XI) to set up a special committee "to investigate,
and to establish and maintain direct observation in
Hungary and elsewhere, taking testimony, collecting
evidence and receiving infol:mation, as appropriate, in
order to report its findings to the General Assembly
at its eleventh session . . .".
314. The Specia'l Committee on the Problem of Hungary has worked assiduously since January, hut it has
so far only been able to submit one report [AI3546].
This report contains some extremely interesting information and an effective working plan. But the Committee itself described it as an interim report, clearly
indicating the provisional nature of this document,
which cannot therefore be said to embody all the information called for in paragraph 1 of resolution 1132
(XI).
315. In these circumstances, to declare the discussion
of item 67 closed would amount to violating that resolution. The Assembly must therefore be able to continue its meetings in order to deal with the report
which· the Special Committee will compvle as soon as
it has completed its inves,~;-a1ion.
316. The PRESIDENT: T.l.; General Assembly will
now vote on the draft resolution submitted by Brazil,
Canada, Colombia, Iran, Japan, Norway and the
United States of America [AI3570] .
317. Since a separate vote has been requested on the
words "or 67" in the operative paragraph of the draft
resolution, I shaM put those words to the vote first.
The words were adopted by 59 votes t() 6, with 2
abstentions.
318. The: PRESIDENT: I shall now put to the
vote the draft resolution as a whole.
The draft resolution was adopted by 65 votes to
none, with 6 abstentions.
319. Mr. LODGE (United States of America): The
United States co-sponsored with Brazil, Canada, C0lombia, Iran, Japan, and Norway the resolution which
has just been adopted because we believe that, in' the
particular ciTcumstances this year, it is prudent to
provide that the session shaH be reconvened by the
President in consult?,tion .with the Secretary-General
arid with. the concurrence of the tm!-jority of· the countrIes whose representatives serve on the General Corr..
mittee. But we wanted to make clear f01" the record

'

---I

our view that,
journment ratl
normally be r
majority of the
at the seventh
Korean questi
was our belief.
Suspension 0

320. Mr. LO
fore I take my
which I paid
General. I sh
United States
Secretariat wh
during such 10
321. Let me
for the magni
over the Gene
good humour
sometimes mus
always shown i
comprehend t
fronted you.
true spirit of j
ever question
everyone was
you have set
follow in their
322. We thin
to the United
to the human
323. Mr. U
Spanish): Aft
times dramatic
the time bein
Assembly, w
about four m
sessions, Cfl11V
for Peace" res
events in Hun
324. As far
sembly has be
responsibilities
gard to the
security and h
tions assigned
of the ceaseles
problems cons
has fallen up
tremely happy
this rostrum
gations-to y
and diplomat,
President of
devotion to th
Nations.
325. I also
Latin-America
who has spar
of the General
complicated a
Assembly has
and to his outs
326.: .We wis
dier, Mr; Cor
Secretariat an
,

'.,,1<'

.'.

,,':'

.

.

-

~ ".

..

1\.

,.',

~"

,",

';.

..'-

. '

Gei1eral Assembly-Eleventh aeeaion-PleD.1U'7 Mectinp

our view that, in instances requiring temporary adjournment rather than adjournment, sessions should
normally be reconvened with the concurrence of a
majority of the Members of the Assembly, as was done
at the seventh and eighth sessions with regard to the
Korean question. We wanted the record to show that
was our belief.
Suspension of the eleventh session of the General
Assembly
320. Mr. LODGE (United States of America) : Before I take my seat, I should like to add to the tribute
which I paid earlier this afternoon to the SecretaryGeneral. I should like to express the thanks of the
United States delegation to all the members of the
Secretariat who have worked so hard, so faithfully and
during such long :1ours for the past four months.
321. Let me also pay a tribute to you, Mr. President,
for the magnificent way in which you have presided
over the General Assembly. You have always shown
good humour and politeness under co~ditions which
sometimes must have been extremely trymg. You have
always shown intellectual force and an ability quickly to
comprehend the many complex questions which confronted you. You have always beyn animated by a
true spirit of justice, and no one. in the ~ssembly h~s
ever questioned the fact that, Wlth you 111 the Chalr,
everyone was guaranteed fair play. The example that
you have se~ is indeed a splendid ~:me for nations to
follow in thelr own corporate behavlOur.
322. We think you are a credit to Thailand, a credit
to the United Nations and, if I may say ·so, a credit
to the human l"ace.
323. Mr. URQUIA (El Salvador) (translated from
Spanish): After our difficult, exhansting and sometimes dramatic labours, it is now time to suspend, for
the time being, the eleventh session of the General
Assembly, which opened amidst great expectan7y
about four months ago after two emergency speClal
sessions, convened in conformity with the "Uniting
for Peace" resolution [377 (V)] to consider the grave
events in Hungary and the Middle East.
.
324. As far as is humanly possible, the General Assembly has been able to carry out the obligations and
responsibilities imposed on it by the Charter with regard to the maintenance of international l?eace and
security and has successfully fulfilled the vanous functions assigned to it in many other fields. A major part
of the ceaseless efforts to reach a solution of the grave
problems considered by the Assembly at this session
has fallen upon you, Mr. President, and. I amp extremely happy and honou; d to pay a tnbute trom
this rostrum-on behalf of all the Latin-American delegations-to your great gifts as a statesman, jurist
and diplomat, your untiring and fruitfu~ labours as
President of the Assembly, and your smgl~-hearted
devotion to the purposes and principles of the United
Nations.
325. I also want to pay a tribute, on behalf of the
Latin-American delegations, to the Secretary-General,
who has spared no effort to further the proceedings
of the General Assembly and to carry out the varied,
complicated and far from easy functions which the
Assembly has entrusted to his skill. and experience,
and to his outstanding devotion to his important duties.
326.: We wish also to convey oUr thanks-to Ml". Cordier, Mr; Correa and a!l1 the other members o~ the
Secretariat and the different United Nations services

•

~

•

•

.

13S1

at Headquarters f?r the valuable help w~ich i:h~y have:
given us and Whlch we know they WlU continue to
give us at succeeding sessions.
327. Let me conclude, Mr. President, by wishing the
General Assembly every success in the days to come
and good luck to you, the Secretary-General and each
and every member of the Secretariat; we h~pe that
they will take a weB-earned test after thelr heavy
labours of the last four months.
328. Mr. GEORGES-PICOT (France) (translated
from French): The French delegation is highly honoured to have been called upon, at the suspension of
the eleventh session, to thank the President, not only
on its own behalf, but on that of the delegations of
Austria, Belgium, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg,
the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Turkey and Yugoslavia.
329. We regard YoU'. Royal Highness as e.mbodying
in the highest degree one of the most valued of those
qualities that go to mak... up the tradition of your
country, the quality of tolerance, which is a. combination of understanding, patience, courtesy and impartiality; and it is this which has marked you out most
especially to preside over the Ai.1sembly. It is for this
reason, Mr. President, that, as early as the seventh
session, you were the candidate of a great many Member States. But fate had decreed that you should
preside over one of the ~ongest and most <1ifficult .of
sessions-and the one Wlth the largest membershlp,
for there are, at the close of the eleventh session,
eighty-one Members-and that you should bring to this
task your qualities and your experience both in international affairs and negotiations and in debates a.t the
United Nations, where you have presided over most
of the Commlttees at one session or another.
330. Through an unforeseen sequence of eventssince I had no reason to suppose thI ee months ago
that I would be here today-your presiding over the
eleventh session has given me the opportunity to pay
a tribute both in my official capacity to your qualities
as a statesman, and in my personal capacity to your
qualities as a human being and your ctea.dfastness in
friendship; for I have had the privilege to find undiminished that friendship which has bound us tog.:ther
through good and evil fortune for nearly a quarter of
a century, and which has never faltered for a single
day throughout the vicissitudes of t."tat period of
history.
331. With our thanks to you as President we wish
to associate the other officers of the Assembly, the
Secretary-General, to whom all the delegations have
so often expressed their appreciation during this session, and the members of the Secretariat-my former
colleagues-the indefatigable and devoted Secretary of
the Assembly, the officials, like the interpreters, the
translators, the verbatim reporters, the document, conference and information officers, whom wc can see at
work, and those who work behind the scenes, like
the officials of the substantive departments, and who,
by their. devotion and ability,have played S?ch an
important part in the harmonious and effective development of our discussions.
332. Please accept, Mr. President, on. behalf of the
delegations which have entrusted us vvith!his message,
OUl" best wishes for your health, prosperlty and personal happiness, and that of your :family, and, in particular of Princess Wan, to ·whom we ask you to pre- .
sent our humble respects; please eonvey our best
wishes to your charming daughter Wiwan on the

' :

-.'

"

....- ..

1332

_
.....,.

668th meeting-8 March 1957

occasion of her approaching marriage. Our best wishes
go to your country, which you represent so worthily
and with such great distinction among us.
333. Mr. BELAUNDE (Peru) (translated from
Spanish) .. It is my privilege. in the name of my dear
colleagues Mr. Sarper. representative of Turkey. Mr.
Mir Khan. representative of Pakistan. Mr. Lannung.
representative of Denmark. Mr. de Marchena. representative of the Dominican Republic. Mr. Loutfi. representative of Egypt. and Mr. Petrzelka, representative of Czechoslovakia. and personally. to pay a richly
deserved. sincere and cordial tribute to our President.
Prince Wan.
334. When the events began which led to the convening of this session of the Assembly, I recalled a
phrase in which Macaulay said that the forces that
push nations into war cannot be controlled. But today. we have seen that the Assembly has been that
mysterious power which Macau1ay did not think existed, capable of bringing conflicts to a halt-for the
Assembly has miraculously accomplished its work of
justice and of peace. At this moment of the Assembly's triumph nothing could be more appropriate than
to acknowledge the debt due to the President who has
guided these debates with such wisdom, patience. bet
and serenity. He has. I know, a title of high royal rank
but I am sure he would not scorn the title I am now
offering him, that of "His Serene Highness," for it
required an understanding, kindly serenity, a serenity
equal towards all, generous towards all to be able to
steer these debates towards their highly successful conclusion. I have often wondered what was the secret of
the success Prince Wan achieved as Chairman of the
Ad Hoc Political Committee at the tenth session of the
Assembly and now as the brilliant President of the
Assembly. A..'1d this, I felt, was the answer: Prince
Wan has succeeded in combining the age-old wisdom
of the race to which he belongs, that deep-rooted
wisdom of the East, with Vvestern culture, of which he
has such an extensive knowledge. He is the perfect exajt1lple of the man who has united the blood and sap
of oriental wisdom with the knowledge, initiative and
technical interest characteristic of the Western mind.
The example of Prince Wan ought, I think, to serve
as a lesson to us all, but especially those who cherish
and belong in blood and spirit to Western culture.
How better could we westerners serve the United Nations than by seeking to combine with our technology
and our inquiring spirit, the wisdom of the East and
sympathetic knowledge of its civilizations? It is my
devout wish, Mr. President, that your example will be
followed, that the men of the United Nation. will
combine the wisdom and skills of their 0""11 races with
the wisdom and skills of other 'Taces.
335. You have been greatly helped, Sir, in these difficult times, not only by the spirit of the Assembly and
the willing collaboration of representatives, but also
by the Assembly's deputy, the Secretary-General,and
his distinguished assistants. The Secretary...Genera1
does not need-he does not want-our praises, but I
should like· to .say something to him on behalf of my
own colleagues and, tu a certain extent, on behalf of
fellow members of the Assembly. I sho1.'ld like to tell
him that he has our.full support in these difficult times
and I should also like to tell him that, just as we have
shared his disappointments, 5ufferings and amcieties
during .these difficult moments we shaH, after the
suspension of the Assembly's session, continue to share
with him these feelings, these anxieties, worries, aims

and hopes, and to share with him, too. I hope, the
final moments of triumph.
336. While I am acknowledging our debt of gratitude. I should like, too, to pay a tribute to Mr. Cordier. the zealous and diligent guardian of the correctness of our votes and the zealous and diligent guardian
of our rules of procedure. whose calmness and confidence are further guarantees of the success of our
labours.
337. I should also like very warmly to thank all
members of the Secretariat, all United Nations staff
members. I have been told that some staff members
have worked fourteen hours a day, without rest, day
after day, for the sake of the success of our work.
And this success is evident in the fact that both staff
members and representatives are convinced-and with
these words I would like to end my statement-that
the United Nations l"epresents the best hope for justice
among mankind and the peace of the whole world.
338. Mr. NA CHAMPASSAK (Laos) (translated
from French): I am e."C.treme1y grateful for the honour
which my Arabian and Asian colleagues have done
my country. Laos, in designating me to spea1<: on
their 'behalf at this final meeting and I thank them
most warmly.
339. My purpose in taking the floor at a time when
all the representatives aTe more concerned with train
and plane schedules than with other questions, is not
to add still another speech to all those which we have
heard and the eloquence of which, be it stirring, ironic,
ingenuous or passionate, will be consigned to the limbo
of the past and simply add to the weight of the already
formidable archives of our Organization.
340.. My intention is simply, after this long voyage,
whose goal seemed to recede as we approached it, to
cong'Tatulate you, Mr. President, together with our
Secr~tary-General, on having brought our ship to harbour. Rarely, however, has this tall ship that is our
Organization known stormier waters, nor has it ever
come nearer to reminding us of the chains and oars of
the old time galley-slaves. There was even at one time
a murmur of mutiny on board. The sirens sang to us
loudly from the sharp rocks, and without your firm
hand at the helm, and the wise and prudent counsel
of the Secretary-General, whose keen eye remained
fixed on the pole star of international [aw, we would
have run grave risks.
341. The wind seems to have dropped, and the reefs,
seen from the harbour, appear less formidable. Btlt we
are well aware that soon we sh9.11 have to put to aea
again and once more battle with the win.ds, the tides
and the sirens.
342. We have every }:onfidence in our Secretary-General: Who could guide 'us better than he, who has the
rare privilege both of belonging to a nation of .sailors
and· of knowing all the secrets of the mountains?
343. We must not forget the members of the Secretariat, seasoned sailors all, whether mates or. cabin
boy,;, whose silent devotion to duty has so effectively
supported the action of the Secretary-General.
344. My comparison will perhaps bring a ,smile to
the !lips of thpse who know my, country, which has.
alas, neither s1:dps nor seaports. But if I have' ventured
to speak t.lf. a ~hip, of sirens ana of rocks, it is becau&e
our Organization has talked for more than six months
of hardly'. anything but canal$ and territorial watere,
345. Therefore, inconclucling,we e.."'l:press our sincere
hope that next autumn our stout Organization will set

out onc.e more
over the world an
b~ attended by fa
346. Mr, THOl
honou1' and p1'ivi
the delegations
Sweden, as well
thanks for the (
Mr. President, h
for the wisdom,
which ;you have {
work of this sessi
all gratefully and
efforts and of yo
problem to So satis
ments by the pa
difficult, delicate
the General Asse!
era! have ever be
347. In eongra
great achievement
ban voyag, to y
way to your bea
enriched the Uni
the highest and
success here is in
the good fortune
now say to you:
1andh1gs. May we
among us at rn,
Assembly.
348. I have all'
this afternoon of
the Secretary-Ge
lnents. May we
failing Mr. Cor
Secretariat who
hours, day and n
349, Mr. KAS
Asian group and
1i1ce to associate
made by other re
self, Mr. Preside
its lll0st sincere
the superb skill
this turbulent ses
350. The eleven
has indeed been
be~n made at the
has withstClod un
emel'ged stronge
possible without
President of the
a shining examp
IUnder the most
which wHl ,ever r
351. 111 yoar pr
em1?Ur.ed the vel'
Unlted Nations
stage} on which •
We lUWC our exi
siOlUtlly does a n
-and his l'eput
terity. Such, I t
Pl'eside11t.
352. My Gavel.'
it was dudn" thi
#

Prince 'Wan s p

lMS
out onc.e more with full sails &pread on its voyage
over the world and its problems. May this next voyage
b~ attended by favourable winds.
.
346. Mr. THORS (Iceland): It is indeed a great
honour and piivilege for me to express, on behalf of
the delegations of Denmark, Finland, Norway and
Sweden, as well as the delegation of Iceland, all our
thanks for the distinguished manner in which you,
Mr. President, have presided over our meetings and
for the wisdom, diplomatic tact and foresight with
which you have officially and privately conducted the
worl( of this session of the General Assembly. We are·
all gratefully and approvingly aware of your admirable
efforts and of your great success in bringing many a
problem to a satisfactory solution and enhancing agreements by the parties concerned on some of the most
difficult, delicate and controversial matters of which
the General Assembly and the United Nations in general have ever been seized.
347. In congratulating you, .Mr. President, on your
great achievements, we take the opportunity of wishing
bon 'lJoyagl to you and your happy family on your
way to your beautiful country. You have once again
enriched the United Nations by your representation of
the highest and noblest culture of Asia. Your great
suc:cess here is indeed no surprise tot'Us who have had
the good fortune of knowing you for many years. We
now say to you: Thank you, bon voyage and happy
landh1gs. May we have the privilege of seeing y{)U here
among us at many future sessions of the General
Assembly.
348. I have already had the pleasure and privilege
this afternoon of expressing our great appreciation to
the Secretary-General for all his wonderful achievements. May we also express our thanks to the neverfailing Mr. Cordier and to all the members of the
Secretariat who have worked so hard, for so many
hours, day and night, during these difficult days.
349, Mr. KASE (Japan): On behalf of t.'le AfricanAsian group and also of the new Members, I should
1il<e to associate myself with the statements already
made by other representatives in tribute t~ your noble
self, Mr. President. My delegation wishes tc express
its 1110st sincere thanks to Your Royal Highness for
the superb skill with which you have presided. over
this turbulent session.
.
350. The eleventh session of the General Assembly
has indeed been ~ nlemorable one. Iv.Ii.tch history has
been made at the United Nations, which, thanks to you,
has withst"'od unprecedented trials and, I believe, has
emerged stronger. Surely, this would have been impossible without your masterly handling of t..he role of
President of the Assembly. Throughout, you .have set
a shining example of devotion to the cause of peace
IUnder the most trying circumstances-an example
which wHl ,ever remain an inspiration to all of us.
351. In your presence, Mr. President, you have exem~H£ed the verv spirit of 'the United Nations. The
Umted Nations Vis, so to speak, the world's ·great
stage} Cl'!. which we represe11tatives ate merely player$.
We 111lve OU1' exits and our entrances, but only occaSiol11dly does a noble actor play an unforgettable role
-and his reputation is long remembered by posterity. Such, I think, is the case of our distinguished
Pl·esiclel1t.
352. My Government is particularly gratified that
it was <1urin, this session of the Ass~mbiy and under
Prince \Van s presidency that Japan became a full

Member of this great Organization. As a newcomer,
my delegation on many occasions had to rely on your
guidance, which Your Highness accorded us graciously
and generously, and we feel that we, particularly,
should raise our voices in abiding gratitu.de.
353. For many years, Japan has enjoyed traditional
bonds of friendship with Thailand, which continue to
grow year by year, and it is a source of genuine
pleasure that our membership in the United Nations
should have been achieved WIth the kind assistance of
a renowned statesman of that great country. On this
occasion, I should like to tender my heartfelt thanks
to all the representatives from whose advice and as~
sistance my delegation has so greatly profited.
354. Our thanks also go to the Secretary-General,
whom we love so much, and to his able staff-in particular, Mr. Cordier-who have exerted superhuman
efforts during this long session.
.
355. In concluding these brief remarks, I should like
to extend the most cordial felicitations of my country
and people to the new nation of Ghana on its admission
to the United Nations.
356. Mr. TSIANG (China): With your permission,
Mr. President, before I make my main speech I should
like to take advantage of this occasion to record a
brief explanation of our vote on the resolution which
has just been adopted.
357. My delegation has all along ...'elt thc.t it would
be wrong for the Assembly to adjounl",ithout providing for future meetings on items 66 anc 67. In
particular, the tragedy of Hungary has been on our
eonscience. It seems to us that we must study the interim report of the Special Committee on the Problem of Hungary with care and, more important, that
we must watch developments in Hungary closely and,
when circumstances demand. we must .be ready to do
our best.
358. Having said that, I· eome to the main purpose of
my intervention at this moment. Your Royal Highness
has presided over the longest of the Assembly sessions. Your Royal Highness has presided over one of
the most diffieult, if not the most difficult, of all sessions. I think that I can speak with some authority
because I have attended ten of the eleven sessions.
Your Royal Highness has presided over this session
with patience, impartiality and wisdom. On·behalf of
my Minister for Foreign Affairs and of my delegation,
I wish to express to Your Royal Highness our 'profoond gratitude.
359. We wish also to tha.,k the Secretary-General
for the wise and skilful role which he has played in
the course of this session. We wish to thank .MT.
Cordier and his associates on the Secretari?t for the
efficient perfon-nance of their tasks.
360. Mr. VOUTOV (Bulgaria): Pennit me, Mr,
P.resident, on behalf of the delegatione. of Albania,
Czechoslovakia, Romania, the Soviet Union, the Byelo,..
russian SSR, the Ukrainian SSR, and on behalf of
the Bulgarian delegation, to express our gratitude for
your presiding and ruling <luring· the eleventh sessiCln
of the General Assembly. I should like to add our
hest wishes and congratulations to those which. we
.have heard expressed, and to express our many thanks.
361. I should like also to extend our congratulations
<l.nd our thanks to the Se -:-etary-General, t{) his staff,
particularly the interpret"ls, who have 'helped us so
greatly during the session and have done such excellent
work.

{I

:. ~

g

1334

668th meeting-8 March 1957

362. Mr. RIFNI (Jordan): It is an honour for me
to eA-press to Your Royal Highness, on behalf of the
delegations of eleven Arab States, our deep apprecia·
tion for the very able manner in which you have pre-sided over this eleventh session of the General As·
sembly. Your dignity and statesmanship have, without
doubt, contributed greatly to the success of our work
in a critical period in the history of the United Na·
tions. We shall always have a pleasant memory of
your wisdom and impartiality.
363. Our appreciation and congratulations are ex·
tended also to the Secretary-General, Mr. Hammarskjold, whose wise COU1lsel, together with the efforts
of his efficient assistants and staff, has been of such
great help in the success which has been achieved.
364. The PRESIDENT: Fellow representatives,
Mr. Hammarskjold, may I first of all thank my colleagues-and I shall not name them-most warmly
for the very kind and generous words of appreciation
which they have just addressed to me.
365. I shall long cherish with gratitude the great
honour and privilege, which the General Assembly
has bestowed upon me, of serving as its presiding
officer during this memorable session. To me, the
General Assembly is a world forum and a centre for
harmonizing the actions of nations in accordance with
the Purposes and Principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. 'flor its success, I consider it essential
that there should be full liberty of discussion and
consultation in a spirit of mutual tolerance, co-operation .and good will. It has been my earnest endeavour
to ensure this liberty and to foster this spirit in the
General Assembly.
366. As regards the measure of its success, I think we
can report to the peoples of the United Nations, in
whose name the Charter was concluded, that the Genera~ Assembly has shown itself to be a resourceful and
conciliatory instrument of peace, dedicated to the moral
principles which it is detemlined to uphold with the
support of Member States and of world public opinion.
367. The General Assembly is certainly a world
forum, for riot only is its membership world-wide, but
it discusses all questions of world interest.
368. The agenda of the eleventh session comprised
a comprehensive programme of normal activities for
the promotion of peace, ~eedom, justice and economic
and social well-being for mankind, as well as the two
special items concerning Hungary and the Middle
East.
369. The enlarged membershiJr-from sixty to eightyone Member St}ltes-gave rise to some misgivings as
to the efficient working of the General Assembly; but
the apprehension has not been justified by the event.
I have even welcomed the increased social activities
because they have' enabled me to keep in constant
touch with the various delegations. Of course, increased
membership in the United Nations involves consideration of the composition of its principal organs, and also
of some improvement in the procedure of the General
Assembly. Certainly, group activity has increased, but
I find that it has facilitated mutual consultations within
and among the groups with- a· view, not to blocking
solutions, but to seeking ..them~ Thus, there have been
a number of unanimous resolutions. We may take as
,.aw~ample . th~e§ol~~-=dis:u-mament·. [10J1(xl,)'j-recornmmullng that· the Disarmament _Commission and its Sub-Committee give prompt attention
to the various proposals submitted. This· is a clear
indication of the earnest desire of the General As"""~'>r-

.-

sembly to see a positive step forward taken in this
matter in the interest of peace.
370. Again, there were the questions of Algeria and
Cyprus. It is remarkable that they have been discussed
during the present session and that, after discussion,
general agreement has been reached for achieving
peaceful, democratic and just solutions in conformity
with the Ch:u-ter.
371. Freedom in Non-Self-Governing and Trust Territories is also welcomed. Thus, the General Assembly
expresses its approval [resolution 1044 (XI)] of the
union of Togoland under British administration with
the independent Gold Coast (now Ghana, our eightyfirst Member State), and looks to further progress
towards the freedom of Togoland under French
administration.
372. In the interest of justice, the General Assembly,
accepting the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice, has authorized [resolution 1047
(XI)] the Committee on South West Africa to grant
hearings to petitioners and, in the interest of international law, a conference to examine the law of the
sea has been called [resol~ttion 1105 (XI)].
373. The promotion of economic and social welfare
too is a principal task of the United Nations, and I
am glad to say that in addition to technical assistance
and investment facilities progress is being made towards the esta1t)lishment of the Special United Nations
Fund for Economic Development for the development
of under-developed countries. I am glad also that consideration of the draft International Covenants on
Human Rights is being activated and that the Convention on the Nationality of Married Women is already open for signature [resolution 1040 (XI)]. The
establishment of the International Atomic Energy
Agency augurs well for the peaceful uses of atomic
ener~, which will in time promote better standards of
Iife in peace and will promote peace itself.
374. Another asset for peace is the diplomatic role
of the Secretary-General. It is of the utmost importance when we pass from the normal and unspectaculat'
work of the General Assembly to consideration of the
special item on the Middle East. The General Assembly must deal with the item and must succeed in dealing with it, because the peoples of the world only
know of the United Nations and cannot be expected to
differentiate between the responsibilities of the Security
Council and those of the General Assembly. Nevertheless it is a fact that the General Assembly has
powers of recommendation only and not of coercion;
it has only moral authority and can rely on moral force
only, the force of moral principles and the force of
world public opinion. .
375. Having regard to these circumstances, the General Assembly has acted promptly. Powers great and
small have taken the initiative and come forward with
constructive proposals, and thus the United Nations
Emergency Force came into being. The General Assembly rapidly passed resolutions couched in general
terms and the Secretary-General has implemented
them by delicate and arduous negotiations, supported
therein by the force of world opinion. The efficacy of
Assembly action depends on its moral force, which
in turn depends on the understanding by world opinion
of the moral principle underlying each Assembly recommendation. This may take time, and may involve
progressive steps being taken before success is secured.
376, In the case of the Middle East, the General Assembly has stopped a war and is building up a founda-

tion of peace based
and not on expedien
and the General A
feeling of satisfactio
and laborious efforts
377. And nowJ! it 0
deep gratitude to al
stinted co-operation
delegates, join wi
thanks to the Seer
Assistant, as well a
Committees and of
those whom we see
the recesses of the
is to be congratulat
contribution to the
also on his adminis
which is impartial
devoted, competent

Printed in U.S.A.

General Assembly-Eleventh aeu1on-Plenal'1' Meetinp

tion of peace based on the principles of the Charter
and not on expediency. This is no mean achievement,
and the General Assembly can now adjourn with a
feeling of satisfaction as the reward of its determined
and laborious efforts.
377. And now~ it only remains for me to express my
deep gratitude to all who have afforded me their unstinted co-operation and assistance. And so, fellow
delegates, join with me in extending our grateful
thanks to the Secretary-General and his Executive
Assistant, as well as his conscientious secretaries of
Committees and of all the members of his staff, both
those whom we see and hear and those who work in
the recesses of the Secretariat. The Secretary-General
is to be congratulated, not only on his own prodigious
contribution to the work of the United Nations, but
also on his administration of an international service
which is impartial and well co-ordinated as well as
devoted, competent and efficient. Our cordial thanks

Printed in U.S.A.

1335

also go to the United Nations officers and correspondents, who through the Press, radio and television
have helped to mobilize world public opinion in support
of the United .:.\Tations.
378. Finally, I would ask the Vice-Presidents, the
Committee Chairmen, Vice-Chairmen and Rapporteurs, as well as all my fellow representatives, to accept
my warmest thanks for their co-operation and good
will. It is the spirit of co-operation and of good will
that I prize the mDist, for it is this spirit, added to your
tireless and determined efforts, that has brought us
the successful results of this session. May I now wish
each and all of you Cl well-earned rest, so that after it
you may resume your work with renewed vigour for
the United Nations cause of peace, freedom, justice
and human welfare.
379. The eleventh session of the General ASS6~t-;ly
is adjourned.
The meeting rose at 8:25 p.m.

S-77001-0,!;.tober 19:>7-2,200
