United Nations

A/RES/62/126

General Assembly

Distr.: General
5 February 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 62 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2007
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/62/432)]

62/126. Policies and programmes involving youth: youth in the
global economy – promoting youth participation in
social and economic development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 50/81 of 14 December 1995, by which it adopted the
World Programme of Action for Youth to the Year 2000 and Beyond,
Recalling also its resolution 60/2 of 6 October 2005, in which it took note of
the three clusters presented in the “World Youth Report 2005”, 1 namely, youth in the
global economy, youth in civil society, and youth and their well-being, and
requested the Secretary-General to provide the General Assembly at its sixty-second
session, through the Commission for Social Development at its forty-fifth session,
with a comprehensive report on the implementation of the World Programme of
Action, including the definition of goals and targets, in one of the three clusters of
the World Programme of Action,
0F

Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 2007/27 of 26 July
2007, by which the Council recommended to the General Assembly the adoption of
the Supplement to the World Programme of Action for Youth to the Year 2000 and
Beyond,
Recalling Commission for Social Development resolution 45/2 of 16 February
2007, 2 in which the Commission requested the Secretary-General, in consultation
with organizations, programmes and specialized agencies of the United Nations
system, to identify goals and targets regarding the cluster on youth in the global
economy and to submit an addendum to the report of the Secretary-General on the
follow-up to the World Programme of Action 3 to the General Assembly at its
sixty-second session,
1F

2F

_______________
1

A/60/61-E/2005/7.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2007, Supplement No. 6 (E/2007/26), chap. I.
sect. E.
3
A/62/61-E/2007/7.
2

07-47133

A/RES/62/126

Recognizing that the implementation of the World Programme of Action and
the achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals, require the full and effective participation of
young people and youth-led organizations and other civil society organizations at
the local, national, regional and international levels,
Recognizing also the positive impact that youth participation in the global
economy and in social and economic development can have on the eradication of
poverty and hunger,
Recognizing further Economic and Social Council resolution 2007/32 of
27 July 2007 on the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), and
the decisions of the Programme Coordinating Board of UNAIDS at its twentieth
meeting, held at Geneva from 25 to 27 June 2007, in particular the reference to the
need to scale up HIV prevention among injecting drug users, consistent with
relevant international drug control treaties,
Reaffirms the World Programme of Action for Youth to the Year 2000 and
1.
Beyond; 4
3F

2.
Decides to adopt the Supplement to the World Programme of Action for
Youth to the Year 2000 and Beyond, annexed to the present resolution;
3.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on
the follow-up to the World Programme of Action3 and the addendum thereto entitled
“Goals and targets for monitoring the progress of youth in the global economy”; 5
0H

4F

4.
Emphasizes the importance of a fair globalization, and recalls the
resolve, expressed at the 2005 World Summit, to make the goals of full and
productive employment and decent work for all, including for women and young
people, a central objective of relevant national and international policies as well as
national development strategies, including poverty reduction strategies, as part of
efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals; 6
5F

5.
Reiterates that the eradication of poverty, hunger and malnutrition,
particularly as they affect children and youth, is crucial for the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals, recalls the commitment to eradicate poverty and
promote sustained economic growth, sustainable development and global prosperity
for all, and the need for urgent action on all sides, including more ambitious
national development strategies and efforts backed by increased international
support, and calls for the increased participation of youth and youth-led
organizations in the development of such national development strategies;
Reiterates also the critical role of both formal and non-formal education
6.
in the achievement of poverty eradication and other development goals, as
envisaged in the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 7 in particular basic
education and training for eradicating illiteracy, and stresses the commitments to
strive for expanded secondary and higher education, especially for girls and young
women, and for the creation of human resources and infrastructure capabilities and
the empowerment of those living in poverty;
6F

_______________
4

Resolution 50/81, annex.
A/62/61/Add.1-E/2007/7/Add.1.
6
See resolution 60/1, para. 47.
7
See resolution 55/2.
5

2

A/RES/62/126

7.
Reiterates further the need to intensify efforts to implement effectively
the International Plan of Action for the United Nations Literacy Decade 8 and to
integrate substantially those efforts in the Education for All process and other
activities of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
as well as other literacy initiatives within the framework of the internationally
agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals;
7F

Recognizes that while youth today are better placed than ever before to
8.
participate in and benefit from global development, many young people remain
marginalized, disconnected or excluded from the opportunities that globalization
offers, and in this regard calls upon Member States, with the support of the
international community, as appropriate:
(a) To integrate and protect youth in the global economy, including those
who live in poverty, through the provision of policies that give them everywhere a
real opportunity to find full and productive employment and decent work, including
policies that promote the transition to work on the basis of equality and
non-discrimination;
(b) To ensure that youth development, especially access of young people to
food, water, health, shelter, education and employment, is specifically addressed in
national policies and programmes, including poverty reduction strategy papers
where they exist, and in other policy documents that aim to foster the participation
of countries in the global economy;
(c) To ensure adequate funding for formal and non-formal education,
including programmes geared at fostering the acquisition of requisite skills by
youth;
(d) To improve the ability of young people, including those who live in
poverty, to make a better transition into the world of work and enhance their access
to the changing labour market through the promotion of policies that expand
opportunities for youth to get quality education and training, the provision of skills
development combined with other programmes that are targeted at the specific
labour market needs of youth and that focus on the multiple needs of those most at
risk of joblessness, and the incorporation of skills training into education planning
at all stages;
(e) To reinforce links between policies on education, training, social
integration and mobility so as to improve the situation of young people in the labour
market and to reduce significantly youth unemployment while also supporting
policies that promote reconciliation of family life and working life, equal
opportunities, solidarity between the generations, health and lifelong learning;
(f) To encourage young people’s entrepreneurship, including by promoting
formal and non-formal education on entrepreneurship for young people, increasing
their access to microfinancing and facilitating their participation in cooperatives and
other forms of social, economic or financial enterprises;
(g) To develop national strategies to overcome the digital divide in each
country and ensure that young people are equipped with knowledge and skills to use
information and communications technology appropriately, including the capacity to
analyse and treat information in creative and innovative ways and to share their

_______________
8

See A/57/218 and Corr.1.

3

A/RES/62/126

expertise, thus enabling them to overcome the barriers of distance and
socio-economic disadvantage, while also promoting involvement of young people in
creating, repairing, managing and maintaining information and communications
technology and providing them access to information on a range of issues that
directly affect them, including health, education and employment;
(h) To ensure young women’s equal access to education and vocational
training at all levels in order to provide them with an equal opportunity to
participate in the global economy;
(i) To recognize the rights of young persons with disabilities to education
without discrimination and on the basis of equal opportunity, including by ensuring
an inclusive education system at all levels and lifelong learning, and to work, on an
equal basis with others;
(j) To consider expanding avenues for regular labour migration, taking into
account labour market needs and demographic trends, recognizing the important
nexus between migration and development and bearing in mind that young people
account for a large number of those migrating;
(k) To take all necessary measures to ensure the rights of young people to the
enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health and their access to sustainable
health systems and social services, without discrimination, paying special attention
to and raising awareness of nutrition, including eating disorders and obesity, and the
effects of communicable diseases, and to sexual and reproductive health, including
measures to prevent sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS;
(l) To ensure that national policies and programmes on youth development
address the particular needs of young people who are in distressed circumstances or
otherwise socially excluded or marginalized, including indigenous, migrant, refugee
and displaced youth, young persons living in situations of armed conflict, terrorism,
hostage-taking, aggression, foreign occupation, civil war or post-conflict settings,
young people subjected to racism or xenophobia, street children, poor youth in
urban or rural areas and youth affected by natural or man-made disasters;
Calls upon the international community to continue to support the efforts
9.
of Governments, together with civil society, including youth-led organizations, the
private sector and other parts of society, to anticipate and offset the negative social
and economic consequences of globalization and to maximize its benefits for young
people;
10. Urges Member States to combat all forms of discrimination against
young people, including that based on race, colour, sex, language, religion, political
or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status, and to
promote equal opportunities for all;
11. Underlines the strategic importance of initiatives such as the
Opportunities Fund for Urban Youth-led Development initiative of the United
Nations Human Settlements Programme, 9 which will provide resources to mobilize
young people to strengthen youth-related policy formulation and to pilot and
demonstrate new and innovative approaches to employment, good governance,
water and sanitation, adequate shelter and secure tenure, and invites Member States
to contribute to the Fund;
8F

_______________
9

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/62/8),
annex I.B, resolution 21/6.

4

A/RES/62/126

12. Urges Member States to involve young people and youth-led
organizations in the development of national policies that affect them, where
appropriate, including poverty reduction strategy papers where they exist, bearing in
mind that girls, boys, young women and young men have the same rights;
13. Calls upon Member States to consider using the proposed goals and
targets, as contained in the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Goals and
targets for monitoring the progress of youth in the global economy”,5 at the national
level as a means of facilitating the monitoring of the progress of youth in the global
economy and the implementation of the World Programme of Action;
1H

14. Also calls upon Member States to ensure the full participation of young
people and youth-led organizations in the development of policies designed to meet
national youth goals and targets, taking into account the proposed goals and targets
contained in the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Goals and targets for
monitoring the progress of youth in the global economy”, and to collaborate with
the United Nations system, young people, youth-led organizations, the private sector
and other relevant stakeholders in all efforts to achieve such goals and targets;
15. Encourages Member States to collect, on a continuous basis, youthspecific data disaggregated by age and sex, whenever possible, in order to create
comprehensive databases within youth ministries or similar offices to assist in
measuring progress in implementing the priority areas of the World Programme of
Action, and requests the Secretary-General to devise means to disseminate such data
widely so as to ensure that the global interest in youth development is informed by
sound and adequate data;
16. Takes note of the process of collaboration and consultation between
Member States, the organizations, programmes, regional commissions and
specialized agencies of the United Nations system and non-governmental
organizations in identifying the proposed goals and targets for measuring youth and
the global economy, and recommends continued collaboration, including in the form
of high-level training cooperation, between those actors in the implementation of
the World Programme of Action and the monitoring of the progress of such
implementation;
17. Stresses that progress in achieving the internationally agreed target of full
and productive employment and decent work for young people should be a central
objective of national and international efforts to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals, and requests the United Nations agencies, and invites the
international community and civil society as well as the private sector, to promote
the broader youth development agenda and to strengthen international cooperation
in order to support Member States in their efforts to achieve such progress, taking
into account that the primary responsibility for ensuring youth development lies
with States;
18. Stresses also the importance of ensuring that young people are
recognized as active agents in decision-making processes and for positive change
and development in society, urges Member States, in this regard, to consider
including youth representatives in their delegations to all relevant discussions in the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council and its functional
commissions, bearing in mind the principles of gender balance and
non-discrimination, and emphasizes that such youth representatives should be
selected through a transparent process which ensures that they have a suitable
mandate to represent young people in their countries;

5

A/RES/62/126

19. Recognizes the positive contribution that youth representatives make to
the General Assembly and other United Nations bodies and their role as an
important channel of communication between young people and the United Nations,
and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to support adequately the United
Nations Programme on Youth of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of
the Secretariat so that it can continue to facilitate their effective participation in
meetings;
20. Recognizes also the need for a greater geographical balance of youth
representation, and encourages Member States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to contribute to the United Nations Youth Fund in
order to facilitate the participation of youth representatives from developing
countries;
21. Recognizes further that national youth councils or their equivalent bodies
are effective channels of cooperation and information exchange between young
people, their national Governments and other decision makers and that strong youth
councils can provide opportunities for more young people to become active in
decision-making and in shaping their societies, welcomes in this regard the political
and financial support provided by Member States to their creation and sustained
development, and invites all States to continue and to increase such support, where
appropriate;
22. Requests the Commission for Social Development, at its forty-sixth
session, to include youth employment in the discussions on its priority theme
“Promoting full employment and decent work for all”, taking into account, inter
alia, the recommendations on youth employment contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the follow-up to the World Programme of Action,3 and invites
young people and youth-led organizations to contribute to those discussions;
2H

23. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session, through the Commission for Social Development at its
forty-seventh session, on the implementation of the World Programme of Action in
the clusters on youth in civil society and youth and their well-being and to include
in that report a comprehensive set of goals and targets for those clusters based on
consultations with Member States as well as the organizations, programmes,
regional commissions and specialized agencies of the United Nations system, young
people, youth-led organizations and other non-governmental organizations.
76th plenary meeting
18 December 2007

Annex
Supplement to the World Programme of Action for Youth to the
Year 2000 and Beyond
I.

Globalization

1.
Globalization has opened new opportunities for sustained economic growth
and the development of the world economy. Globalization has also permitted
countries to share experiences and to learn from one another’s achievements and
difficulties and has promoted a cross-fertilization of ideas, cultural values and
aspirations. Globalization has thus helped to connect youth not only to the rest of
the world, but also with each other.

6

A/RES/62/126

2.
At the same time, the rapid processes of change and adjustment of
globalization have been accompanied by intensified poverty, unemployment and
social disintegration. Threats to human well-being, such as environmental risks,
have also been globalized. Some countries have successfully adapted to the changes
and benefited from globalization, but many others, especially least developed
countries, have remained marginalized in the globalized world economy. The
benefits are very unevenly shared, while the costs are unevenly distributed.
Globalization should be fully inclusive and equitable. There is a strong need for
appropriate policies and measures at the national and international levels to help
countries to respond effectively to the challenges of globalization and the
implementation of the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals.
3.
Many young people, especially in developing countries, remain marginalized
from the global economy and lack the capabilities to access the opportunities that
globalization offers. Many are restricted by inadequate education, limited skills,
unemployment and poverty or are outside the reach of basic information and
communication and the goods and services that have become available with
globalization.
Proposals for action
Managing the effects of globalization on youth
4.
The international community should continue to support the efforts of
Governments, together with civil society, including youth-led organizations, the
private sector and other parts of society, to anticipate and offset the negative social
and economic consequences of globalization and to maximize its benefits for young
people.
5.
Governments should ensure that access of youth to technical, secondary and
higher education is improved and that curricula are adapted to meet the needs of a
rapidly changing labour market associated with globalization. The transition from
learning to work should also be facilitated.
6.
Governments should foster the conditions that provide opportunities, jobs and
social services for youth in their home countries. Efforts should be made to
guarantee that young migrants enjoy full respect for their human rights, including
fair and equal treatment with others and the protection of law against, inter alia,
violence, exploitation and discrimination such as racism, ethnocentrism, xenophobia
and cultural intolerance, and access to economic opportunities and social services,
as appropriate.
Promoting youth employment and skills development in the context of
globalization
7.
In order to overcome the mismatch between the skills that youth possess and
the specialized demands of labour markets shaped by globalization, Governments,
with appropriate support from the international community, should provide funding
and opportunities in both formal and non-formal education for youth to acquire
requisite skills, including through skills development programmes.
8.
At the same time, Governments should promote access to work through
integrated policies that enable the creation of new and quality jobs for young people
and that facilitate access to those jobs.

7

A/RES/62/126

Establishing ways of monitoring systems to track the effects of globalization on
youth
9.
Governments should assess the extent to which the benefits of globalization
are accessible to youth and should design and implement programmes to enable
youth to better harness the benefits of globalization.
II.

Information and communications technology

10. Information and communications technology (ICT) and infrastructures are
growing in importance as a part of everyday business and interaction. This process
can be enhanced by removing barriers to universal, ubiquitous, equitable and
affordable access to information, which hinder the bridging of the digital divide,
particularly those that impede the full achievement of the economic, social and
cultural development of countries and the welfare of their people, especially youth,
in particular in developing countries. ICT has enormous potential to expand access
to quality education, to boost literacy and universal primary education and to
facilitate the learning process itself, thus laying the groundwork for the
establishment of a fully inclusive and development-oriented information society and
knowledge economy that respects cultural and linguistic diversity.
11. Youth have a particular interest and ability with regard to modern technology.
ICT can empower youth by providing them with the opportunity to overcome the
barriers of distance and socio-economic disadvantage. Through the Internet, for
example, young people can have access to information on a range of issues that
directly affect them, including health, education and employment. This information
can be used to improve the quality of life of youth and their communities. This
process can be facilitated if Governments, civil society, the private sector, families,
youth-led organizations and other groups work together to open up avenues for a
cultural and social exchange among young people. Governments can also capitalize
on the interest of the young in ICT to alleviate poverty. For example, youth can
become engaged not only in the use of ICT, but also in the development and
engineering of locally relevant software design and hardware.
12. ICT offers new ways to address the needs of youth with disabilities who
cannot access traditional sources of information and employment. Vulnerable groups
of the population can capitalize on ICT to make a better connection with society and
advance their education and employment opportunities.
Proposals for action
Making information and communications technology available to all youth
13. Governments, supported by the international community, as appropriate,
should facilitate access to ICT for all youth, including those in difficult-to-reach
areas, such as rural areas, and in indigenous communities. Governments should
evaluate inequalities in access that exist between urban and rural youth and between
young women and men and should develop national strategies to overcome the
digital divide in each country, thus decreasing the proportion of youth who have no
access to ICT.
14. Governments should develop domestic policies to ensure that ICT is fully and
appropriately integrated into education and training at all levels, including in the
development of curricula, teacher training and institutional administration and
management, as well as in support of the concept of lifelong learning.

8

A/RES/62/126

15. Governments, with the support of the international community, should
promote and encourage local knowledge systems and locally produced content in
media and communications, support the development of a wide range of ICT-based
programmes in local languages, as appropriate, with content relevant to different
groups of young persons, especially young women, and build the capacity of girls
and women to develop ICT.
Providing training to facilitate use of information and communications
technology
16. Governments, in collaboration with relevant actors in the information society,
should ensure that young people are equipped with knowledge and skills to use ICT
appropriately, including the capacity to analyse and treat information in creative and
innovative ways, to share their expertise and to participate fully in the information
society. Efforts should be made to provide special training courses for in-school and
out-of-school youth to enable them to become conversant with ICT and to facilitate
their use of such technologies.
Protecting youth from the harmful aspects of information and communications
technology
17. Governments should strengthen action to protect youth from abuse and to
defend their rights in the context of the use of ICT. In that context, the best interests
of youth are a primary consideration. Governments should promote responsible
behaviour and raise awareness of possible risks for young people arising from the
harmful aspects of ICT in order that they may protect themselves from possible
exploitation and injury.
18. Governments, in cooperation with relevant actors in the information society,
should strengthen action to protect children and youth from abuse and the harmful
impact of ICT, in particular through cybercrimes, including child pornography.
Promoting the use of information and communications technology by persons
with disabilities and other vulnerable groups
19. Governments should facilitate the development of ICT capacity for youth,
including indigenous youth, youth with disabilities and youth in remote and rural
communities.
20. Governments should initiate the development and use of special technical and
legal arrangements to make ICT accessible to all youth, including indigenous youth,
youth with disabilities and youth in remote and rural communities.
Empowering young people as key contributors to building an inclusive
information society
21. Governments should actively engage youth in innovative ICT-based
development programmes and should widen opportunities for youth involvement in
e-strategy processes in a manner that encourages youth to assume leadership roles.
The role of youth in creating, repairing, managing and maintaining ICT should also
be recognized and encouraged.
22. Bearing in mind that literacy and numeracy are preconditions for access to and
effective use of ICT, Governments should promote opportunities through formal and
non-formal channels for young persons to acquire the appropriate knowledge.

9

A/RES/62/126

23. ICT should also be used to enhance education, employment and youth
participation in the decision-making process. ICT should be used to improve the
quality of education and to better prepare youth for the demands of the information
society.
III. HIV/AIDS
24. The HIV/AIDS epidemic is increasingly a problem of youth, especially in
parts of the developing world. Governments have noted with grave concern the fact
that new HIV infections are heavily concentrated among youth and that there is a
lack of information available to help youth to understand their sexuality, including
their sexual and reproductive health, in order to increase their ability to protect
themselves from HIV infection and sexually transmitted diseases and to prevent
unwanted pregnancies.
25. Young people, especially young women in Africa, face especially high risks of
HIV infection. Young people and women are particularly vulnerable to infection
owing to their lack of economic and social power and their lack of the capability to
decide freely and responsibly on matters related to their sexuality in order to
increase their ability to protect themselves from HIV infections. They often lack the
tools and information required to avoid infection and cope with AIDS. In 2006,
women and girls made up 57 per cent of all people infected with HIV in
sub-Saharan Africa, where a striking 76 per cent of young people (aged 15 to 24)
living with HIV are female.
26. Although many children orphaned by AIDS have not yet entered the youth age
groups, they are at great risk of becoming youth with severe vulnerabilities. They
are subject to malnutrition, illness, abuse, child labour and sexual exploitation, and
these factors increase their vulnerability to HIV infection. They also suffer the
stigma and discrimination often associated with HIV/AIDS and may be denied
education, work, housing and other basic needs as a result.
27. It is imperative that young people continue to have access to evidence- and
skills-based youth-specific HIV education to enable them to avoid high-risk
behaviour. In some regions youth, especially girls, play a key role in caring for
HIV/AIDS patients or their orphans. To ensure that young caregivers stay in school,
build their skills and have the chance to generate an income, Governments should
provide economic and social support to families that rely on young caregivers as
well as support for improving home- and community-based care.
28. Because youth often lack decision-making power and financial resources, they
may be the last to receive treatment if they become infected. Programmes should
scale up the provision of treatment as part of the promotion of the highest attainable
standards of health.
29. It is essential for Governments to implement fully the Declaration of
Commitment on HIV/AIDS, adopted by the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth
special session on 27 June 2001, 10 and to achieve the internationally agreed
development goals and objectives, including the Millennium Development Goals, in
particular the goal to halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS by 2015. In
addition, Governments should implement the commitments dealing with HIV/AIDS
reached at all major United Nations conferences and summits, including the
9F

_______________
10

10

Resolution S-26/2, annex.

A/RES/62/126

2005 World Summit 11 and the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on
HIV/AIDS held on 2 June 2006, 12 at which Member States committed themselves to
scaling up responses directed towards achieving the goal of universal access to
comprehensive prevention programmes, treatment, care and support by 2010 and
towards achieving the goal of universal access to reproductive health by 2015, as set
out at the International Conference on Population and Development.
10F

1F

Proposals for action
Raising awareness about HIV/AIDS prevention, care and treatment for youth
30. Governments should ensure that prevention of HIV infection is the mainstay of
national, regional and international responses to the pandemic and should therefore
commit themselves to intensifying efforts to ensure that a wide range of prevention
programmes which take into account local circumstances, ethics and cultural values
are available in all countries, in particular the most affected countries, including:
information, education and communications, in languages most understood within
communities and with respect for their cultures, aimed at reducing risk-taking
behaviours and encouraging responsible sexual behaviour, including abstinence and
fidelity; expanded access to essential commodities, including male and female
condoms and sterile injecting equipment; harm-reduction efforts related to drug use;
expanded access to voluntary and confidential counselling and testing; safe blood
supplies; and early and effective treatment of sexually transmitted infections.
31. Governments should commit themselves to addressing the rising rates of
HIV infection among young people in order to ensure that future generations may be
free of HIV infection through the implementation of comprehensive evidence-based
prevention strategies, responsible sexual behaviour, including the use of condoms,
evidence- and skills-based youth-specific HIV education, mass media interventions
and the provision of youth-friendly health services.
32. Governments should provide access to the highest attainable standards of
affordable and youth-friendly health care in order to increase the capacities of
young people to protect themselves from the risk of HIV infection, principally
through the provision of health care and health services, including for sexual and
reproductive health, in accordance with the Programme of Action of the
International Conference on Population and Development, 13 that integrate
HIV/AIDS prevention, treatment and care and include confidential voluntary
counselling and testing and involve young people in the planning, implementation
and evaluation of those efforts.
12F

33. Governments should promote initiatives aimed at reducing the prices of
antiretroviral drugs, especially second-line drugs, available to young people,
including initiatives undertaken on a voluntary basis by groups of Member States
based on innovative financing mechanisms that contribute to the mobilization of
resources for social development, including those that aim to provide further drug
access at affordable prices to developing countries on a sustainable and predictable
basis.

_______________
11

See resolution 60/1.
See resolution 60/262, annex.
13
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
12

11

A/RES/62/126

34. In recognition of the fact that HIV/AIDS is increasingly affecting youth in
both developed and developing countries, all efforts should be made, in full
partnership with young persons, parents, families, educators and health-care
providers, to ensure that youth have access to accurate information, education,
including peer education and youth-specific HIV education, and services necessary
to develop the life skills required to reduce their vulnerability to HIV infection.
35. Governments should involve young people, including youth living with
HIV/AIDS, inter alia, through their respective youth organizations and, as
appropriate, with the support of their families, in the decision-making, planning,
implementation and evaluation of HIV/AIDS prevention and care programmes.
36. Governments should ensure that prevention programmes include counselling
for those who are infected with HIV in order to ensure that they take appropriate
precautions to prevent the spread of the virus and to help them to cope with the
effects of living with HIV/AIDS.
Supporting universal HIV/AIDS education, taking gender inequalities
into account
37. Trafficking in women and girls for prostitution and sexual slavery increases
the vulnerability of young women to HIV/AIDS infection and is linked to the
widespread feminization of poverty, sex tourism, sweatshops and other detrimental
consequences of globalization. Governments should devise, enforce and strengthen
effective youth-sensitive measures to combat, eliminate and prosecute all forms of
trafficking in women and girls, including for sexual and economic exploitation, as
part of a comprehensive anti-trafficking strategy within wider efforts to eliminate all
forms of violence against women and girls.
38. Governments should include appropriate information in school curricula and
non-formal training programmes on the effects of high-risk behaviour, including
intravenous drug use, on the transmission of HIV infection.
39. Governments should give special attention, in all programmes aimed at
providing information about and preventing HIV/AIDS among youth, to aspects of
gender and to the disproportionate vulnerability of girls and young women.
Legislation and legal instruments to protect vulnerable youth
40. Governments should ensure non-discrimination and full and equal enjoyment
of all human rights through the promotion of an active and visible policy of
destigmatization of children orphaned and made vulnerable by HIV/AIDS.
41. Governments should strengthen legal, policy, administrative and other
measures for the promotion and protection of the full enjoyment of all human rights
by youth, the protection of their dignity and the reduction of their vulnerability to
HIV/AIDS through the elimination of all forms of discrimination and all types of
sexual exploitation of young girls and boys, including for commercial reasons, as
well as all forms of violence against women and girls, including harmful traditional
and customary practices, abuse, rape and other forms of sexual violence, battering
and trafficking in women and girls.
42. Governments should intensify efforts to enact, strengthen or enforce, as
appropriate, legislation, regulations and other measures to eliminate all forms of
discrimination and to ensure the full enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms by youth living with HIV, including policies to secure their access to
education, inheritance, employment, health care, social and health services,
12

A/RES/62/126

prevention, support and treatment, information and legal protection, while
respecting their privacy and confidentiality and developing strategies to combat the
stigma and social exclusion connected with the epidemic.
IV.

Armed conflict

43. Development, peace and security and human rights are interlinked and
mutually reinforcing. The scale of the violence perpetrated against civilians,
including youth, in the past couple of decades is extremely worrisome. Armed
conflicts have resulted in killings, the massive displacement of people, including
youth, and the destruction of communities, which has impacted negatively on their
development.
44. Youth are often among the main victims of armed conflict. Children and youth
are killed or maimed, made orphans, abducted, taken hostage, forcibly displaced,
deprived of education and health care and left with deep emotional scars and
trauma. Children illegally recruited as child soldiers are often forced to commit
serious abuses. Armed conflict destroys the safe environment provided by a house, a
family, adequate nutrition, education and employment. During conflict, health risks
increase among youth, especially young women. Young women and girls face
additional risks, in particular those of sexual violence and exploitation.
45. During conflict, young men and women who are forced to take on “adult”
roles miss out on opportunities for personal or professional development. When
conflict ends, many of the young people who must make the transition to adulthood
while dealing with the traumas of war are at the same time required to adapt quickly
to their new roles, often as parents and caretakers of the victims of war. Without
services to help them to deal with their situation, youth and young adults may fail to
integrate into society.
Proposals for action
Protecting youth under age 18 from direct involvement in armed conflict
46. Governments should ensure that children benefit from an early age from
education about values, attitudes, modes of behaviour and ways of life in order to
enable them to resolve any dispute peacefully and in a spirit of respect for human
dignity, with tolerance and non-discrimination. Governments should promote a
culture of peace, tolerance and dialogue, including in both formal and non-formal
education.
47. Governments should consider, as a matter of priority, the ratification and
effective implementation of the Convention concerning the Prohibition and
Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour, 1999
(Convention No. 182) of the International Labour Organization.
48. Governments should take all feasible measures to ensure that members of their
armed forces who have not attained the age of 18 years do not take direct part in
hostilities and that those who have not attained the age of 18 years are not
compulsorily recruited into their armed forces.
49. Governments should take all necessary measures, in accordance with
international humanitarian law and human rights law, as a matter of priority, to
prevent the recruitment and use of children by armed groups, as distinct from the
armed forces of a State, including the adoption of policies that do not tolerate the
recruitment and use of children in armed conflict, and the legal measures necessary
to prohibit and criminalize such practices.
13

A/RES/62/126

50. Governments should protect young persons in situations of armed conflict,
post-conflict settings and settings involving refugees and internally displaced
persons, where youth are at risk of violence and where their ability to seek and
receive redress is often restricted, bearing in mind that peace is inextricably linked
with equality between young women and young men and development, that armed
and other types of conflicts and terrorism and hostage-taking still persist in many
parts of the world, and that aggression, foreign occupation and ethnic and other
types of conflicts are an ongoing reality affecting young persons in nearly every
region, from which they need to be protected.
Providing for the reintegration of youth ex-combatants and protection of
non-combatants
51. Governments should provide opportunities for all youth who have been
engaged in active combat, whether voluntarily or by force, to demobilize and
contribute to society’s development if they seek to do so. In this regard,
Governments should establish programmes to provide opportunities for youth
ex-combatants to retool and retrain so as to facilitate their employment in economic
activity and their reintegration into society, including family reunification.
52. Governments should take all appropriate measures to promote physical and
psychological recovery and social reintegration of children and young victims of
armed conflicts, in particular by restoring access of those children and youth to
health care and education, including through Education for All programmes, as well
as to put in place effective youth employment strategies to help provide a decent
living for young people and to facilitate their reintegration into society.
Promoting active involvement of youth in maintaining peace and security
53. Governments should encourage the involvement of young people, where
appropriate, in activities concerning the protection of children and youth affected by
armed conflict, including programmes for reconciliation, peace consolidation and
peacebuilding.
V.

Intergenerational issues

54. Many aspects of the demographic transition, global economic development
and globalization have influenced opportunities for the intergenerational exchange
of knowledge, ideas and resources. The increase in lifespan implies that many adults
may be able to share knowledge and resources with younger generations over a
longer period of time. In recent times, greater longevity has resulted in situations
where many older people live for longer periods in some form of dependency on
younger generations. On the other hand, trends in globalization and development
have resulted in situations where many young people are cut off from their families.
In many developing countries and countries with economies in transition, it is the
ageing population that is dominant in rural areas owing to the exodus of young
adults. Older persons may be left behind without the traditional support of families
and even without adequate financial resources. While older persons lose
opportunities to receive support from younger members of families, younger
persons also lose opportunities to benefit from the knowledge and guidance of older
members of their families.
55. At the family and community levels, intergenerational ties can be valuable for
everyone. Individual and family choices, geographical mobility and the pressures of
contemporary life can keep people apart, yet the great majority of people in all
cultures maintain close relations with their families throughout their lives. These
14

A/RES/62/126

relationships work in both directions, with older persons often providing significant
contributions financially, emotionally and in respect of the education and care of
grandchildren and other kin, thereby making a crucial contribution to the stability of
the family unit.
56. The weakening of intergenerational connections in the context of ageing
societies implies that various needs of youth, children and older persons, which may
have been supported through intricate and complex familial relationships, are
increasingly not being met and are instead becoming the responsibility of the State
or the private sector.
57. It is therefore incumbent on Governments and relevant sectors of society to
develop programmes that renew or restore intergenerational solidarity. Where there
has already been substantial erosion of the ability of communities to meet this
objective, Governments should intervene to ensure that basic needs for protection
are met.
Proposals for action
Strengthening families
58. While respecting individual preferences for living arrangements, all sectors of
society, including Governments, should develop programmes to strengthen families
and to foster intergenerational relations.
Empowering young women
59. Governments should promote greater participation by young women in the
labour force, including those living in rural and remote areas, by providing and
developing the necessary skills to enable them to find employment, especially
taking measures to eliminate male and female stereotypes, promoting role models
and facilitating better reconciliation of work and family life.
Strengthening intergenerational solidarity
60. Government and private sector businesses should capitalize on the opportunity
to use the experience and skills of older workers to train younger and newer
employees.
61. Governments should promote equality and solidarity between generations,
including by offering young people full and effective participation in poverty
eradication, employment creation and social integration programmes within their
societies.
62. All sectors of society should be encouraged to develop reciprocity in learning,
which provides older persons with opportunities to learn from younger generations.
63. Where traditional forms of social support have been reduced by migration,
globalization and related situations, Governments should work with nongovernmental organizations and the private sector to provide assistance and support
to older caregivers, especially those providing care for HIV/AIDS orphans, in
meeting the needs of their children and grandchildren.
64. Governments should take steps to strengthen solidarity among generations and
intergenerational partnerships through the promotion of activities that support
intergenerational communication and understanding, and should encourage mutually
responsive relationships between generations.

15

A/RES/62/126

65. The full and effective participation of young people and youth organizations at
the local, national, regional and international levels is important for the realization
of the Millennium Development Goals, the promotion and implementation of the
World Programme of Action for Youth to the Year 2000 and Beyond, and the
evaluation of the progress achieved and the obstacles encountered in its
implementation, and for support of the activities of mechanisms that have been set
up by young people and youth organizations. Governments should encourage their
participation in actions and decisions and in strengthening efforts to implement the
World Programme of Action, bearing in mind that girls, boys, young women and
young men have the same rights, but different needs and strengths, and that they are
active agents in decision-making processes and for positive change and
development in society.

16
