UNITEO NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
.

OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES-VERBAUX·OFFICIElS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 74

, et 181emeseances
"
180eme
. 12 ao~t 1947

180th and 181st meetings
12 August~947
:Lake Success

New York

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Hundred and eightieth meeting

Cent-quaire-vingtieme seance
Page

Pages

290. Provisional agenda
1899
291. Adoption of the agenda
1899
292. Continuation. of the discussion on' the
report by the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the Securit-j Council
1899

290. Ol'dre due jour provisoire
1899
291. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
1899
292. Sui~ de la discussion sur 1e rapport
presetite au Conseil de securite par la
Commission d'enquete sur les incidents
1899
survenus a la frontiere grecque

Hundred and eighty-first meeting

Cent-quatre-vingt-unieme seance

293. Provisional agenda .. ~
"
1914
294. Adoption of the agenda
1914
295. Continuation of the discussion on the
Indonesian question
1914

293. Ordre gu jour provisoire
1914
294. Adoption de 1'0rdre du jour
1914
295. Suite de la discussion sur la question
indonesienne
1914

Documents

Documen!s

The following documents, relevant to the hundred
and eightieth and hundred and eighty-first
meetings appear as follows:

Les documents suivants, 'Se rapportant aux centquatre-vingtieme et ceIit-quatre-vingt-unieme
seances, figurent dans les publications suivantes:

.0 fficial Records of the Security Council:

Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite:
Premiere Annee, Deuxieme Serie, Supplement
No 10, Annexe 16
Lettre clu President par interim de la delegation
gr.ecque, et memorandum l'accompagnant

First Year, Second Series, SUp'plementNo. 10,
Annex 16
Letter from the Acting Chairman of the de1egationo£ Greece", dated 3 December 1946, and
enclosed memorandum
Second Year:
Supplement No. 16, Annex 40.
Letter dated 30 July 1947 'from the acting representative of A11stralia on the Security Council
, addressed to the Secretary-General (document
S}449)
Supplement No. 16, Annex 41Letter dated 30 July 1947 from the Permanent
Liaison Officer of India addressed to the
Presirlent of the Security Council (document
S/447)
Supplement .No, 17, Awnex 42
Letter dated 31.Jt1ly 1947 from the permanent
representative of Greece to the United Nations
addressed to the Acting Secretary-General, and
enclosed letter dated 31 July, 1947 from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece
(document S/451)
Special Supplement No. 2
Report of the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the
Security Council (documeIit S/360)

Deuxiemf? Annee:
Supplement No 16, Annexe 40
Lettre, en ~ ate du 30 juillet 1947, adressee au
Secretair general par le representant par
interim de l' Allstralie au Conseil de securite
(document .S/449)
Supplement No 16, Annexe 41
Lettre, en date du 30 juillet 1947, adressee au
President du Conseil de securite par l'agent de
liaison perman~nt de l'Inde (document S/447)
Supplement No 17, Annexe.42
Lettre, en date clu 31 juillet 1947, adressee au
Secretaire general par interim pat" le representant permanent de la Grece aupres de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies et lettre
jointe, en date du 31 juillet 1947, <iu Ministre
des Affaires etrangeres de Grece (document
S/451)
Supplement special No 2
Rapport pr-esente au Conseil de securite par la
Commission d'enquetesur les incidents survenus a la frontiere grecque (document S/360)

UNITED N"ATIONS'

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY

CONSEIL

COUNCIL

DE ,SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS

SECOND YEAR

No. 74 DEUXIEME ANNEE

HUNDRED AND EIGHTIETH
MEETING

No 74

CENT.QUATRE-VINGTIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake S:Uccess, N e'w York,
on Tuesday, 12 August 1947, at 10.30 a:!1'l..

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York,
le mardi 12 aout 1947, a 10 h. 30.

President: Mt. F. EL-KHOURI (Syria).

['resident: M. F. EL-KHOUlU (Syrie).

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Present: The representatives of the fol'lowing
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China, Austra!1ie, Belgique, ,Bresil, Chine,. Colombie,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of: France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des: Republiques
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom, c socialistes sovietiques, ,Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
United States of America.
<1'Amerique:

290. Ordre du jour provis~ire
(document S /48;1.)

. 290, Provisional' agenda
(document S/481)

1. Adoption of the agenda,
L Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
2. ~he Greek question
2. La question grecque
,(a) Report by th.c:;.Commi$sion of Investiga- '
a) Rapport presente au Coilseil de secuiite
par la Commission d'enquete sur les inci. tion concer:nirig Greek, frontier Incidents
to the Security Council (document
dents survenus a la frontiere grecque
, S/36O)1.
, ,
. "
'
(document' S/360) 1.
(b) Letter dated 31 July 1947, from the'
, b) Lettre, en date du 31 juillet 1947, adressee
permanent representative of, Greece to
-au Secretaire general par interim par 'le
,the United Nations addressed to, the
representant per.manent de la Grece aupres
Acting Secretary-General, and enclosed·
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies et,
letter dated 31 July 1947" from the.
lettre jointe, en date du31 juillet 1947,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece
du Ministre des' Affaires ,etrangeres de
(document S/451)2.
Grece (documen.t S/451)2.
\

291. Adoption of the agenda
.The· agenda was adopted.

291. Adoption de l'ordre du jour,
L'ordre du .jour estadopte.

292. Continuation of· the discussion on
the report' by the Commission of Investigation concel'iling Greek Frontier
Incidents to the Security Council

292. Suite de la ,discussioDsur le J;'apport
presente au Conseil de securite par
Conunission d'enquetesur les incidents survenus it la frontiere grecque

Atlhe invitation of the President, Coldnel
Kerenxhi, representative ~f Albania, Mr.

K:e~enzhi, representant de l'Albanie,. .M. Me'uo-

1 ~('el sOQicialRecords of the Security Council, Second Year,
Sp;Cla.
ullplement ~o. 2.
, Ibid•• ~ull~lem~t No. 17, Annex 42.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux ofJiciels., du Conseil ,de 'securite,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement special N° 2.
21bid., S1;1pplement N° 17, Annexe 42.

'a

Sur l'invitation du President,

le colonel

1900

"

\
Mevorah, representa~ive of Bulgaria.; Mr.. lYen-', rah, rrtpresentant de la Bulgarie; M. Dendramis,
.dramis.,repres~ntatiile of (rl-eece, and Mf'. V#l:Jn" representant de la Gr,ece, et M. Vilfan,repreff~'fJYese't~JatweOf Y-rtgokla1Jia., ;took tMit' seat~ sentant de la lYmugoslavkl preooentplt'iCe .<1 10
at the Council table.
. table du Conseil.
The PIciSIDEN'n: I understand that the repre- , Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): On m'insentative of Yitgoslavia has a statement which he fortne 'que' ie representant de la Yougoslavie
wishes to make before we listen' to the report of desire faire une declaration avant la lecture du
the Sub-Committee.'
,
rapport du Sous-Comite.
Mr. VILFAN (Yugoslavia): At the hundred and
M. VILFf\N' (Yougoslavie) (tranduit. de l'anseventy-:seventh meeting,1 I reserved ,the right to glais): Au cours de la cent-soixante-dix-septieme
return to the statement made by th€l Greek repre- seancet, je me ,suis ['eserve le .arGit de revenir sur'
sentative. I ,di~n6t' 49 ~is [Qt the purpose of la declaration'faite 'par le lrepresefita1Jlt de la Grece.
polemizing with him., His statement, full of Je ne l'ai pas fait clans l'intention d1engager une
insults to ouroountry and the other two Balkan polemique avec luL Sa declaration, remplie d'incountri~ is liQ~g ~lse!putohe of a number of suites a,l'adresse de notte pats et des deux autres
provoca'tiOnS whith, the Greek Gbverl1tnent has pays balkatiiques. ne£!1it que s'aj{)'Uter aux ncmcommitted, since the.. very beginning. The aim of 1;>reuses provocations ~uxquenes le Gouvernement
thtsl'ro'Vo~'tt(jfi, a:~ has 'hi' en the aim of all the gree s'est livredepuis 'le tout debut de 'cette 'aff~ii"e. \
,other ?rovQcatiGn~1 isck~. : and transpar€!1t~ it is .Le but de cette provocation, CGmme de toutes
to I'ft'l:siea:d public Upihio1'1 and the 'SeCUrity les autres, est 'Clair et ti'artspareftt. I1 consiste
C'6uncil itself in order 'to influence its 'decision. a egarer l'opinion publiqueet lIe CGlnseil· (de
securite lui-meme afin d'influencer sa ,decision. '
Mais ,ici se poseuneautre question, o~ le
But at this pointarroth-er question arises,
, ,a~~ly... Where, does the Greek Government get Gouvernement grec puise-t-il l'audace d'ut~liser
It! btjldn.~ss ,t{} use tnateatta ,fi1are U1'I.troth'S 'a1'ld de plus 'en plus le rtienso~ge et lacalom'nie t Oil
slanders? Where does the Greek Governmer.t find ' le Gouvernement grec trouve-t-il un soutien pour
support for its dangerous game of threatening le jeu dangereux qu'il joue et qui menace la
intem~tional .peace? ,Today I wish to give the paix' internationale? C'est la repGlnse it cette
answer -te that questiori.
,
question que je desire danher atijourd'hui.
The only possible answer lies in the incorrect
La set:t'le reponse, possible reside clans la meway mwhidithe fi1aJodty ,of the' S'e~urity thode defectueuse dont :s'inspire la' rna-jothe du
COttI1~,:l3;pproach:s ,!he', ,solution of the~eek Conseil de securite ,pour donner une soltition a la
ques~on. Thec~Jor1ty'Qf the 'members of the
questiongtecque., La majorit~ du Conseil de, secu~ecurityG{)uncilsi1~ntlypassedbver ~ur formal l'ite a tacitement ignore notie pro.posiHoh bffidelie
re~est tQ discuss ther~port of the ComnUssion qui prevGlyait,la discussien, detainee" ch'apitre,.par
ot !nvutigation in detail,' Chapter by chapter. 1t chapitre, du rapport de la CommiSSIon d'enquete. ,
is dear that nobody could ask, and neither did we, 11 est evident que personne ne pouvait demande,r
to repeat the Commission of Investigatio1J;'s whole - et nous ne l'avons d'ailleurs pa,s fait - que
work:and iPYoc(;du~'-fit hearittg' evidelild; but it l'on reCOOOrtefice ici totit le travail et toute la
- was the', dutY '~~ the. Secur,ity.Couhdl to weigh procedure d'~uditEon des temoignages dont s'est
thema~erial.gather~, toapp~ais~ critica!ly the ' acquittee la Commission d'enquete; mais le (:onconclUSions of thetMJ0tity at the COfutfii!;~ibh of seil de securite avait le de\Toird'apr,.t-~cie'r 1a
Investigation and to examine their juridical an'd documentation recueillie,de soumettte a l~
logical c()nnexion with the evidence gathered. . c!itiqu~ les conc1u~ions de la' majorite . de la
COnun~ssioii d~enGfuete, et cl'eh examiner les rappofts ,j"utidiqftes et lbgi<}ues a:vec [cs t~moignages
recueiltis.
'
I,
We draw the attention ofthe Security Council,
Nous attirons I'atten,ion du Consel1 ,de se~as nut, rept"esetitatlve tt>' the ebftiiliission has" ,&trite, 'comme i~ a di!J. Htit Ge1'1eve nbtre teprea1r~dy'done at Geneva, to the, fact that the con-' sentaftt 'a la Cotiiib:issi'on d'enl!1.'Iet~, sUr le fait·
clusfOhsofthe majority I()f the Cbff!missitin of In- que les conelusibfiS ije"'la majbrite de 1a CommistT~stiga:ii(>n mtedl>V1ous1y based on the testiniony 'sroh ;d'enquete 'Sont. .ne tbute evid~ce, fondees
of •fals-e witft~sses, Witnesses, who collaborated s't'tr les declarations de faux 'telrtbins, de temoins I
with the invadets of Gteecedutlf1g the 'war, q'liibntcoHabore avec 'i'envahissetlr 'Pendant la
prisoner-witnesses who Were forced into giving gtterre, de temoins-pr'isonniers qui eta-ient con, false testimony in order to.save their lives., We traints de fournir de faux temoign2ges pour
drawt1i~attenti(tn. -pt theSecutity C@Qncil, as our
,sauyer leur vie. Nous ,attirohs i'attentioil du Conrepresentative, at Geneva has done, to the fact sdi de securite; comme I'll, fait notre representant
that between the testitrtOtiies of such witnesses- it Geneve, sur le fait que, entte le' t~tnoignagt
witnesses with the above-cited, and other, faults de tem()ins de ce genre - temoins qui meritent
--a,ndthe ~oncl:usio1).s of tM majority, there Was les l'eptoches que je lieur aifaits et d'atitr~s
neithel'lo,gical nor ,real connexio.n; that the con-' encore - et ,les condusionsde,.la m(l.jorit~, il
clusionsgf the, maiori.~.,were based on the bare n'y a aUlZun rapport logique ni reel; que les conallegatioti'Sof 'the Gr-eek GOV'errtI'ft~ti'!:~otltained hi elusions de la l11ajorite ,sont Clniquetrtent femMes
the White Book, allegatidns ",-filth .had not been ' sur lesaliegati6fis dil G6uverhement 'grt!c conexamined; that the majority of the Commission tetiues dans le Livre blanc, allegatiollsqui n'ont
of ' Investigation passed over the slanders of the pas eteverifiees; que Ita majorite de la CommisGreek Government, and, although there were, sion d'enquete a neglige de relever ,Qes calomnies
c~eat prbdfs, it omitted fgestablish them as du G6fiVerhemefit gtec et, rtJalgt~ l'e~istence de
,

\

a

.

1, See Official Rec~dsof the Security Council, Second Year,
No. 71. '
..
"

a

1 Voir lea Proces''IIerbaUK officiels dll
Conseilde se.uritl,
Deuxieme Annee" N° 71,

1~1

\

slwdets; that. in solvmg qttestio~swhith, arose
duthtg th~ investigation" the totti,ii1i:~slon .ex""
hlbit~d partiality and illfluetite by pteconreived
id~a§. .

preuves fMfuelles,a oiiiis de'rett:lnnaitreql:i'il
i;'agi~it de caloinhies, ; que; .eft fesotV8.11t les
~ttestt6tis qui se soiit posee§ an tourS de l'erlqtiefe;;
'la .Comnn,sswn a fait pfeiive de pattialife 'et
d'itie'eS' pi'ec6'!\~ues.
'
E~ depit de tout cela, la maj ofite du Conseil
In spite of all that, the majority 0'£ the Security
Coun9i1 pa~sed over our request. Influenced by de seCtirite ,ii'!l pas pri8 rt6tredeIi1filde en conthe demand of .the delegation Of the United sideration. Irifluencee pat la demahde de la.d~l~i.,
States, it ac';epted, without discuss!iJ.g the report, gation des Etats-Unis, e1Ie a accepte, sans disthe conc.1usions of the majority, of the Commis- cuter le ·rapport, les conclusions de [a majorite
sion of Inyestigatioh, and took them as the basis , de la Commission d'enquete etles a pr;ises comme
for a soltition. Thus the majority of the Security .base de la solutIoIi a adopter; .Aiiisi' la fuaJoi·!te
Cdtincii adopted, th'e G,teek accusationsi instead' dil C'6liseil ne sectirite a fait sieIines leE>' acctls'aof establishing their slanderous cliaracter, and Hons,de la fG~c~t, au Ht:tf d'en etablir leC'aracgave the GreekG6~effiineiit new inipulse to COll- t~re diffamatQlre, ei:tcb'ut~geant ainsi fL, Iiouveau
tinue its slanders. The Greek Government, realiz- le Gbuvefuem.,~.nt gtec It poutsUlvresll.tamp~gne
ing. that it was not, held .' f~Spbnsible by the de ~lofutiies. Le Gbuvetnemeht grec; cbfl:ip'renant
Security COuncil fot its slandp.ts '6f December, qUe le Cdfisei1 de s&utitene lef&aitpas 'peUr .
1946, c6nside~d that it niight cbtltinue in the respoiis'able de sesciiffamations' de .decemore
same way.,
'1946~. it consider€' quiil n'avait qU'a contihuer
dans la l:t1~me VOle.
.'
Howe~er,1 this is not all., It is the sail:H~ with
Mais ce n'est pas tout. 11 en est d~ mei.li.~~,
the Sttbsidiary GrOUIl. TIie majority of . the en efIet, du Groupe subsidiail.'"e. La mcij6titedti
Secu!"ity Council took nJ notice of. ilie tact 'that <::~nseil de_ securite n'a" tefl~'aucun compt(~., du
t1i~ Coriifnissioll of lliVestigatiOh did n6t examine fait-queiaCoi:bl'nission d'en,quete n'a pM ~ai1-iin~
the irtddi:!nts Which Yttgoslavia charged the les ihddeiits que la. You.goslavie accusait· 'le
Greek G6ve'rnmetif with having provokM. This GouWriIefneITl: . . grec. d'~Vaif provoqu&t C'etait
represents an encouragement to tlie Subsidiary ent-eU:tage~, le GtOUf!e sttosidiaii"'ea pei:'sisiet dan$"
Group to .c611tilitH~ in the same way. Taught by- SOl1 ,attitude. IhStr!1it par l'exemple (je ·.la Corn':.
the eXample (:if the CofiiliJ.issiofi of Investigation mission d'en'i!uete. -et entdftragepa£ i'~ttitude de
.and.supported by the atti~ude of the tnl'tj'drity of la majorit~' 'du C6nseil de securite, I1'e Gi:'ohpe
the $etiirity Council, the Subsidiary Group; from subSidiaite, des les pfemi~fs bri:!itsln[(c~· pat le
tlIe very first rumo'i;ti"s Of the Greek Government) Gbti.veft1'ement gre€, a soilfriis a: I'~xametl I~ plus
examined ni-ost eare£ully the alleged incidents pto- at~eri'fi£' les iiit::idefits ptefeifd~ment :pr6v<fqu~spa!­
voked by the northeth neighbours of Greece, which le's v'oisms sepfen:ti"ioriau.x .. tl{j la; Gfffce,' et'"'qttl
represented all obVious G'r@ek provocatiori. The i'epteseiilaieIit "ufie prev0dltlOll gtecfque-evid~tfte.
aim aga~n is thie same. The most olit~tandirtg ex- Le Bm: ~tait eilcbi'~ [e meliie, L'exen1pll'l le plus
ample Of it is ~e Cl1Se Of the alleged invasion Of frappaiit ~st teltii' t!e la preferldue invasion, dtl
Gteece by an interliationalbtigade. Altlioughit la G'tece Jja.t fiii~ lifiga'de itifefhati6fial(!;' Bi'eli
was quite ol)vIElus' iliat it was an ordinary urt- qu'il £Ut paffaite'ineiit ··~videht .qu'll s'agissait
trtitli, 'the SubsidiaryGroupneVerth'eless trIed encbr~ d''uii' meftsongl:!; ieGi'oupe s'ubsidiair~
to just!fy lliischatge made bY- the Greek GoverIi" n'eri apasmoins telite t;le jusHfier. tetre li.coosa,:
ftlent. However; "tlfe same ~ubsidiary 'Grbup dill tlon tan-tee' par !le ,GouVerhenreht gtec. 'Le- ffierrfe
nothing to examine the incident ptovoked by the Gttiupe sttbSidiai¥(!,'o''<! cepeii'dant t1e~ ff!.i~. {rol1t
Greek authorities on the Yugoslav-Greek frontier examiner I'incident que les a1}torite!igrecques.
oh 12 Jun-e, the 'coiisequertces of which Were the ont provoque J la ·ftontierc'greep\o.yougosJ:ave
death·Of a Yugoslavofficer and the wounding of le 12 juin 1941 et an cours duquel: un 6fficier'
several persons. By ignoring an this, the majority ydugoslave a ete tueet .plusietirs pets6nnes
of the :Secutity Gou~ci'l help-ed tocreat~ 'the iro- blessees. En fermant i-es yeux sur 'Ces faits; la
pfessibutltat the Bubsidi~ty Gro~t;p was support- trta.jbrite dil Conseii de seet1rite' a contribue
iflg the Greek Government in .f.abric<!tingslahd~rs creer l'imptessibnqU'e le Groupe' subsidia:ireen'7,
directed against th'e denlottatic ':Balkan countries. cou:rageait le Gouvemement gtec a forger.· deS.
ca:lOlrtnies dirigeesedntre 'les pay.s democt.atiques'
des Balkans.
.
,.,' , ,
Le Gfdttpe ~ub§idiaite" ri'apas o1?s~tve la
.• T~eSubsi~iary Group did iiot ex~r~isethe
dtgmty b-efitHng an' organ .of' tli.~ Security dignite qui cbrtvient a un dr:gane du 'CoI1seil de
~ounci~. On the contrary, it reveal~d the political securite. Au contraire, il a revele les visees polialmS of the c6fi'i1ti'ies which interfere in all as- tiques des pays qUi ihtetvienrteht dari~ taus les
Pects of the irifernallifeof Greec.e by trtaihfaining, sedeurs de 'I'exrst'ente interleUte· de la' .GI'ece .et:£:
tfo6psandsehding money there. It is Character- y in~iti.tenant, des troupes .et en y 'envoyiitit 'de
istic that the Commission of Investigation, before l'argedt. Fail 'cara.eteristique, .la Comtnlssioii
d'enqttete, avaht-de quitter 8albfii'que, ·a ~ errvisa.g>e
h~aving Salonika, considered the creation of a
suBsidiary gr()Upc,ahd .then ,rej~cted . it .as la creation d'ungroupesuh'sidiairej pUlsol'a t~':
unhecessary. A<t<tording to the opinion of the jet~e c'Omtrte inutile. La Commission' d'enquete
CdnifuiilSi6h .. of Investigation,. no ·subsidiary considerait qu'aucun groupe subsidiaire ·fi'~iliit
group was needed withr'egard to the task which ne~essaire pour lui permettre de reinplir··HI. ta..che
it hadbeeh given by'the Setttrit)f Golliicil. Only' que lui avaitc~)l1Jiee le Conseil de securite. C'esf
when· the Ttuman dOctrine of so-'called Greek seulementau trtoment ou a ete formulee hi docaid Was' formufatecl, was the idea 'Of a subsidiary trine Truman de pretendue ai~e'a la Grece "que
.'Sell qijicialRecords 0;' the Secur#y Council, First Year,
i Voir Ies PY'oc~s.'lIerba,,~ oificiels dll CoJtseil. de, sjc~rite,
S

'.a:

_
'.

,.

<.

" . - . • ,-

..

% eeond
.... Series. Supplement Nil. 10, AnneX .16.

Premiere Annee, Deuxibne Se'rie, StippJemeIll N° 10; .t.:ruiexe W.

1902
'1'on a rep~is et fait revivre la conception d'un
groupe subsfdiaire..La delegation des ~tats-.Unis a
propose, cette creation afin de justifier l'acroissement de son ingerence en Grece.·On est done
oblige de conclure que la delegation des EtatsUnis avait besoin d'un, groupe .subsidiaire peur
creel' l'impression que la graYite de la situation
en' Grece etait la, consequence d'une pretendue
intervention exterieure et pour justifier sa propre
interventioQ, sans cesse accentuee dans l'ordre
militaire et politique, de son propre pays.
Jusqu'a present, le travail du Groupe subsi'The work of the Subsidiary Group up to now
only confirms the impression which it left at the diaire ne rait que confirmer l'impression qu'il
beginning, that this Group was to be used for the a donnee a ses debuts, a savoir' que ce Groupe
political aims of certain c01.1,1ltries. Seen in this etait destine a servir ·les vis~es politiques de cerlight only, the provocations of the Greek Govem- tains pays. Vues sous ce jour, les provocations
ment could be understood;. this Government has du Gouvernementgree pourraient se combecome. the guardian of the interests of the prendre: Ce Gouvernement est devenu le gardien
Joreign Powers in the Balkans. puring the dis-: des interets des. Puissances ,etrangeres dans ies
cussion, Ithe manner in which the. consideration of Balkans. Que, au cours de la discussion, l'idee
the ,creation of' acommisslon' was treated, and is meme de la creation d'une commission ait ete
still being treated, does' not at all weaken the traitee de telle
telle maniere, et le soit encore,
impressiqn which it le!t upon us.
cela n'affaibiJ.it nullement l'impression que nous
avons recueillie.
On a essaye d'interpreter la Charte de falSon
, Attempts were made to. interpret the Charter
in such· a way as to fit the political interests of a 'Padapter aux interets politiques de certains
ce:'tairi countries. The United States delegation pays. La dt1egation des Etats-Unis a maintenant
has now· forgotten. the interprehtion of Chapter oublie l'interpretation' du Chapitre VI que les
VI. which the United States Government itse1f , Etats-Unis eux-memes ont donnee il y a deux
had given two· years' ago, and is now trying to ans. Elle tente deso~ais d'y, decouvrir ce qui
find in it that which it does not contain.
ne' s'y trouve pas.
Afin de justifier; maintenant, la creation d'une
'In order now· to find a basis for the creation
ofa commission in this or another form, one goes commission sous telle ou tene forme, on va
so far as to change from one day to another the jusqu'a modifier d'un jour a l'autre l'interprejuridical interpretation of the situation in the tation juridique de la· situation qui regne 'dans
Balkans; namelYf while from the very beginning ies Balkans. Ainsi, des le debut et jusqu'a ces ~
and, until a few days ago th~re was. unanimity demiers jours, le Conseil de securite etait au
;Ut,the'5ecurity Council' at least concerning the moins unanimea esti.iner que la paix n'etait pas
fact. that as regards the northern neighbours of endanger dll fait des voisins· septentrionaux de
Greece ,peace was not endangered and there was la Grece, qu!il n'y avaitni rupture de la paix
neither a breach 'of the peace nor an act of aggres- ni acte d'agression. Or, soudain, apresune nousion,now, .suddenly, after a pew provocation on velle provocation" de la part du Gouvernement
thepaIi of the Greek Government" we hear talk grec, nous entendons a nouveau parter, de
,ofa "threat to the peace/' of"acts of aggression," "menace' a la ·paix", d"'actes d'agression", etc.
, and' so forth.
Where does . this . artifidally-,produced .noise
Oil mene donc ce bruit artificiellement provo.. regarding the deterioration of tltesituation in que aut9ur d'une aggravation de la situation
the Ba1kans ' lead to? It is directed toward the . dans l~s Balkans? Toujours au meme hut: a
same aim: 'to suppress in the beginning 'every etouffer des l'origine toute tentative. visant ,it
attempt' todisc1osethe procedure which in sub- devoiler la procedure qui, en fait, tente dejustistance tries to justify and strengthen the foreign fier et <le renforcer I'ingerence etrangere, de'cerinterference in Greece on'thepart of some of t;:Lines 'grandes' Puissances dans lesaffaires de
the' major Powers; to shift the responsibility for la Grece; de faire endosser a ses voisins septencivil war in Greece to. her northern, neighbours; trionaux la responsabilite de la guerre civile en
and to justify. the violation of the independence Grece; de justifierenfin la violation de l'indeof Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania.
pendance de la Yougoslavie, de la BuJgarie et
de l'Albanie.
'
If we base our actions on the Charter, we are
Si nous agissons conformement a la .Charte,
reproached for being formal while, allegedly, a on nous reproche de nous en tenir a la lettre
situation which threatens peace' and security is alors qU'une situation mena~nte pour la paix et
under discussion. If we try to pointe out the real la securite est en discussion. Si nous tentons de
causes· of the situation in Greece, we are simply montrer les causes reelles de la situation en
al1sweredwith a repetition of Greek slanders Grece, on nous repond simplement par une' repeabout oar, alleged interference in its internal *ion des calomnies de la '. Grece sur notre preaffairs.
tendue int~ryention dans sesaffaires interieures.
En et: qui concerne la repetition intentionnelle
Speaking .about the intentional repetition 'of
Greek, slanders, I found the best example in Mr~ desca'lomnies grecqu,es, le meilleur exemple peut
Ethridge's article in the Washington Post of en etre trouve, a mon sens, dans un article de
10 August in which all the Greek accusations are M. Ethridge publie par le Washington Post du
repeated not only iJlthe formin which they were 10 aout. Toutes le~ accusations, 'grecquesy sont
accepted by the majority of the Commis~ion of reprises, non seulement. sous la' forme sous lagroup resurrected. It was proposed by the'(Jnited
States delegation in order, to justify. an increase
in the interference in Greece. ,One cannot but
conclude that the 'United States delegation needed
a subsidiirygroup in order to create the impression .that the serious situation in Greece was the
consequence of an·al1eged interference from out~ide, and to justio/ its own increased military and
pnlitical interfprence.
J

.

~-

ou

...-----

1903

queUe les a acceptl~es ~a majorite de la Commission d'enquete, mais encore 'sousune forme
aggravee. Nous nous souvenons que la declaration faite par M. Ethridge,au retour a' NewYork ,de la Commission d'enquete, laissait pr~voir
ce1le qu'atlait faire le representant des EtatsUnis au Conseil de securite. Et nous avons l'impression que la lettr.: 'de M. Tsaldaris du 31
juillet et la declaration faite le 6 aout1 par le
representant de la Grece ont un rapport etroit
avec l'artic1e de M. Ethridgeo
Le desir de paix de la Yougoslavie ne fait pas
There is no doubt about the fact that Yugoslavia wants peace. It has devoted' itself com-' de doute. La Yougoslavie s'est consacree entierepletely to the work o.f r.econstruction. .Eve:r ment au travail de reconstruction. Taus les
objective observer admIts It. Marshall TItO, In observateurs objectif;; le reconnaissent. Le marehis last statement, mentioned this desire of chal Tito, dans sa derniere declaration, a' fait
Yugos.1avia for peace, saying: "We desir...e pea.ce, allusion a ce desir de paix de la Y ougoslavie.
the peaceful development of our country-, whIch "Nous desirolls la paix", a-t-il dit, "le developpewas heavily devastated by the war. We wdl defend ment pacifrque de notre pays durement devaste
par la guern... Cette paix, ce developpement, nous
this peace and development to our last breath."
les defendrons jusqu'a notre dernier souLde."
Nous savons quece n'est pas la ce ql.1e certaines
We know that this is not what some foreign
Powers desire, but we are of the opinion that Puissances etrangeres desirent, mais, nous
the Security Council should not support these sommes d'avis que le Conseil de securite ne
manoeuvres, permitting systematic provocations devrait pas soutenir ces manreuvres et autorise~
by. the Greek Govemment. In this sense, we re- ainsi les provocations systematiques du Goupeat the proposal to reject the last Greek vernem,ent grec. r::' est d,ans ce ,sens que nous vous
proposons de nouveav de rejeter la derniere
accusation.
<; ccusation lancee par la Grece.
.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : N ous pasThe PRESIDENT: The next step is to hear the
report on the development of the work assigned SOl1S maintenant a l'audition du rapport relatif
at the hundred and seventy-s.eventh meeting to aux travaux confies au S-ous-Comite [ors de la
the Sub-Cornmittee. I recognize the Chainnan of cent-soixante-dix~septieme seal1ce, Je donne. la
t.1:lat Sub-Committee, the representative of parole au President de ce SOus-Colr.ite, le repre':'
sentant de la Colombie.
. ,
Colombia.,'
M.
LOPEZ
(Colombie)
(traduit
de
l'anglais):
Mr. L6PEZ (Colombia): I very much regret
to inform the Security Council that the Sub- Tai le grand regret d'informer le Conseil de seCommittee failed entirely to find common ground curite que le Sous-Comite n'a pas reussi a trou'ver
\ for formulating a new draft resolution on the un terrain d'entente qui permit la redaction d'un
Greekqttestion, which might have been recom- nouveau projet de resolution re1atif a la question
mended. by the: Sub-Committee to the Council for grecque et susceptible d\~tre recommande par le
Sous-Comite a l'approbation du Conseil. .
its approval. .
Le Sous-Comite a tenu deuX seances, l'une le
The Sub-Committee had two meetings, one on
Thursday,..7 August, and the other':on Friday, jeudi7 aout, l'autre le vendredi 8 aout. Au
8' AUg1',st. During the dis<;:ussicins, we naturally cour des discussions, nous avons naturellement
went over some of the ground that had previous1y refait une partie du chemin parcouru deja par
been covered in the Security ·Council, without le Conseil de securite, sans arriver a reduire,
however reducing the area of ottr disagreement; cependant, la marge de desaccord. A vrai dire,
if anything, I could say the differences of opinion les divergences d'opinioI!s ont meme eu tendance
were brought into sharper contrast. The meetings a s'accentuer. Les seances se sont en effet tenues
were held in·a very easy and frank atmosphere dans une atmosphere tres libre et tres franche,
whic1} gave all the members of the Sub-Committee; qui a donne a tous les l11embres du Sous-Comite
the' oppotillnity to present their views in yery l'occasion d'exprimer leurs vues, avec le maxiclear form..
mum de nettete.
That atmosphere *as so pronounced that, by
La. situation etait si claire que, a. notre deuour second meeting, we wo~nd, it would be useless, xieme seance, nous avons juge, comme le suggerait
as was informa1lyintim.ated bv the French repre- offi~ieusement le representant de la France, inusentative, to meet again un1es~ some new sugges- tile de nous reunir' a 110uveau, a mains que ne
tion were presented. If there were .some assurance fUt presentee que1que' nouvelle suggestion. Si le
from. the USSR representative that, such a sug- representant de l'URSS not,ls avait donrie quelgestion wou1d be acceptable to his delegation, we que assurance que sa delegation trouverait acmj~ht meet again and engage in new discussion.
ceptab1e une telle suggestion, nous aurions pu
So far as I have been informed, nothing has nous reunir a nouveau et repreridre la discussion
come, out of that idea. We return to the Council sur nouveaux frais. Pour autant que je' sache"
with the suggestion that the Council should pro- . rien n'est sorti de cette idee. Nous reyenons
ceed to discuss the proposals already submitted. done devant le Conseil pour lui suggerer de
reprendre la discussion des propositions deja
deposees.
Investigation but also in an enlarged-upon form.
We remember Lhat the statement of Mr. Ethridge,
made after the' Commission of Investigation had
returned, from Geneva, foreshadowed the statement of the United States representative in the
Security Council and we have the impression
that Mr. Tsaldaris' letter of 31 July and the
statement of the Greek representative on 6
August1 have a close connexion with the article
by Mr. Ethridge.

I

~/ S7ee Official Records of the Security CounCil, Second, Year,

.'0. 1, I~7th meeting.

'

1 Voir lea p,.oceS"'IJerbal/$ offictels du Conseil de sccurittJ.
, Deuxieme, Annee,. N° 71, I77eme seance.

,

'

.

,

.

Naturally l feel v~r,y disa,pppjnted at the ~esult
Qfou.r n~w effor,t. However! I am v~, g~ad we
., Q1~c1,~ th€;effort 'l>el;alJ~e I t4in.~ it was o~rd~ty
tq ,ro.ake eVery po~sible a~teqlpt to .reach If.Il

Jcy .sui& I;lll.t~J;"~U~VJent pJ,'()f9nd~JI1~p.t ~e~:g d\l
r~~~uJt~tc;le ~Q1:r~ nQ1,lV~J etrQ,J,1.
s~i~, (:~~~lJd~t
tre~ 4.~t1r~~ qij~ HQ\ta l'~yom" fait, C~J; Je (!1"oi$
Qll'il et~it q~ t;.wtr~ d~volr c;l~ faire t{)U~ notre

le.

pQ~sjl>l(l JWur ~bp.t,tth· il. ~" accQf'4..·

.
At a later stage in the discussion, in view of
Etant donne ce qui slest passe awe' seC\nces du
what happened at the meetings of t\J.e Sub-Corn, ,SOUs.-Comite. j'ai l'intentiQn de dema.nder, un peu
mittee, I intend ta request the Council to allow plus. tard au Conse~l d'autcriser la delegation de la
the Colombian delegation to withdraw its pr<r Colombie, a retirer ses propositions.1 • En effet
posals1 because, to express our opinian brielly, pour exprimer brievement mon opinion, nous n~
there seems now to be no use in requesting the croyons plus qu'il soit utile de demander au
COUllcil tQ give any furthel' consideration to . CqJ1sflil de [es prendre pl\.ls IpJ1gtemps en
con~id~f~tion.
'
those propo~al!?
I understand, ho:wever, that the Australian
Je crois neanmoins savoir que le repres~ntant
representative still has his proposa11 under con- de I~Australie a maintenu sa prppasition1 . Le
sideration. The Security CouncIl will have the Censeil de securite va pouvoir entendre I'opinion"
opportunity to hear every member of the Sub- de tous les membreEi du Sous.,Comite sur '.!ette
Committee express his views on this questiop in question a la llumiere des explications donnees
the light of the explanations given in the meetings au cours des seances du Sous-Comite•
.af the Sub-Committee.
The PRESIDENT : We regret that the SubLe PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Nous
Conimittee was unable to pre~ent to the Council rf~lP'ettons que le Sous-Comite n'ait pas ete en
anything that might ~ave usefu1 results. Now mesure de :foumil'" au Conseil un travail qui eut
we pass to the next step, a discussion on the reso- presente une utilite certaine. I1 nous reste mainte.lutiOns which were previously presented. As the . nant a ouvrir la discussion sur les resalutions
Colombian representative has withdrawn his qui nous ont eie sQumises. Puisque
repreresolution' for reasons he has already explained, sentant de la Calombie a retire la sienne pour
I ask the Australian representative whether he les raisons qu'il a exposees, je demande au reprewould like his proposal disC11ssed now.
sentant de l'Australie s'il aimerait voir sa proposition mise en discussion maintenant.
Colonel H()D,GSON (Australia): I all} su;e that
Le colonel HOOOSON (Allstralie) (traduit de
we all heard Wlth deep regret the ..observations of l~anglaif): Je suis certain que nous avons tous
the Colombian representative on the break-down entendu ~vec un profond r(lgret les' ohset;Vaof the discussions in the Sub-Committee, and the tions du representant de la Colombie surl'echec
failure to arrive at some concrete draft resolutions des discussions du Sous-Comite et rimpossi~
or, at least, to find some basis for further discus- bilite de redi~~r un projet concret de resolution
sion. It is quite clear that the break-down PI' dead... ou de trouV0r, a tout le moins, une base de dislo~ has been caused by one factor. When dealing' cussion future. I1 est clqir que l'echec, ou l'imwith a concrete set of facts, representatives may passe devant laqueHe nous nous trouvo:as, n'ont I
honestly differ as to the correct solution to meet ea l"0ur cause qu'un seul facteur. Lorsqu'ils
the situation disclosed by those facts; but in this traitent d'un ensemble coneret de faits, 1es reprecase the failure of the SecUrity Council to reach sentants peuvent,en toute' honnetete, etre en
~y decision at all is solely due to the fact t.,hat
~~sac;~Qr4 51.1-1'. ~ sP}utiQJ1, q1.\i r~PQnQ:raitl~ mj~ux
we' cannot agree on the facts. In other words, One a l~ &i~uati()n e~prim~e pqr I;f;S faits; .IMi~, dw.s
!\i!ie insists that the trouble is wholly due to the le ~a,s pre~ent, l' ~ch~c du <;:ons4'lil de ~c,k"l'ite,
inte~al conditions in vreece, and the other side
qqi J;:\'a pq parvcynir
a.ucune f;9~c.lu,siQP, est
base!! its position on the majoritY report of the tln~Ql,1eme~t 4f;J. il c~ ql:1e nou,S n'arri:vp:Q~ p~.s a
Corp.mission of Investigation.
nous mettre d'a~eorQ. SUr lE!s fl:\its, En Q!CJ;utre::;
termes, lIes uns affirment, que les diffictJ:lt~~ provienne~t uniq1,lement de la. situation iut.erieure
dell! Gr;eqe; les. av.tres s'appuient sur l~ rapport de la majorite de li:l, CommissiQn d'enquete.
N-pus en sommes donc la: nous ne saurions
So we are left with this. We cannot declare
to the world that we are impotent as a Security declarer au monde que le Conseil de securite est
Council, that we cannot fulfil the functions laid in1puissan.t, que nQus somm!s il1capables de remdown for us in the Charter. To my mind, that . Plir les fonctions dont la 01at:te uous a investis.
would be disastrous. The only thing left is ~Qr A . mon avis, ce serait un desastre. La geule
the Subsidiary Group to remain in Greece with solution encore possible, c' ~st que le' Gl'Oupe
a11 the powers with which this Councii cim clothe s\J.Osidiaire demeure en Grece, avec tous les pouit. But, unfortunately, the Group lacks authority. voirs dont notre Cons.eit peut le doteI'. Mais,'
It has no authority because it does not get sup- ma.lheurel.lSemenJ, le Groupe manque d"autorite.
port, it does not get co-operation, and it does not Et, s'il manque d'autorite, c'est parce qu'it p.e
get assistance ffom some of the Governments bene&cie pas d\.l soutien, de .la cooperation et de
concerned. Further, as the members of the I'assistance de certains des Gouvernements inteCouncil have 'heard this morning, it does not com- resses. ":En outre, comtne les memb:res dt1: (onmand authority because it does not command seil l' ontenter.du ,dire ,ce matin, le Gmupe subsidiaire n'a pas d'autorite parce qu'il n'impose
respect.
pas le respect.
agr~emept..

le

a

,

1 s~

No. 71.

Official Records of tile Sec,,,ity COJlllC#, Se<:!'nd Year,
" .

1 Voi~
les Pr,9.fes-verblJolf~ ojfi<;iifls du, Conseil d, secllrite,
Deuxienie Annee, N° 71••

p

1905
Voici <;l\Ii we &wrpl'~nd, &n~Qr~: Le. COMeil Q.~
s6elIrite a cree ce Groupe &llbsidiaire, Ul).e <lecilliop, Q;'ij.. CQlJ:$eil 1.';J; d.ote <le c~J;ta.in~ pOl1-\'Oh"s
~t. d,u Ef!iOH Q!~n..qp.~te. Mai~,o lorsq~~ ce GIrQupe
Mdd~ dfg.gir, la. Jlulga,rie, l'Al1;>anie ~t 1<1-. Y'Qug.q,..
slavie S'?t:rogent t'eA1!iere aij.tQrit~ <tU: (:Qnsei! de
securite et declarent: "Nous avons deja proc~de au¥ en,quetesl il n,'e.s t pas besoin d'en,~ueter.
c~s inqide.nts n'ont pa,~ exi~t.e."
' .
NQus arri"ons ainsi a. cette CQJ;lclusiQU que
1),oas ne pouvons en 7-ester la et dedder ql;te le
Groupe subsidiair€ va. rester en Grece sa.ns aucune autorite. Ce n;'es.1! pas, uue soLution. NOItS
lW.tI" effQr<;ons donc d'abollder le probleme sous
un angle noqveau. 11 n'estpas jiuste de dire que
n01Js n'avolils s.0nge a deposer netre lles9ltition
quiapres le rejet de la proposi~ian '<:les Emts,Un.is. et ap.I:€$ la remlse all Conseilt de s.eeurite
de 1a lwuv.ellfl lettl1e du Gouver:nement grec ou
ce1ui-ci demande an COl1seil drappliquer re
Chapitr~ VU de la. Char-te. En effet, m{i)1iJ. Go~'o
verne.ment etutlie depuis longtemps cfltte b<;(j)n
d'aborder le probleme, et c~est immediaWlmerrt
apres le rejat de la rel:1oIution de· la Folagatt
que fai pres~nte, au nom de mon, Gliluvernement, la presente proposition. J~ li'ai faii: pour
tenter de tnou"er une solution acceptable paul"
tous et reposant sur les reaJires de la situation
actueiie. D'autres representant&; onti dedaFe· iCi:i,
directement ou indirectement, que la pabq est
menacee, sans toutefois mentionner expressement l'Article 39, ce qui placerait le probleme
!:Ur le terrain du Chapitre VII.
Je ne veUK .pas e~uyer le~ m€mml'es d't1 ConI ~I;lall not. weary, the members of the Coul1cil
sdI,
mais je sa-is en meSUl'e de citeI' textuellement
blft. r can quote directly from the various. statedes
extmits,
deljl; dive1'lses doolarat-ions. faites par
ments mad~ by representaHves at this Council as.
des
representants
deVaIJt cc <Conserl et' qui llemon,..
flJ.r ba<;k as SeJ?teil;lbt:r of last year. I (;an quote
tent
i.usquten
septembl'e·
1946. ]e peux citer des
prt:v,ious l?t.atements, by the r~'prc::sent.ative of th~
VSSR where he said in September
laat1 that thisr d~clal'ationi faites: :ear le JTepI'e~enta~t de IfU.<RtSS
U
dans l~squ(tlIl€s il i:lisait, au mois de seprembre
situat~qn, rs. a "manifest thJeat to the pea<:e, and
we all know: the situation has ~avely d.'etf:riorated' de l'<l'1'1i1ee dc'rnie11e\ que cette' situatioa. lnen.a(!e
d'ul1e f~C;Qn evidente le maintien: de la pal-x,
sinc~ that time. We have alf seen and felt the
et noas savons tous qae, depms lors, la situati@n
effe~ of that deterioration even in the statements
m,llde befqre thi's Council QJ the representatives or s'est considerablement aggravee. Nous· aIVons, toas
c~.mstate et ressenti Ies effets de cette aggravathe countries involved.
'
tIon, meme dans les declarations faites devant
?e , CO~1I~1 par. lIes repr~ep,tant~ d,es pays
mt,eresses.·
'
Rendo.ns-nous a Fevide.nce: nQus avons tous
SQ. let us, £~ce .up to the fact that we have aR
admis
et declare que. cette §ituation (:onstitue
a.dmittOO anq stCJ.ted t.@t the situation cQnstitutes a
tht('.a.t to the pe.ace. We accept that determination, une menace contre la, paUl::. Nous, acceptons cette
and it auto~ti,@ly bi:ings the situation under n::tani~J;'e de voir, et elte nous amene. autornatiqueChapter, VU, which compels us squarely to face ment sur le terrain du Chapitre VU, ce qu,i nous'
force a faire loyalement' face a la situation.
the situation. ,

It surprises me tOQ that, when: the Subw.diary
Group. set up.' by this. C.ou{ldL a.nd arm~d by a
Clecision of the Cuurl,~il with ~ertq\n PQw~rs and
at'+hority, to htves1:igat~, .deeide8.' tQ do S.Q, we
s. tld then find J3tJ.1garia, Alb31Jia. a.ud Yugo,..
slavi<b'arl'ogating to themselves the f1JI~ authQl'i1:y
af the Security CounciL <mid ~ayipg: "We have
al:re?d.~ inv.~t~gateq, cHld th~xe.. \S'. nq. tI;',ed; to
hwt}st~~e. 1'hexe were no sij,~h 11l(:ldentS. ,
So we l'ea.ch J.ie concl'1£Sion that we cannot
leave it at that by saying that the S1Jbsidiary
Group, with no authority, shall remain in Greece.
That 1'10 sa1ution. Therefore, we try to approach
the problem in a new way. It is not fair to say,
as has been suggested, that we thought of br.inging our resolution forward only after the United
Scil:tes propll8RI had meen rejecte:d, .wd after the
Greek Government had pr0duced that new lettt':r
to the, Security Council asklJ;lg the Council to! act
under Chapte.r VH of the Charter. My GOVflffiment had been seriously considering: this method
of a£ipr0ach fol' some thne, and so, immediately:
following the rejection of the Po1ish resolu.tion,
an behalf or my Governm.ent I produced this pr<r
pasal. I introduced it in an endeavour, to find
something acceptabl!€ to all and! baseq on the
r~atities C!)f the e~isting situation. Other representatives hel'e, either dil'eet1y or by implication, have
stated that there is a 'threat to the peace, alt1:lough
not specifical1y mentioning Article 39; and so
bl'inging it under Chaptel' VII.

I

is

En noqs ?pp11yant SUJ;4 les <UsPQ~itions, de

In' accordan,(:e with' the pro\\is.~on$ of Article
39, we" cOij.ld immediately proc€t;d to recommend. But we do nQ1; do that; we put 'the question
on t~~ basis, of Article 40 by proposing certain
provn.onal me&&ures. What are ~ose provisional
me~s1.!re~ ? To enter into, direct negotiation--,.direct
negotIatIon is an obHgati()n under the Charter
--:: to reli~ve the tension at present existing,
With a "Iew to the resumption of norm,al
an~ peacef~ qiplom"1tlc rela.tions. That is not a
ser~ol,tf'obllga.tion. Nobody is blamed there. Nobody IS ~o~de!1Ul,ed. We merely direct the parties
to do cect~n things which th~y have all said they
are ;prep::tred to do. They have all said here at

ment a:u~ recomlllandations. Mais nol.1S ne le
faisons pas; nous posQns la questjon 1Iij.1' le terr<1.in de l'Article 40 en propoScwt ce~ajnes' mesures provisoires. Quelles sont ~es mflSij.reS plOvi~()ires? E~~ger des negociations dir~ctes eng8.gGr des n~g()ciAtions directes. est Qbligatoire
q.ux termes de Iq Charte - et atte~uer la tension
e:x;is~ant qctue~lerne1lit aiin d'assurer l~ reprise
de relations diplomatiques norrilales et pacifiques.
Cette obligation n'est pas partictllierement lourde.
Elle ~~ constitue de blame ni de condqmnation
pour personne. Nous dema,ndons silnp1ement aux

Se' S~! sOfltil;ia1 ~t:.Cqrd,r of. t{11l .seCI~ritil' Ca,mcil, ~irst Year,
con
er es. NO\, 7. pai~ 1110.

'V~ir lCll Prqcesove,lla.u;;, (;Q'iciels an CQII$(!il. tl" slcl{J<ite,
Prem,ere Annee. DeU-'Cleme Sene, N° 7, pal/ie IIlO.

b

l' Article 39, nOU$ pourrions passeI' hnmediate-

1906

this table that .they are actuated by good faith.
We have heard protestations of such character,
to .the effect that they want to see orderly and
good-neighbourly relations established. The resolution simply call:> on them to do that; but it
makes it an obligation for: t.~em to do it.

parties de faire certaines choses qu'elles ont
toutes declare etre pretes a faire. Elles ont toutes
declare ici etre de bonne foi. Nous les avons
entendu protester de leur desir de voir s'etablir
des relations normales et de bon voisinage. La
resolution ne fait que leur demander de realiser
leur desir; mais elle lellr en fait une obligation.
A ceux qui nous critiquent pa:rce qt,'ils esTherefore,-to those critics who may feel that
because we bring this under Chapter VII we timent que, en nous pla<;ant sur le terrain du
bring it under the strong Chapter of ,the Charter, Chapitre VII, nous nous decidons pour le Chapiwe say: that may be so. But it is only strong, tre le plus imperatif de la Charte, nous reas regards the obligation imposed. So far as pondrons qu'il en est peut-etre ainsi. Mais il
this particular case is concerned, it is very clear . n'est imperatif qu'en ce qUi concerne l'obligation
that we have exhausted Chapter VI, beC3use' imposee. Dans le cas particulier qui nous occupe,
under Chapter VI, whatever we do, a portion of il est bien clair que nous avons epuise le Chapitre
any resDlution must take the form of a recom- ' VI, parce que,' sous ce Chapitre, quoi que nous
mendation; a portion of it must consist in the f1l.ssions, une partie de toute' resolution doit
establishment of a commission of investigation. ' revetir la forme d'une recommandation; une
But we are faced here in this dispute with the autre partie doit stipuler la creation d'une com. doctrine which I hope will never be pursued mission d'enquete. J'espere que la. doctrine a
again because it means the complete break-down ' laquelle nous nous sommes heurtes au cours de
of the Charter. So far as the pacific settlement, ,cette discussion ne sera plus jamais reprise, parce
of disputes is concerned, the doctrine is that action qu'e11e signifierait l' ecroulement total de la
under Chapter VI can be only a recommendation, Charte. En ce qui concerne [e reglement pacifique
and therefore not binding on the parties. But be ' des differends, cette doctrine voudrait qu'une
that·as it. may, whether that doctrine is held mesure prise au titre '<iu Chapitre VI ne puisse
sincerely or not, the fact remains that for the etre qu'une recommanoation sans caractere obHpurposes of this dispute we have reached a dead- , gatoire pour les parties. Quoi qu'il en soit, que
lock. as to the applications of the provisions of cette doctrine ait ete soutenue sincerement ou
Chapter VI.
non, it n'en demeure pas mains que, dans cette
affaire, nous sommes arrives a une impasse en
ce qui concerne l'application des dispositions du
Chapitre VI.
Au cours de la cent-soixante-dix-septieme seAt the hundred and seventy-seventh meeting of
the- Council, the representative of the USSR ance du Consei1, le representant de I'URSS a
stated that the Australian proposal combined declare que 'la proposition de l'Australie commechanically the two elements of the Indonesian binait mecaniquement les elements que 1'on
case and the United States reso1ution. Without trouve dans. le cas de l'Indonesie et dans la
going into any argument, I suggest that this ob- resolution des Etats-Unis. Sans vouloir provoI servation is not correct. In the Indonesian case
quer une discussion, j'affirme que cette observahostilities had in fact broken out. The war was tion n'est pas juste. Dans le cas de l'Indonesie,
on. In this, case we simply determine, as we have 'les hostilites avaient commence effectivement.
all admitted and, agreed, that there is a threat La guerre avait ·'lieu. Dans le cas present, nous
constatons simplement, comme nous ravons tous
to the peace.
admis 'et reconnu, qu'il y a une ~enace contre
la paix.
La resol.ution des Etats-Unis:l, d'autre part,
The second point .is that the United States
resolution:!' provided for a commission of investi- stipulait la creation d'une commission d'enquete
gation with very wide powers of investigation investie de pouvoirs etendus pour ses enquetes
and powers of reporting. This resolution does et autorisee a faire rapport. La presente resolunot ask for that. This is a decision binding on the tion n'exige pas cela. II s'agit ici d'une decision
parties, any violation of which will mean a viola- obligatoire pour les parties et dont toute viola-tion of the Charter, and the Council itse1f will tion equivaudra a une violation de la Charte,
then be in a position to decide what other ce qui permettra au Conseil de decider desautres
mesures, necessaires.
measures are necessaty.
Quant a ce que nous envisagions de faire au
Ref~rring to. the point as to what we had in
mind regarding the observers, we have not sujet des observateurs, nous n'avons pas etudie
elaborated on that question; but as I pointed out' 'cette question a fond; mais, comme je I'ai'
in my opening remarks, we find that inasmuch indique dans mes premieres remarques, noUS
as the replJrts which we are receiving 'are not estimons que, dans la mesure. Oll les rapports
based on the full facts, they are of. very little que nous recevons ne sont pas foncles sur l'envalue. The Subsidiary Group' spends days and semble des faits, ils n'ont qtie tres peu de valeur.
days in argument as to whether it shall investi- Le Groupe subsidiaire consacre des joumees
gate, what it shall investigate, and so on: Then it entieres a discuter. pour savoir s'il qoit proceder
has to agree on a report and agree to send it back a l'enquete, sur quoi eUe doit porter, etc. Il
to this Counci1.0ur proposal is that the obserVers discute ensuite pour arriver a se mettre d'accord
-:-and we have made a careful assessment-ean sur un rapport et, enfin, sur l'envoi de ce rapfulfil the role we visualize; that is, we feel that port au Conseil. Dans notre proposition - et
eleven to twelve observers can fulfil the duty of n01,lsetI avons soigneusement pese les termes 1 See Official Records. of the SeCWIity' Council, Second Year,
Nil. 51, 147th meetinll'.
.
.
'

1 Voir les P,.ociso'/Je,.b~ o/ficiels dll Corsseif dt socarite,
, Deuxieme Annee, N° 51, 147eme seance.
'

1907
reporting clirectly to this Council without having lIes observateur~pourrai~taccox;o.plir la tache
to go through all the procedure which has beeJ? que nous avons er.'. vue; nous pensons que onze
it. douze observateurspourraient se: 'Voir cbnfier
found necessary in this particular dispute.
1a mission de faire des rapports directs au Gonseil sans avoir asuivre toute la procedure qui
ete jugee necessaire clans eette question
particuliere.
We say there is no derogation of sovereignty in
Nous dedarons qu'i! n~ a pas d'atteinte a.
this resolution. It is not severe. There' is no la souverainete dans cette resolution. EUe n'imonerous obligation. It simply puts into' words pos~ pas d'obligations trop lourdes. Elle ne fait
what all the parties have said they are ready and qn'exprimer ce que toutes les parties se sont
willing, to do, without any condemnation on allY declarees pretes a: faire, sans condamnation d'une
party, without any implication that any party is partie quekonque. sans qu!il soit implique qu!une
guilty, as was the suggestion made about the partie quelconque est coupable - ce qui' a ete
various resolutions submitted under Chapter VI. aV'"clIlCe a.u sujet des diverses resolutions preFor those reasons, we commend this .resolution sentees conformement au 'Chapitre VI. C'est pour
to the earnest consideration of the Cpuncil, in ces raisons que nous soumettons cette. resolu.the hope that it will see us out of the difficult posi- tion auConsei1 en lui demandant de lui accorder
tionconfronting it so far as the Council's toute son attention, dans lespoir qu'elle nous
authority and prestige are concerned.
permettra de sortir de la situation difficile I dans
laquelle nous nbUS t1Ouvans, en ce qui concerne
l'autorite. et le prestige .du Conseil de securite.
Mr. LOPEZ (Colombia): I requested to speak . M. LOPEZ (Colombie), (traduit de l'anglais):'
because 1 wish to clarify a point. I simply wish , J'ai demande [a parole parce que je desire
to ·say that at a 1ater stage 1 intend to' request the apporter tL."1 eclaircissement. Je'desire simplement
Council to allow me to withdraw my proposal.
declarer que j'ai l'intention, a.. un stade'u1te.rieur
de la discussion, de' .demander au Consel1 de
me permettre de retirer m~, proposition.
The PRESIDENT: The representative of Aus- ,
Le P~ESIDENT (traauit de '1' anglais) : Le repretraliahas alreadv declared that he wishes his' sentant de l'Australie a deja declare qu'll desire
proposal to be discussed and, a£j:er a gener.al, dis- que sa proposition soit discutee et' qu'elle soit
cussion, adopted. Therefore I declare that the adoptee apres discussion generale. J e declare
proposal' of the Austraiian, repres~tative as done ouverte la discussion genenle sur la propocirculated is now open for gt"neral' discussion ·sition du representant de l'Australie; tel1e qu'e1le
before proceeding to 'vote.
a. ·ete 'distribuee, avant que nous ne' passions
au v o t e . '
Mr. JOHNSciN (United States of America) :·1 :
M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traagree in very large part with the general com- duit de l'anglais): J'approuve en grande partie
ments on the situation in which the Council now :les cornmentaires generaux que le repre,sentant
finds itself, which have 'been very eloquently de l'Auf-tralie vient de' presenter sur la sit'l1ation
expressed by the representative of Australia. T1;le dans laquelle le Conseil setrouve actuellement.
United States. delegation wi'll propose minor -La delegation .des' Etats-Unis proposera' des
amendments to the Australian resolution,! which .amendements de detail a. la resolution 'de ·la delewe should like to see accepted, and we shall vote gation de l'Austraiiel, qu'elle, aimerait voir
for that resolution.
adopter, et elle votera eh· faveur de cette
re§olution.
,,
, Depuis de nombreuxmois, le Conseil ~de se.The Security Council now has attempted for
many months to find a sQlution totheGreekques- curite tente de trouver une solution a'la question
tion by the processes of pacific settlement. Many grecque par le moyen d'un' reglement' pacifique_
proposals have been presented to us, most of De nombreuses propositions, nous ontete souwhich have carefully avoided- findings of guilt or mises; la piupart evitaient soigneusementde conblame on' either of the parties to this dispute. Al~ £lure a la culpabilite de rune quelconque des
those solutions have failed, as the President aqd parties en cause ou la necessite d'infliger un
the other members of the Council know. The blame a l'une d'entre dIes. Toutes ces solutions
report of the Sub~ColTu"llittee indica:tes clearly, as ont echoue; comme le savent le President et les
, :Mr. Lopez has told us, that there is no longer 'autres membres duConseil. Le rapport du Sousany hope of reaGhing compromise solutioIls. The Comite indique clairethent, comme nous l'a dit
Security Council is faced with a complete dead- M. Lopez, qu'il n'y a plus. d'espoir d'arriver a
lock which prevents it from taking the necessary une solution de 'compromis. Le· Conseil ,de semeasures to deal with' the factual situation along curite se trouve dans une impasse qtft l'empeche
the Greek border.
de prendre les mesures necessaires pour ,venii
'a bout de la situation actuelle le long de la frontiere grecque.
'

a

a

"-'he following is the text of'the am~ndments:
Document S/471/Add. 1
, 1 2 Attgust 1947
[Original text: Englis'h]
"
I, To be added at the end of paragraph number 2:
"
"and frontier violations along the borders' oIf Greece on the
2¥e hand and Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania on the other."
• ,,0 be ;added; at the end of paragraph number 4 : ,
""
..
.Pdendihn,g the appointment of such observers by the Council
an t , elr. arrival on the ,spot! the Subsidiary Gr<mp of the
Invest!gatmg Commission is directed to report to the Council
"regardmg t1ie compliance of the parties with this decision!'
1

2 Void.le texte des amendements:
Document S/471/Add. 1
12 aout 1947
[Texte original en anglais]
1. Ajouter, a la fin du paragraphe 2:
"et violations de frontiere' le long de.~ ~frontieres greCoalbanaise, greco-yougoslave Pot /Feco'bulgare!'
'
;;!. Ajouter, a la, fin du paragraphe 4:
"En attendant la designation oe ces observateurs par le Conseil
et 'Ieur arrivee sur les Iieux. le Groupe subsidiair<: de la
Commission d'enquete est charge de faire rapport au Conseil
,sur la fa~oit dont les parties interessees se sont conformees
a cette decision!'

1908

Da.is ces conditions, le seulinoyen qui reste
In the circumstances, the only COUrse left fOr
the Security 'Council, in our opinion, is to register au Conseil de securite est, a notre avis, de faire
foY the whoJe world the opinion of its inember,s connaitre au monde entier ['opinion de sesmeinas to the facts and what action they are prepared ' bres quant aux faits, et l'action qu'il se propose
to take under the Charter. We are no longer d'entrep.rendre conformement a la Charte. Nous
under the necessity of, attempting to appease ne hous trouvons plus dans la necessite d'essayer \
further a threatening veto. Let us ,now record our de conjurer la menace d'un veto. Nous devons
honest opinions. That is what I now propose to maintenant indiquer clairement notre opinion.
do on behalf of the United States delegation.
C'est ce que je me propose de faire maintenant,
au nom de la delegation des Etats-Unis.
Qu'il me soit permis de dire, en passant, que
I may say in passing that the Australian resolution also imputes no blanle, but, it does take care la resolution de l' Australie n'implique pas non
0.£ the situation of danger and, if passed, will plus de blame, mais qu'eUe tient compte du
give the Security Council some hold, some meas- danger .q1,le comporte la, situation, et que, si
. , eUe est adoptee, elle donnera au COltseil de seures of CGntrol.
•
curite un point d'appui et des possibiHtes' de
controle."
Apres avoir expose)es'vues de mon GouverneAfter I have expressed the view which my
Government and my delegation' hold on this sit- ment et de ma delegation sur cette question,
uation; I shall put before the Council another je soumettrai au Con~eil un autre projet de
draft resolution from the United States delega- reSolution ·de la delegation des Etats-Unis. Je
tion. I shall not co~ment spedfically on that draft ne comll1enterai pas le detail de ce projet, de
• resolution. I think tha,t our views regarding It resolution; Je pense que notre point de VUe se
will be clear from the general staterilent which I degagera ,de la declaration generale que je me
propose to make. I need hardly remind the Coun- propose de vous presenter. nest inutile que je
cil that if the Australian resolution is passed by rappelle au Conseil que, si la resolution de
the Council, the United States resolution wilt be l'Australie est adoptee, Ila resolution des Etatswithdrawn.
Unis sera' retiree.
It is the view of the United States Governne Gouvernement des Etats-Unis estime qu~
ment that Greece is in grave peril. This peril la Grece court un grave d3.llger. Cc danger resulte
results from the guerrilla warfare now being de la guerre de francs-tireurs que m~nent' contre
waged against the Greek Government by com~u­ le Gouvernement grec des bandes menees par
nist-led bands actively supported by Albania, Bui- des communistes et acti\rement 'soutenues par
garia and Yugoslavia"and by the Communist l'Albanie, la Bulgarie et la Yougoslavieet par
Patty of Greece. It is perfectly clear that the ' le parti communiste grec. n' est parfaitement
Governments of'the three northern countries are clair que les Gouvernements de ces trois voisins
working in close conjunction with the Greek septentrionaux travaillent, en cooperation etroite
Communists with a common objective - the avec lIes communistes grecs, a la poursuite d'Ull
establishment in' Greece of a minority totalitarian but, commun -" l'etablissement en Grece du
government which would be subservient to the gouvernement d'une niinorite totalitaire qui serait
communist-controlled countries.
aux ordres des pays sous controle coinmuniste.
The United States Government considers that
Le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis est d'avis
the evidence ,obtained by the Security Council's que les :preuves recueillies par la Commission
Commission of Investigation and the ,Subsidiary d'enquete du Conseil de securite et par le Groupe
Group as set forth in a series of reports to the subsidiaire, teHes qu'elles SO:1t reproduites dans '
Securit".f Council unquestionably proves that sub- une serie de rapports au Conseil de sec4rite,
stantial assistance is being received by the Greek prouvtpt indubitablement que les partisans grecs
guerril1as from the northern C0untries, and rec;oivent une aide considerable des pays sitttes
, further shows that this assistance is of such im- au nord de la Grece et que les conatatations faites
portance as to constitute a very serk JS threat to montrent, de plus, que cette aide est d'uneimGreek independence and integrity.
portance telle qu'eHe constitue une menace tres
serieuse -contre 1'independance et I'integrite
htlleniques.
.
C'est a cause de la gravite evidente de ,fa siIt is because of the obvious seriousness of the
situation that my Government has taken so active tuation que mon Gouvernement attache un si
an interest in the Greek complaint to the Security grand interet a la plainte adressee par, 'la Grece
Council. We believe that with the United States au Conseil de securite. Nous croyonsque, avec
assistance now being made available to Greece l'aide mairttenant fournie a la Grece par les
and with the assistance which other nations and Etats-Unis, et avec l'aide que d'autres nations
international organizations may be able to pro- ou des organisations internationales pourront
vide in the future, Greece can solve her domestic fournir a l'avenir, la Grece pourra resoudre ses
difficulties provided she is 'relieved of the con- difficultes interieures, a condition qu'elle soit destantly growing threat from the north.
barrassee de la menace toujours plus grande
qui, vien~ du Nord.
'
We further believe that this threat can be
De plus, nouse'royons que cette menace, peut
checked it it is firmly faced by the United etre jugulee si l'Organisation des Nations' Unies
Natians. When the report of the Commissio!;1 of lui..,!ait face resolument. Lorsque le rapport de
Investigation was first submitted to the Security , la L.ommission d'enquetea ete soumis pour la,
Council, the United States thought that the meas- premiere fois au Conseil de securite, les Etatsures proposed in our resolution of 27 June would Unis pensaient que les mesures proposees dans
4

1909
be adequate to re-establish order along the north- notre resolution du 27 juin permettraient de
em Greek frontier, and that those measures were retablir I'ordre le long de 'la frontiere septen- ,
at the same time designed to offer the maximum . trionale de ~a Grece et que ces mesures seraient,
possibiHty of acceptance by the Council. They en meme temps, de nature a oft'rirau Conseii
did in fact, commans the support of nine of la possibilite de les adopter a la majorite. En
the'eleven members of the Council, clearly show- fait, elles eurent l'appui de neuf des onze meming that our views were shared by nearly all bres du Conseil, c~ qui montrait clairement que
the Governments represented. The implementa- nos vues etaient partagees par presque tous
tion of those proposals ",vas, however, frustrated ies Gouvernements representes. Toutefois, l'apby the adverse vote of one of the permanent , plication de ces propositions a ete empechee par
le vote negat~f d'un des membres permanents.
members.
.Tandis que la resolution des Etafs-Unisetait
During the debate on the United States resolution, the situation "along t4e Greek border grew soumise a la discussien, la situation le long de
worse rather than better. We be1ieve that the la frontiere grecque empirait au lieu de s'ame, evidence laid before the Council by the Commis- ' Horer. Nous croyons que ~es documents soumis
si()n' and ,the Subsidiary Group, taken in con- au Conseil par la Commission et le Groupe sub, junction with'the renewed request of the Greek • sidiaire,' consid~resconjointement avec la deGovernment and the continued defiance of the mande retteree du Gouvernement grec et avec
Sectirity C,ouncil by Albania; Bulgaria and Yugo- le defi continuel lance au Conseilde securite
slavia, now more than ever obligates the Council' par l'Albanie, la Bulgarie et la Yougoslavie,
to seek positive measures which would, if obligerit le Conseil, plus que jamais, a rechercher
adopted, have a reasonable prospect of success. des mesures positives qui, si elles etaient adoptees,
We believe that this course is, required by the auraient des chances convenables de succes. Nous
terms of the Charter, by common 1€lgic and by pensons qu'une telle decision ~'impose a nous
the necessity for' preserving thoe position of this , aux termes de 1a Charte, qu'elle nous est comCouncil commensurate with its responsibility. My t mandee par le bon sens et Par la necessite de
Government is firmly convinced that the standing sauvegarder,' pour le Conseil de securite, une
of the Security Council before the world can positio'n quisoit a la. mesure de ses responsa-,
never' be maintained by avoiding 'the issues or bilites. Mon Gouvernement est fermement .conby attempting to take measures which are obvi- vaincu que le Conseil de securite ne pourra ja- i
ously inadequate.
mais conserver le prestige dont it jouit dans le
monde en evitant d'aborder ~es problemes
de
!
front ou en, essayant de prendre des mesures
II;Ianifestement inadequates.
It is my Government's conviction iliat each
Mon Gouvernement est profondement convainmember of the- Council is under, a moral duty cu que chaque membre du Conseil a le devoir
in a case of this kind to act in accordance with moral, dans un cas de ce genre, d'agir en tenant
the facts and in conformity with t4e high prin- compte des faits et en s'inspirant des principes.
ciples of the Charter. Each one of us must live eleves de la Charte. Chacun de nous doit agir
up to the trust reposed ih us by. the -United de fal;on a justifier la confiance quinous est
Nations, for we represent the United Nations accordeepar les Nations U:nies, car nous'repreas a whole, not mere1y our own Governments. sentons- les Nations Unies dans leur ensemble,
The Vnited States, hI taking this stand, is con- et non pas seulement nos Gouvernements resvinced that it is taking a' stand which' is right pectifs. En adoptant cette attitude, les Etatsin the interests of international peace and justice. Dnis sont convaincus qu'ils adopteIlt uhe posi,Even though the efforts of the majority of the tion juste et conforme aux interets de lapaix
Council in the future shoutci be blocked, as has et de la justice inteJ:'nationales. !Meme si, dans
been the case already, by the exercise of the I'avenir, les efforts de la majorite dti Conseil'
veto, my Government does not consider that these devaient etre paralyses par l'exercice. du droit de
efforts would thereby have been fruitles·s.On ' veto, ce qui a deja ete le cas, mon Gouvernement
the .contrary, a firm stand by the majority on ne consi.dere pas que ces efforts seraient steriles~
this issue would demonstrate to the world a Au contrair.e, une attitude ferrtle de la majorite
determination of nine of the eleven members sur cette question .demontrerait au mon9-e. la
of the Council to prevent aggression, whereas determination de neuf desonze membres du
a failure by the Council to. meet the issue squarely Conseil d'empecher une agression; .a1ors que,. ,~i
would. be a signal to aggressors and potential le Conseil evitait d'aborder resolt.iment le prOaggressors in' other' places' that they could act bleme, il donnerait aux agresseurs, ou a des agreswith impunity, secure in the belief that their seurs eventue1s en d'autres lieux; I'indication
',
actions 'Y0uld .be tacitly condoned.
qu'ilspeuvent agir impunement, .forts de la certitude que letirs actes serai~nt taeitement excuses:
We most earnestly hope that the maj~rityof '
~Jous avons ie fer'me espoir que la majorite
the Council will Join in seeking action under au Conseil se decidera a agir' en .application du
Chapter VII, not only for the fundamental rea- Chapitre VII, non seulement pour les raisons
sons given above, but also for the -reason that fondamentales que j'ai indiquees precedement, •
a clear decision by ~e majority of the -Council, 'lis .aussi parce qu'une decision nette de la
even though frustrated by a veto, would provide majorite du Conseil, meme si dIe etait contrea firm foundation for effective future action carree par un veto, fournirait une base solide
w~thin the framework' of the Charter. It' is our pour Ulie action future efficace dansle cadre de
thought that, having done all in its power to la Charte., NQusestimons que, si le Conseil,
cope with the situation,. shouM the Council, for apres avoir fait tout ce qui est en son pouvoir
the ,present at least, findJtself un~bll':.tQ afford pour . !air~, 'face a ~a situatiqn, se trouve daps

b.'-.-..

.'

,.

1910

l'irnpossibilite, du moins a l'heure actue11e, de
fournir
la Grece la protection necessaire, la
question devrainevitablement, etre portee devallt
l'Assemblee generate. Si urte majorite itnportallte
du Conseil declare ou indique par' son vote que
1es trois. voisillS septentrionaux de la Grece sont
coupables d'actes d'agressioncontre la Grece et
que, en consequence~ it y a dans les Balkans
une menace contre lapaix, necessitant une action
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, cette attitude de la majorite donnera, a notre avis, unc
puissante impulsion en faveur d'une a.ction officielle par l'Assemblee generale.
'
My Government will not sit idly by while the
Mon Gouvemement n;~ pas l'lntention de rester
territorial integrity, and pdlitical independence inactif alors que'l'integrite territoriale et l'illdeof a Member-of the United Nations are chal- pendance politique d'un Etat Membre des Nations
lenged. We do not consider that our obligations Unies sont menacees. Nous 'ne considerons pas
or the obligations of the United Nations in this que nos obligations ou les obligations de I'Organi- .
,regard are ended merely because we haveseeri sation des Nations Unies a cet egard soient
, our objectives frustrated by the veto of another 'remplies du simple fait que nos buts .ont ct6
permanent member of the Council. It becomes contrecarres par le veto d'\tt1 ,autre membre perall too clear that this veto has been used in manentdu Conseil. It est de plus en plus clair que.
defence of the aggressior1s. of Yugoslavia, ce droit de veto a ete utilise pour soutenir les
A1bania and Bulgaria. Greece's right to exist is agressions de la YougQslavie, de l'Alban.i~ et de
la Bulgarie. C'est le droit de la r:rece a l'cxistence
~nvolve<J in this case. We wish to make it very
clear that we shall not hesitate to exhaust every qui est en jeu dans cette aff&lre. Nous voulons
available means within the framework of the qu'il soit parfaitement clair que nous n'hesiterons
Charter of'the United Nations to maintain inter- ' pas a epuiser tous les moyens prevus, dans le
national peace and to prQvideGreece with what- cadre de la Charte des Nations Unies, pour ma1ntenir la paix internationa.Ie et pour fournir a la
ever protection it. may need in the future.
Grece toute la protection dont elle pourra avoir
besoin dans l'avenir.
The continued failure, so fa.r, of the Security • Le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis estime que
Council to take effective action in this case be- les echecs successifs du Conseil de securite, dus
au veto de I'URSS contre toute action effective,
ca~se of the- USSR veto· cannot, in the opinion
of the United States Government, preclude indi- ne peuvent empecher une action individuelle ou
vidual or. cOllective .action by States willing to collective des Etats desireux d'agir, tant qu'ils
, act, so long as they act in accordance with the agiront conformement aux buts et aux principes
general purposes and principles of the United de l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Cela est vrai
Nations. This ,is particularly true when such tout particulil~rement lorsqu'une telle action inindividual or collective action is .in support of a dividuelle ou collective est entreprise pour appolicy or course of action which has, the approval puyer une politique ou ttne liglle de conduite qui a
of a clear preponderance of the permanent and l'approbation d'ne majorite importante des memnon-permanent members of the Security Council. bres permanents et non permanents du Conseil
de securite.,
.
Notts avons l'espoir que, dans le cas Oll l'action
In the case.o,f the blocking of Security Council
action by the veto,. we are confident that the du Conseil de securit't serait bloquee par l'exerdce
General Assembly will exercise 'its powers' to du droit de veto, l'Assemblee generale exercera
ses pouvoirs jusqu'au bout, pour la protection de
the .limit for the protection of 'Greece.
,
la Grece.
Pour sa part, la delegation des Etats-Unis
The United States for its part would be prepared to comply with any Genera'l Assehibly serait prete a se conformer it toute recommandarecommendations for the solution of this prob- tion" de l'Assembtee generale pour la solution de
lem. It.would also be prepared to co-operate ce ptobleme. EHe serait prete aussi a collaborer
with like-minded' Members of the United Nations avec les Etats Membres des Nations Unies qui
in taking any steps' which might b~come nec- partagent son opinion, pour prendre, conformcessary, within the terms of the Assembly rec- ment aux termes des recommandations de rAsommendations or within the provisions of the sembleeotl aux dispositions de la Charte, toutes
Charter, to afford Greece the. protection .to which mesures qui pourraient etre 'necessaires afin de
donner a' la Grece la protection a laquelle €!lle
we think she isentitIed under the Charter.
nous semble avoir droit en vertu de la Charte.
Le projet de resolution1 que j'ai mentionne au
I shall ha~ the draft resoluhonwhich I mel~~
debut
de mon interventi9n sera redige et distribuc
tionedat tile beginning· of this. intervention
.
written and distributed to the members of tile aux membres du Conseil.
Council. 1
Greece the necessary protection, the problem.
must inevitably be carried to the General Assem.b!y. If a substantial majority of the Coun~l
declares, by its words and its votes, that' the
three northern neighbours of Greece are guilty
of acts of', aggression \a~inst Greece and that
there therefore exists in the Baikans a threat to
the peace requiring action by the United Nations,
this action by the majority w\l1, in our opinion,
provide. a powerful impetus for formal action
by the General Assembly.

,

\

,

a

~

,

'The following is the text of the draft resolution:
Docum.ent S/486
12 August 1941
[Original 'tX': ~tlolisllJ
.
. The Security Council having considered the report of the
Commission of Investigatioll' established by resolution \ of the
Council of 19 Dcecm.ber 1946, and having considerelt the in.
formati.on supplied by the Subsidiary Group of the Commission

..

'Volel le texte du llrojet de resolution:
Document 8-/486

12 lIOt1t 1941

[Tt.flt' original /Ill pllolail']

Le Consell de stlcurit6, ayant examln6 le rap-port de In
Commission .d'en!lullte constitu6e en vertu de la t'csolulion dl\
Conseil du 19 dl!cembre 1946; llyant tlCnmin6 les renseill!llc·
ments fournls pllr le Groupe QUbsldiaire de la Commlss OIl

..

..

1911
Mr. MEvoRAH (Bulgaria) (trmt.rlated from
French): I should ~ike to make a very brief

M. MEVORAH (Bulgarie): Je desire faire 'une
tres breve declaration a la suite d'une assertion
statement concerning ~ tne assertion made some faite, il y aquelque te111ps1 par le representant de
time ago by the Greek representative.,ll He alleged la Grec&. 11 apretendu que le President du
that the Prlnie Minister of Bulgaria had issued Couseil des Ministres de. Bulgarie avait· fait une
"- a declaration regarding an immediate union of declaration concernant l'union imntediat&, envithe tllree parts .of Macedonia, contemplated by sagee par 1es representants des pays balkaniques,
the representatives of the Balkan' countries. I des trois parties de la Macedoine. rai sollicite,
asked our Government for explanations on this sur ce poi.tt des explications de notre GouverneP9int. In reply ..! received the short telegram 111ent. rai reliU en reponse le court telegramme
which I shall read to the Security Council, so dont je vais donner lecture au Conseil de securite
that'it may appear in the records:
afin qu'il figure au proces-verbal:
"With regard to· the ~endentious information
"Au sujet des nouvelles tendancieuses que 1'0n
which is still being propagated abroad regarding continue a repandre a l'etranger sur de pretertdues
statements alleged to have been made by the declarations du Premier, Ministt'e bulgare1 M.
Bulgarian Prime Minister, Mr. Dimitrov, con- Dimitroff, a regard de l'union des trois parties
cerning the union of the three parts of Mace- de la Macedoine clans le cadre de la Yougoslavie,
donia within Yugoslavia, the Bulgarian Tele- l'Agence teIegraphique bulgare est autorisee a degraphic' Agency is authorized to reiterate most clarer une {ois de plus, de la maniere la plus
categorica'11y that the Prime Minister never made categorique1 que le Premier Ministre n'a jamais
fait a qui que ce soit unetelle declaration."
any such declaration to anyone." :
With the permission of the President, I shall
Je demande au President de 111'autoriser a
add a few words on' the very serious question ajouter un. mot sur la question tres grave que
which has just been debated here. With regard l'on viellt de debattre id. En ce qui concerne le
to the draft resolution submitted by the reprei projet de resolution presente par le representant
sen.tative of Australia, I think that a number de l'Australie, 'il111e semble q~'un certain nombre
of assertions have been made here repeatedly in d'affirmations ant ete repetees .ici sans qu'il ait
disregard of the remarks which I had the honour ete tenu compte des remarques que 'nous avons
to make to the Council recently.s
eu l'honneur de presenter ces derniers jour's
di.\l:ant le Conseils.
In the first place, the Australian representa- . Tout d'abord, ie representant de r Australie
tive stated that the peace is threatened. I, stHl declare qU'il existe une menace a. la paix. Or1nous
repeat that I would like to know where this continuons a crier notre desir de savoir 011 se
threat is' to be found, where it is concealed, in trouve cette menace, 011 elle se dissimule1 en quoi
what it consists and how it can be proven.
elle cOllsiste1 par quoi eUe est prouvee.
1 have raised this question on several occarai 'maintes fois souleve 1a question; j'ai· dit
sions i I said that we were faced with a kind of qu'il s'agissait, en quelque sorte, d'un deni de
denial of justice and I complained rightly that justice1 en me plaignant a juste titre que le Conthe Council, for one reaSOll or another, has never seil, pour uile raison ou une autre, n'ait jamais
had the courage or even the interest; to examine elt, je voud·rais dire l'audace, mais il n'a jamais
the report in detail in order to see whether tI:te 111eme manifeste le desir d'entrer dans le> detail
contentions in that report were realiy justified, du -rappprt pour determiner t~i, vraiment, 1es
whether the train of thoughts and ideas was allegations de celui-ci sont justifiees, si marche
correct and wltether the conclusions proposed to des pensees et des idees a suivi la bonne orientaus were the logical reslI.lt of these contentions. . tion. et si les conclusions qu'il nou5. propose
I have never received a reply to that question. s'imposent en tant que suite logique a ce qui a
ete cpnstate. Je n:'ai jamais reliU de reponse a
cette question.
Le representant de la YQugoslavie vient d'exThe Yugoslavian representative has just reiterated- this complaint today when he declared poser a nouveatt ce grief, aujourd'hui, lorsqtt'il
formally that ne discerned no desire and no a declare formeUement qu'il ne constatflit, de .ia
effort on the part of tile Counci'l to reacll a just part d~'i Conseil, aucuit desir,, aucun effort en vue

la

of Iuvestigatio;l\ and the oral and written statements made to
the Council by Albania, Bnlgaria. Greece and Yugoslavia;
lfinds t1mt Albnnin, Dulgnria and Yugoslavill have given
lISslstnncc nnd snl'11ort to the' ll'\lerrillns fighting against the
GI,reek 90verlllncnt and have continued to do so subs~uent to
tie, pcrlod covel'cd' by the report of the Commission of Investl.
gntlonl
Detcrmines that such assistance and support'tO! the guerrilllls
by Albnnin, Bulgaria and .YUllOshwill constitnte 11 ttlr-cllt to
the pence" within the meauing of Chapter VII of the Charter;
<ialls Ullon ,Albnnia, Bulgaria and YUllo~lavla ta cease llnd
(fleslst fronl rendering nny. fUrtll(~r. assist/mce or sUl!llort ill uuy
orlll to thc gucrrillas figlltlng agninst the Greek Governnlcnt;
,DiI'ects tile Subsidiary Grou~ to report to the SecurityCounCthlt on dthe cOlllllllance of Alblll1la, Bulgaria lInd Yugoslnvl~ with
1S or er;

,Calls UPOIl Albania, BUlgaria and, Yugoslavia to eo-ollcrate
With Grcece In tile scttlemcnt of their disputes by Ilcnceful
m,eans. and to keel) the Security Council informed of the
11Io~csS of the .settlemcnt.
'I he Security Council relllains seized of the' quc.stlon and
wilt tall\! SUcll further action In connexion with the cnforcel\lent of I!S order and the settlement of thc dispute liS may from
:1II1C to t1!I\e be necessary.
No. S6~~ OffICIal Rccortis Of t',c Srcurit~ C?Jlllci,. Second Year,
··NSee J}/Nclal Records of tile Security Council, Second YClIr
0, , ~ . .

. . '

d'cnqullte, ninsl que les declarations ecrltes et orales faltes
devaut le Conseil par I'Albanie, Ir. Bulgarie, la Greee et la
Yougoslav!e;
Coustnte que l'Alban!e, la Bulgnrie et la Vougoslnvle ont
aecorde aide et soutieu aux francs-tireurs qui combat~ent III
Gouvernemimt !Ietlenlque, et que ees pnys ont continue a le
flllre apres la fin de III perlode sur laquetle porte le rapport 'de
la .~olllllllssion d'enqullte;
.
•
~dde que I'alde 'et le soutlen accordcs nUll: francs-tlreurs
p~
'Mbanie, la Bulgnrle et la Yugoslnvle constituent ulle'
mc..... il contre la palx nux termes du Chapitre VII de In
Chnrte;
,
Invite l'Alballlil, III Dutgnrle et la Youll'oslav!e a. cesser
dcsormals d'Recorder tout soutien· ou toute: aide, sous que\que
forme que ce solt, aux ,franes·tlreurs gui conlllattent le Gou.
vcrnemcnt hetlcnlque;
Prcserlt au Groupe subsldialre de falre rapport au Consell
dC"'SecurM de l'c:'Cccntion de cet ordre par I'AI6anie, la BUlgarle
et In You~slavle;
•.
Invite lAlbanle, la Bulgarle et II!. Yougoslavle 1i collaborer
nvea la Grece au rcglement de leurs differends par des moyens
paclfiqucs et n tenlr le Conseit de sccurit6 nu cournnt de la
marehe des Ilegoelatlons.
Le Conseil de ,sceurite demeure salsi de la question et prendra
toutes nouvctles lIlesures. qnl s'av<!reralent par la suite ncces·
salrcs n l'executlon de son ordre et nu l'e¥lement du, dlff>!rend. !
: Voir Ics Proccs-t/crball.\- officio's d'U COllscil d,l sCcflriM.
Deuxicme Anllce. N° 62.
~ Ibid., N0 72.
.

1912
d'arriver a une juste decision, en' vue de savoir
si, precisement, les constatations' du rapport sont
bonnes et si, logiquement, cesont ces constatations
~~~.~
.
qui nous amenentaux conclusions qui nous sont
proposees.
'
I' afso listened' most attentively to the Aus:.
Or, j'ai ecout"e avec b~auc6up d'attention le
tralian' representative. I think he repeated the representant de 1'Australie. Selon moi, il a commis
mistake made by the Greek representative: he la meme erreUr que le representant de la Grece:
objected to any eff.ort b~ng made to justify the il s'oppose a ce quesoit recherchee ce qui peut
aUeged existence of a threat to the peace. He justifier la pretendue existence d'une menace con~
merely said, in effect:' "This is a proven fact! tre la paix. I1 dit tout simplement :"C'est un fait
This exists because we all know that the threat avere! Cela existe parce que nous savons tous
exists!" He used the same method when he said que la menace existe I"~ I1 a employe la meme
that the USSR representative hitnself had admit- methode lorsqu'i! a dit que le representant de
ted: at a certain meeting that a threat existed. 1'URSS lui~meme avait admis, a l'9ccasion d'une
The matter was, therefore, beyond dispute.
seance determinee, qu'une menace existait. Done,
nous n'avons pas a en discuter.
I wish to' remind Je members of the Council . Je rappelle aux membr~s du Conseil que, 1'autre
that I made some remarks ahout this erroneous jour, j'ai precisement fait porter m'es observations
method the other day. I thought I had proved sur cette fausse methode. J'avais cru 1eur avoir
to them that they cotild not take part of an demontre qu'on ne peut pas, d'une partie de la
admission made by the USSR representative declaration par laquelle le representant de l'URSS
and draw a conclusion from it.
reconnaissait certains faits, tirer une conclusion.
Le representant de l'URSS a admis qu'une
The USSR representative admitted the existence of a threat. But he considered that this menace existait. Mais il a vtl cette menace, prethreat was precisely the, ~tension of the civil cisement, dans l'extension de la guerrecivile en
war in Greece, the presence of 'foreign troops Grece, dans la presence de troupes etrangeres dans
in that territory and the terror perpetrated cepays et dans la terreur exercee contr~ le peuple
against the Greek people. The USSR repre~~n-' grec. Le representant de 1'URSS a tire de ces
tative drew the logicai conclusions from these' premisses des conclusions logiques: ii a presente
affirmations;· he' submitted a resolutlon1 which une resolution1, exigeant justement le retrait des
rightly insisted on the withdrawal of foreign troupes etrangeres et proposant des mesures qui
troops and proposed measures which might have auraient pu mettre fin it 1'exercice d'une semblable
tetreut.
put an end to such terrorism.
How can we now take the affirmations minus
Comment se peut-il, maintenant, qu'on prenne
the premises and. say:' "We are all agreed. Let la conclusion sans 1es premisses et qu'on dise:
us' therefore proceed directly to solutions and I"Nous sommes tous d'accord. Passons done didraft proposals"? It i~ indeed illogical to allege, rectement aux solutions et aux projets de propofirst of all, that. the USSR representative admit- sition"? C'est, en v6rite, manquer, a la logique
ted the existence of a threat to the peace and que d'affirmer, tout d'abord, que le representant
then to draw the following conclusion: "Let us , de l'URSS a dit qu'il y avait une menace contre
stop there. Let us say.no more about it. That la paix et d'en co~clure: "Arretons-nous la:~N'en
is enough.. Let us prescribe the measures con- parlons plus. Cela suffit. Edictons les mesures
'
tained in the Australian proposal."
que preconise la proposition de i; Australie. ",
I. real'ly think that the question remains quite
Je crois reellement que la question. reste tout
open. If we say that peace is threatened, it is a fait ouverte. Si l'on dit que la paix est menacee,
absolutely necessary to prove this or at least il faut absolument 1e demontrer, le montrer tout
to show it. This has not been proven, however; au moins. Or, on ne le demontre pas, on le pretend '
it is merely alleged.
seulement.
I also listened with great attention to the
J'ai prete egalement la plus grande attention it
United States representative's remarks.. He' 1'interventien du representant des Etats-Unis. n
referred to the report. He said nothing new to se reportc au rapport. I1 ne dit rien de nouveau
prove the existence of a threat to -the peace; he pour affirmer 1'existence d'une, menace contre la
merely referred to the report. It is this very paix: i1 s'en remet au, rapport. Et bien, c'est j1,1stereport that we object to in the first place and ment le rapport que nous attaquons en premier
whiCh we want to be considered in detait .
lieu: dont nous reclamons l'examen detail!e.
Furthermore, if we base. ourselves on the
'En outre, si 1'on prend pour base le rapport
rel'ort itself, we shall see that it proposes a lui~meme, on constate 'qu'il propose d'agir' dans
p~ocedure which falls within, the framework of . le. cadre du<;:hapitre VI. Le rapport I].e reconnait
Chapter VI. The report does not recognize the pas 1'existence d'une menace contre la paix: il
. existence of'a threat to the peace; it merely re,connait tout simplement une situation dont la
recognizes a 'situation which, if it' is prolonged, prolongation esfsusceptible de mettre la paix en
is like1y to endanger peace, and that· is quite a danger, ce qui est tou.t' it fait different. Si l'on doit
different matter. If such a leap must be made, faire ce saut, si 1'0n doit passer directement du
if we are to pass directly fl:om Chapter VI to Chapitre VI au Chapitre VII, que 1'on nous dise '
Chapter VII, we must be told in what this threat donc en quoi consiste cette menace contre la paix
to the peace consists and precisely where it lies: et ou elle 'reside precisement: nous continuons a
,
. we still demand this.
rec1amer cette precision.
I
,.
."
'deOSlc>n, to find ont whether. the contentions. of
. the report were really cort:ect and whether these
, contentions .logically lead to the conclusions pro-

1 See Official R~cords of th~ S~c",.it:l Council, Second Year,
No. SS, lS3rd meeting•.

s Voir les p,.oc~s:'V~,.baui officids &u Conseil, de secflrite, .
Deu.'tieme Annee, N° SS, lS3eme sbnce.

>

1913
, P6uren revenir d'une mahiere plus concrete
. To revert more 'concretely to the resolution
submitted by the Australian, representative, I a la resolution. presentee par le representant de
must say· that in my hUmble opinion there is no I'Australie je dirai que, a mon, humble avis, ii n'y
logical and absolute nece~sity to base the ,first a pas necessite logique et absolue a fonder, sur
paragraph of the ~solutlOn on Chapter VII,. le Chapitre VII le premier point de la resolution.
, in order to corroborate, if I may say so, the pour corroborer, si je. puis dire, lespoints suisubsequ~nt paragraphs; The first paragraph con- , vants. Le premieFPoint fait une constatatiori: la
tains a statement: the situation prevailing On the situa;tion existant a la frontiere septentrionale de
northern frontiers of Greece constitUtes a: threat la Grece constitue une menace contre la paix aux
to the peace under the terms of· Article 39 of termes de·I'Article 39 ,de la Charte. Ouel est le
the, Charter. What is the purpose of this state- but de· cette constatation? InviteI' ks· parties
ment? -To invite the parties concerned,. namely, interessees, a savoir: la Grece, d'une part, l'AlGreece on the one hand, and Albania, Bulgaria banie, la Bulgarieetla Yougoslavie, de I'autre, a
and Yugoslavia on the other, to cease all acts of cesser tous. actes de provocation. Or, ceci ne
provoc1;ttion. This does not alter the problem in change den. a la qU<7stion. N.ous avonseu presque
any WilY. I had almost, the same idea, but -I la mem~ idee, mais nous l'envisagions formu1ee
thought of putting it in a more 'a:ccept~ble and d'une maniere plus acceptable, moins off~nsante.
less offensive manner.' It would be enough to 11 suffirait de changeI' Iegerement le libelle du
change slightly the wording of paragraph 2 of paragraphe 2 de cette proposition et de dire simthis proposal and to say simp1y: '."Invites the plement: «Invite 'les Gouvernements a' faire le
Gqvernments to do everything in their power to necessaire pour •evitt;r tout acte de provocation.
avoid all acts of ·proyocation and all offensive . tout aete offensant ou' autre".
.
acts."
.
Paragraph 3 states ,that, in accordance with
Au paragraphe 3, ort lit que, conformement a
Article 40, the Council decides that Greece, on l'Article 40, le Conseil decide que la Grece, d'Ul'le
the one hand, and Albania,· Bulgaria and Yug<?'" part, l'Albanie, 'la Bulgarie et la Y ougoslav~e,
slavia, on the other, sliould immediately begin d'autre part, doivent intreprendre immediatement
direct negotiations.· If the word "decides" were des negochitions directes. Or, si I'on remplac;ait
replaced by the expression '''invites, the parties" le'mot "decide" par l'expression "invite les par(and this is the·essence of the Polish proposal) , ties" (c'est.la l'essence de la proposition de la
the rest woulq become
quite acceptable.:
Pologne),.le reste deviendrait tout a fait accep.
,
.
table.
. '
".' I fully realize that the weak point of the AusJe vois bien ou est le point vulnerable .de la
traliaq reso1ution lies in the -terms· used and not resolution .de l'Australie:. it· reside 'precisem~nt
in its substance. If we conside]; the substance dans les termes employes, et non dan~ le fond. En
of this resolution we shall see that it would be effet, si on examine· cette resolution dans son
essence, on constate qu'll' suffirait de changeI'
enou~h to change a few words in paragraphs Z'
anfr-,3 simply to' revert to. the Polish proposal, quelques.mots aux points 2.et 3 pourenrevenir
which would be acceptable. Thus, if we were tout simplement a la proposition de 'la Pologne,
to delete the statem.ent in' paragraph 1, which laqueUe aurait pu Hre ·'acceptee. Ainsi don:c,si
is absdlutely unnecessary from the logical point 1'0n supprimait la constatationque. contient le
of view, and if we were· to do the same with paragraphe, premier et 'qui est tout a fait inuti'1e
parag!aph 4 and with the reference to the ob- du poirlt de. vue . logique, et si 1'0nagiss~it de
servers who are to be sent to the spot, the sub- meme pour le paragraphe 4, ainsi que pour les.
stance of the proposal- would be acceptable.
observateurs que 1'0n, envisage d'envoyer ta~bas.
le fond de la proposition serait acceptable. .
.'.'
.
I think we should reject both conclusions , It faudrait, a mon sens;rejet.er 'et les conclu.because they are unnecessary - and: the pro- sions, parce qu'eUes sont inutiles, et les proposi..
posals based on parag:t;aph one-because they are tions fondees sur le paragraphe premier, parce
unacceptable in substance. If the· beginning and qu'elles sontinacceptables quant a leurfond. ·E~
the end of the text were deleted, only the middle supprimant le debut et la fin du texte, il ne depart would be retained which, differently drafted meurerait que .la partie mediane, laquelle, modifiee
and based on Chapter VI, would be generally dans sa forme et fondee sur le Chapitre VI,
the same as the amended I;'qlishproposal, which equivaudra.it, en somme, a la proposition de la
could then be accepted by the Council as a whole. Pologne avec des moclifications, qui serait alors
susceptible d'etre acceptee par le Conseil dans son
ensemble.
'
That is what I wanted to add to the remarks
Voila ce que je voulais ajouter a ce que j'ai
I niade concerning .Chapter VI the day before dit avant-hier au sujet du Chapitre VI. La these '.
yesterday. The arguments I ""advanced on that que j'ai developpee, ce jour-la pour de£endre
day in defence of the application of Chapter VI l'application'du Chapitt:e VI n'a pas eteebranlee
have not been shaken by the Australian repre- par le representant de l'Australie; eUe n'a. meme
sentative; they have not been affected at all.
pas ete touchee.
.
.
.' ,
Mr. DENDRAMIS (Greece) (translated fr~m
.M. DENDRAMIS (Grece): Le President, me
French): I 111,erely want to say a few words in· pennettra-t-il de dire deux mots seulement a
reply to the Bulgarian representative's statement. la suite de la declaration faite par le representant
I want to point out that the statements attributed 'de la Bulgarie? Je desire souligner queJes declarato.Mr. Dimitrov were published in several new~­ tions attribuees a M. Diinitroff ont ete publiees
papers. They were, given to a, correspondent of a dans plusieurs journaux. Elles ont ete donnees a
S~edish newspaper' Goteborgs Handels Och un correspondant du journal sue~ois Goteborgs
Sf/arts Tidning. They were also given to the Hamdels Och Sjofarts Tidning. Elles ont egale-

b,

1914
corFespond~nt of the Daily Telegr.aph· at Sofia.'
They were published, on ,the fronfp::I,geof the
Bulgarian paper Rabotnitches.ko Dela, in the 11
JUly issue. They were reproduced' by the- paper
'\ .Politika, on 17 July; and were broadcast by the
Belgrade radio station on 17 July. 'It was only
today that we received some ,belated items of
information.
.

The meeting rose' at 12.55 p.m.

merit ete donnees au correspondant du Daily
Telegraph a Sofia. Elles ont ete publiees en pret:: ierepage du journal bulgar~ Rabotni-tchesko
Delo, dans le numero du Il juillet. Elles ont ete
reproduites 'par ie journal Politika a la date du
17 juillet,,~t elles ontete diffusees par la station'
radiophonique ,de Belgrade le 17 juillet. Ce n'est
qu'aujourd'hui que nous parviennent des elements tardifs.
La seance est lervee a12 h. SS.

HUNDRED ANDEIGHTY·FIRST
MEETING

CENT-QUATRE·VINGT.UNIEME
SEANCE

,Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Tuesday, i2 A:ugust 1947, at 3.QO p.m.
_ President: :M:r.':F. EL-KHOURI (Syria).
I'
Present: The representatives of the following
c~>untries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France" Poland, . Syria, Union of
Soviet. Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of. America.
.

T;nue a L,ake Success, New-York,.
le'mardi
12 aout 1947, a 15 heures.
-'
Pr-esident: M. F. E,L-KHOUR£ (Syrie).
Presents:Les, representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, 'Chine, ColOlilbie,
France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
.d'Amerique.

293. Provisional agenda

293. Ordre du jo~ provisoire
Adoption de l'ordre du jour.,
La question indonesienne:
a) Lettre, en date du 30 juillet 1947, adressee
au Secretaire general par ie representant
par interim de l'Australie au Conseil de
securite, (document S/449)1;
•
b) Lettre,en date du 30 juillet 1947, adressee
au President du Conseil de securite par
I'agent de liaison permanent de l'Inde
(document S/447)~.

,

1. A90ption of the agenda.1.
2.
2. The Indonesian questiofl:
(a) Letter dated 30 July 1947 from the
acting repreSientative of Australia on the
Security. Council addressed to the Secre- .
tary-Genera!l (document S/449);1
(b) Letter dated 30 July frbm the Permanent
Liaison Officer of India addressed to the
'President of the' Sectfrity ,Council
(document S/447).2

(

2940 Adoption of the agen~a
The. agenda was adopted.

294. Adoption de I' ordre du jour.'
L'ordre du jour est adopte.

295. Continuation' of the discU8sionon

295. SQite de la discussion sur.a

the Indonesian question

question indonesienne

At the invitation of the President, ¥r. Sen,
representative of' India, and Mr. van Kleffens,
representative of' the Netherlands, took their
places at the Council table.
The PRESIDENT: A letter dated 8 AugUst 1947,
addressed to the President of the' Security
Council, has just been received from qeneral
Romulo, representative of the Philippines,3 asking
that the Council, should give renewed considera~ion to the request which was previously
submitted at the hundred and seventy-eighth
meeting,'" namely, that he should be allowed to
" take part in the discussions on the Indonesiant
,question..- However, the letter cannqt be discussed or voted upon except at the request of a
member of the Council.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. Sen, representant de I'!nd'e, et M. vg,n Kleffens, representant'
des Pays~Bas, prennernt place a.la table d~t Conseil.

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second Year,
Supplement No. 16, Annex 40.
Ibid., SUPJllement No. 16, Annex 41.
• See OfficIal Records of the Security Council, Second Year,
No. 72.
• The following is the text of the letter and of'the memorandum
enclosed therein:
'
Document S/485
12 August 1947
[Original text:' English]
, In accordance witli instructions received from my Govern.
m.ent, I ,have the honour to request reconsideration by the
Security Council. of its decision of 7 August 1947 denying the
application of the Philippines to participate in the discussion
of the Indonesian CJ,uestion.
My Government IS taking this step in the belief that the vote
on that occasion, which stood at 6 in favour, none against,
with 5, abstentions, indicated the possibility that further con"

Le PRESIDENT (tradui-t· de ,I'anglais): Le Conseil de securite vient de recevoir une lettre, en
'date du 8 aoitt 1947, adressee au President par le
general Romulo, representant des Philippines3, et
demandant au Conseil d'examiner a nouveau la
requete qui avait deja etepresentee lors de la
cent soixante-dix-huitierne seance4 ,a savoir, d'etre
autorise a participer aux deliberations relatives a
la question indonesienne. Toutefois, nous ne pouvons discuter cette lettre, ni la mettre aux voix,
que si un membre du Conseil le demande.
1 Voir les Proces-'lIerblUlJ: officiels ~ Conseil de secUf'ite,
Deweieme Annee, Sup.p)ement N° 16, Annexe 40.
• Ibill., Supplc!ment N° 16, Annexe 41.
• Voir les Proces-'lIerbauJ: officiels du, Conseil de, securite, Deux.
ieme Annee, N° 72.
3 Void le, texte de cette leftre ,et du memorandum qui I'accom·
pagne:
12 aout 1947
[Texte original- e;: anglais]
Conformement awe instructions que ;'ai rec;ues de mon Gouvernement, j'ai l'honneur de demander au Conseil de
securite de revenir sur la decision gu'iI a prise le 7 aout 1947
de -ne pas accc!der a la demande des Phillppines de participer
a la discussion de la situation indonesienne.
Cette ,d"marche de mon Gouvernement procede de la convi.c·
tion que le vote qui a eu lieu ~ cette occasion avec '6 VD'"
pour, zero contre et 5 abstentions a donne I'imp,ression qu'un

'.

SALES AGENTS OF THE UNITED NATIONS' PUBLICATIONS
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES

I ARGENTINA-,-ARGENtINE
.

Editorial Sudamerlcana S.A.
AIsina 500

BUEN9SAmES

AUSTRALlA-AUSTRALIE
H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
SYDNEY, N. S. W.
BELGIUM-BELGIQU~

Agence et Messagerles de la
Presse, S. A. '
14·22 rue du Pelsi!
BRUXELLES

BOllVIA-BOllVIE
Libreria Cieutffica y Literaria
Avenida. 16 de JOOo,216
Casilla 972
LA PAZ

CANADA
The Ryersou Press
299 Queen Street West
TORONTO

CHILE-CHill
Edmundo Pizarro
Merced 846
SANTIAGO
'The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
SHANGHAI

COLOMBIA-COlOMBIE
Lihrerin Latina Ltda.
Apartado Aereo 4011
.BOGOTA

COSTA RICA-COSTA-RICA
Trejos Hermanos
Apartado 1313
SAN JosE

":E;Ieftheroudakis"
Libtairie internationale
Place de la Constitution
ATHENES

GUATEMALA
Jose Goubaud
Gouhaud & Cia. Ltda.
Sucesor
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUATEMALA

HAITI
Max Bouchereau'
Librairie "A la Caravelle"
Boite postaIe 111-B
PORT-AU-PRINCE
BokaverzIun Sigfusar Eymundsonnar
Austurstreti 18
REYKJAVIK

INDiA-INDE
Oxford Book & StatioBery Company
Scindia House
NEwDELm

IRAN
Bongahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
TEHERAN

LEBANON-LlBAN

CZECHOSLOVAKIATCHECOSLOVAQUIE
.

DENMARK-DANEMARK
Einar Munksgaard
N9$rregade 6
K,7JBENHAVN

DOMINICAN REPUBLICREPUBlIQUE DOMINICAINE
Lihreria Dominicllua
CsUe Mercedes No. 49
.
Apartado 656
CiUDAD TgY.JILLO

ECUADO~-EQUATEUR

Muiioz. HerDlanos y Cia.
Nueve de Octubre 703
Casilla 10·24
GUFIAQUIL

I:GYPT-EGYPTE
Librairie "La Renaissance d'Egypte"
9 Sh. AdIy Pasn2
CAffiO

ETHIOPIA-ETHIOPIE
Agence etliiopienne de publicite

P • ted in the U.s~

GREECE-GREeE

Mackenzie & Mackenzie .
the Bookshop
BAGHDAD

La Casa BeIga
Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LA lIABANA

P.O. Box 8

Editions A. Pedone
13, rue SoufHot
PARIS, Ve

IRAQ-IRAK

CUBA

ADDIS·ABEBA

FRANCE

ICELAND-ISLANDE

CHINA-CHINE

F. Topic
Narodni Trlda 9
PRAHA1

FINLANn..-FlNL4NDE
Akateemmen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI

Librairle universelle
BEYROUTH

LUXEMBOURG
Librairie J. Schummer
Place Guillallme
LUXEMBOURG
NETHERLANDS-PAYS~BAS

N. V. Marunus' Nijhoff
Lange Voorhout 9
'S·GRAVENHAGE

NEW ZEALAND.-NO.UV.ilLE-ZELANDE
Cordon & Gotch, Ltd.
Warlng Taylor Street
WELLINGTON
Unitt'd Nations Association of
NewZeaIand

P. O. 1.011, G.P.O.
WELLINGTON

NICARAGUA
Ramiro Ramirez V.
Agenda. de Publicl1ciones
MANAGUA, D. N.

NORWAY-NORVEGE
Johan Grundt Tanum Forlag
Kr. Augustgt. 7A
OSLO

Price in the U.S.A.: 50 cents

PERU-PEROU
Libreria internacional del Peru,
S.A.
Casilla 1417
LIMA

PHILIPPINES
D~ P. Perez Co.

132 Riverside
. ~AN JUAN, IbzAr.

POLAND-POLOGNE
Spotdzielna Wydawnicza
"Czytelnik"
38 Poznanska
WAIlSZAWA
"

SWEDEN-SUEDE
A;·B. C. E. Fritzes Kongl.
HofhokhandeI
Fredsgatan 2
STOCKHOLM

SWITZERLAND-SUISSE
Librairie Payot S; A.
LAUSANNE, GENEVE, VEVEY,
MONTREUX, NEUCHATEL,
BERNE, BASEL
Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17
ZURICH I

SYRIA-SYRIE
Librairie universelle
DAMAS

TURKEv.-TURQUIE
Librairle 'Hachette
469 IstikIal Caddesi
BEYOGLU-IsTANBUL

UNION OF SOUTH AFRICAUINION SUD-AFRICAINE
Central News Agency
Commissioner & Rissik Sts.
JOHANNESBURG and at CAPE'fOWN
and DURBAN

UNITED KINGDOMROYAUME-UNI
H. M. Stationery Office
P. O. Box 569
LONDON, S.E. 1
.and at H.M.S.O. Shops in
LONDON, EDINBURGH, MANCHESTER.
CARDIFF, BELFAST, BIRMINGHAM
and BRISTOL
'

UNITED STATES OF AMERICAETATS·UNIS D'AMERIQUE
International Documents Service
Columbia University'Press
2960 Broadway
NEW YORK 27, N. Y.

URUGUAY
Oficina de Representaci6n de
Editorlales
Av. 18 de JuIio 1333 Esc. 1
MONTEVIDEO

VENEZUELA
Escritoria Perez Machado
Conde a Piiiango 11 '
CARACAS

YUGOSLAVIA-YOUGO$LAVIE
Drzavno Preduzece
Jugoslovenska Knjiga
Moskovska U1. 36
BEOGRAD

[49&1

March 1949-,30
