United Nations

S/PV.6643

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6643rd meeting
Monday, 31 October 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Ahamed
Mr. Salam
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Mashabane
Ms. Hendrie
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Post-conflict peacebuilding

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-57138 (E)

*1157138*

S/PV.6643

is required, given the multitude of actors who play a
role in those efforts.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

Let me start with the areas where progress has
been made, beginning with our efforts to create more
cohesive United Nations senior leadership teams and to
respond more rapidly to leadership gaps.

The agenda was adopted.
Post-conflict peacebuilding
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Ms. Judy Cheng-Hopkins, Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacebuilding Support, to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Her Excellency
Ms. Sylvie Lucas, Chairperson of the peacebuilding
configuration for Guinea and Permanent Representative of
Luxembourg, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. Judy Cheng-Hopkins.
Ms. Cheng-Hopkins: Today I have the honour to
update the Council on behalf of the Secretary-General
on two peacebuilding agendas for action that stem
from, first, the 2009 report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) and last year’s progress report
(S/2010/386*), and secondly, the 2010 report on
women’s participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466).
As requested by this Council last year, I am providing
an oral briefing today, but next year we will prepare a
written report.

First, a collaborative approach is now in place
that supports the eventual selection of complementary
leadership teams. Secondly, since 2009 more than
20 senior United Nations officials have been quickly
dispatched to the field as temporary senior leaders in
the immediate post-conflict period. Such arrangements
have become standard practice for the Department of
Political Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, and they help to minimize the loss of
strategic momentum during critical periods.
The seamless leadership model used in Libya is
also an example of good practice. The senior official
leading the pre-assessment phase was subsequently
appointed Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral. That approach allowed Special Representative
Martin to hit the ground running and to initiate the
mission planning process, as he was already deeply
familiar with the issues and the national actors on the
ground.
However, there are also extremely challenging
crisis response and peacebuilding needs in countries
that do not benefit from a Security Council-mandated
mission. Relatively calm countries that suddenly
become volatile require the same sense of urgency and
attention, and sometimes circumstances will require a
quick adjustment to the United Nations leadership.

Before I begin, I would like to pay tribute to this
year’s Nobel Peace Prize laureates — President Ellen
Johnson Sirleaf and Leymah Gbowee of Liberia and
Tawakkul Karman of Yemen. We draw inspiration from
them and echo the Nobel Committee’s recognition of
their “non-violent struggle for the safety of women and
for women’s rights to full participation in
peacebuilding work”.

The 2009 report also emphasized the need to
strengthen support for capacity development from the
outset. That will be reflected in the upcoming review
of the integrated mission planning guidelines in 2012,
which will contain guidance on how to ensure that
national perspectives and capacities are taken into
account from the outset of each planning process.

It is two years since the report on peacebuilding
in the immediate aftermath of conflict was issued. The
Council will recall that the report’s agenda aims to
improve the United Nations system’s support to
national peacebuilding efforts in the critical first two
years following the end of the main conflict and that it
was developed with the understanding that a
coordinated United Nations approach to peacebuilding

We can also report progress in galvanizing the
United Nations system and Member States around the
common goal of improved civilian expertise in
peacebuilding operations. Under-Secretary-General
Susana Malcorra has been leading and chairing a
steering committee that oversees the system-wide
follow-up to the independent 2011 civilian capacity
report (see S/2011/85). The Secretary-General has

2

11-57138

S/PV.6643

prioritized its recommendations, focusing on national
capacity, partnerships, accountability and agility. One
of the most urgent priorities is to explore modalities to
broaden the scope for deploying personnel provided by
Governments and other entities, particularly those from
the global South, so that specialized expertise can more
easily be made available to United Nations field
presences in key gap areas.
We are also continuing our internal efforts to
clarify roles and responsibilities within the United
Nations system for core peacebuilding functions. Since
2009, the Secretary-General’s Policy Committee has
completed six reviews on the following areas: first, the
reintegration of refugees and internally displaced
persons; secondly, security sector reform; thirdly,
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration;
fourthly, mine action; fifthly, mediation; and sixthly,
electoral assistance.
The reviews have addressed some key challenges,
exposed others and set a forward agenda for additional
work. They have also revealed that the constructive
and consistent engagement of Member States,
including on how they mandate and fund us, is a sine
qua non for effective delivery in the field.

pleased to announce that Ms. Clare Lockhart — who,
with Mr. Ashraf Ghani, co-authored Fixing Failed
States — has agreed to provide the keynote address.
The other new issue on the agenda is drug
trafficking and organized crime. This issue has risen to
the peacebuilding agenda, as it undermines
peacebuilding efforts and poses a direct threat to
security and stability. The Council’s recent discussions
on Afghanistan, Somalia and West Africa reflect that
alarming trend.
Earlier this year, the Secretary-General
established a task force on transnational organized
crime to bring the United Nations system’s capacities
together around that common concern. The West Africa
Coast Initiative — WASI — is one positive example of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs working together to
support the Economic Community of West African
States and the efforts of national Governments in the
region.

Regarding partnership with the World Bank, its
World Development Report 2011 on conflict, security
and development has created a new impetus for
collaboration. We are truly hopeful that the Bank’s new
fragile-States hub in Nairobi will link up more
effectively with United Nations peacebuilding efforts
in the field, including in the countries on the agenda of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).

The report on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict also reinforced the importance of
innovative approaches to funding for peacebuilding. In
that regard, I am pleased that countries of the
Organization
for
Economic
Cooperation
and
Development are finalizing new guidelines for
transition financing. In addition, the upcoming HighLevel Forum on Aid Effectiveness in Busan, Republic
of Korea, will discuss the usefulness of transition
compacts as accountability tools among donors,
conflict-affected States and the United Nations.

The Secretary-General’s 2010 progress report
(S/2010/386*) stressed the importance of two emerging
peacebuilding issues: first, organized crime and drug
trafficking,
and
secondly,
natural
resource
management.

The Peacebuilding Fund continues to demonstrate
value-added, especially in responding very quickly to
peacebuilding opportunities as they arise, with recent
allocations to Kyrgyzstan, Côte d’Ivoire, the Sudan and
South Sudan.

Natural resources in fragile States are often
powerful drivers of conflict, not, unfortunately, of
peace, prosperity, growth and job creation. In that
respect, let me mention that, as part of the Stakeholders
Event of the Peacebuilding Fund on 22 November, my
office will host a round-table discussion with private
sector representatives from the mining and minerals
sector, post-conflict Government representatives, nongovernmental organization activists and other experts
on ways to support the use of natural resources for
economic recovery in post-conflict countries. I am

I should like to say a word about the
Peacebuilding Commission. The very timely and
relevant review of the peacebuilding architecture last
year has generated significant momentum that has
reinvigorated the PBC’s working methods and focused
it on improving impact in the field. Work is also
progressing in developing benchmarks or indicators for
countries, when the time is right, to transition out of
the PBC agenda.

11-57138

3

S/PV.6643

I will now turn to the Secretary-General’s
September 2010 report on women’s participation in
peacebuilding (S/2010/466). I wish to highlight that the
almost perfect working relationship between the
Peacebuilding Support Office and UN-Women has
made the preparation of this update almost effortless,
as are all our other joint endeavours. As will be
recalled, the rationale behind this agenda is to ensure
that women are central to peacebuilding — not merely
to secure women’s rights, but because it is good
peacebuilding practice. Quite simply, ignoring the role
of women exposes us to a greater chance of failure.
This agenda focuses on seven critical areas that, if
implemented, would ensure that women have the
opportunity to play a crucial role in making peace
sustainable.
The first area of progress is in mediation and
political dialogue; gender expertise is provided more
systematically to ongoing conflict resolution processes
and through the inclusion of specialized gender
expertise in mediation rosters.
Secondly, I am pleased to report that there is
broad agreement among the United Nations, the
European Union and the World Bank on the importance
of integrating gender into post-conflict needs
assessments.
The third area of progress is in the rule of law.
Examples include the provision of legal support and
referral services to women in Burundi, the Central
African Republic, Iraq and Somalia, and mobile court
systems to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
With regard to sexual and gender-based violence,
special courts have been established in Liberia and
specialized expertise provided to commissions of
inquiry in Côte d’Ivoire and Libya, while training to
prevent and investigate sexual and gender-based crimes
is being rolled out in Member States and in United
Nations missions.
The PBF-funded, United Nations Development
Programme-implemented project in Sierra Leone,
supporting the All Political Parties Women’s
Association in order to increase solidarity among
women across party lines and to encourage political
coalitions around issues of interest to women is
impressive and progressive. Unfortunately, initiatives
such as these are still rare. The United Nations
electoral technical assistance includes a focus on
assessing the potential application of temporary special

4

measures or quotas for women in public office, and
more will be done to improve women’s representation.
I will now turn to areas where change needs to be
accelerated. First, we need to do better in
comprehensively engaging and targeting women in
economic recovery efforts. We also need more women
mediators in peace processes, including from the
United Nations, which did not appoint any women
special envoys or chief mediators last year.
Last but not least is our common commitment to
allocating 15 per cent of United Nations-managed
peacebuilding funds to projects that further gender
equality and women’s empowerment as their principal
objective. The Peacebuilding Fund is doing its part to
catalyse more innovative approaches, and recently
launched a $5-million gender promotion initiative.
Let me reiterate that these two agendas for action
in peacebuilding initiatives were devised as tools to
improve our combined support to nationally led efforts.
The agenda for peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict is having a promising impact on
the ground. Of course, we cannot compare the United
Nations to the private sector, but surely many of these
initiatives are increasing our effectiveness and creating
a more businesslike approach.
History demonstrates that peacebuilding takes at
least a generation to become sustainable. With these
new tools and a culture shift in place, we may be able
to help post-conflict countries beat the odds.
The President: I thank Ms. Cheng-Hopkins for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Lucas.
Ms. Lucas: I have the honour of addressing the
Council on behalf of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC).
In its previous considerations of the SecretaryGeneral’s reports on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304) and women’s
participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466), the
Security Council sought the continued engagement of
the Peacebuilding Commission as the SecretaryGeneral embarked on the implementation of the
recommendations contained in both reports. At the
same time, the reports anticipated the completion of the
2010 review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, which generated a number of important

11-57138

S/PV.6643

recommendations aimed at further strengthening the
Commission’s role in and impact on the evolving
United Nations peacebuilding agenda. The Council
welcomed
the
review
and
encouraged
the
implementation of relevant recommendations.
In response, the PBC adopted an action oriented
road map for actions, focusing on reinforcing the
Commission’s impact in the field. Therefore and with
an expanded agenda of six countries and its ongoing
efforts to adapt its tools of engagement with the
countries on its agenda, the PBC is increasingly
becoming a central political platform to promote a
shared and coherent United Nations peacebuilding
agenda.
From the Commission’s particular experience of
concrete peacebuilding work on the ground, I would
like to highlight how the PBC’s activities are
complementary to the Security Council’s work and
how the Council can benefit from the Commission’s
experience and advice to the countries under its
consideration and beyond.
Being a creation of the General Assembly and the
Security Council, and with some of its members
designated by the Economic and Social Council, the
PBC has a unique convening power that allows it to
bring together interested and committed Member
States, as well as competent and relevant actors from
inside and outside the United Nations system. In the
years since its inception, the PBC has been able to help
build a knowledge base in matters of post-conflict
peacebuilding, including on issues of interest to the
Security Council, whether regarding the link between
peacebuilding and peacekeeping, the preparation of
elections in the countries on its agenda, or concerning
issues of regional relevance such as the fight against
organized crime and drugs in West Africa.
In this regard, the country-specific configurations
for Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone
organized a joint meeting this June, together with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, to deepen
their knowledge of the problem and seek common
solutions to a problem affecting all four countries. The
PBC, especially through its country configurations in
collaboration with the Working Group on Lessons
Learned, stands ready to present more regular reports
documenting its findings to the Council and to deepen
discussions with the Council on issues on the Council’s
agenda, such as resolutions or statements regarding the

11-57138

PBC agenda countries that have a significant impact on
the situation on the ground. Another way to deepen the
relationship is to have the country-specific
configuration Chairs participate in the Security Council
Working Groups when they deal with the country
concerned, such as the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict.
The PBC is developing a body of experience with
United Nations engagement in a range of settings with
a variety of field presences, from full-fledged
peacekeeping missions, such as in Liberia, to
integrated peacebuilding offices, such as in Sierra
Leone or the Central African Republic, to Resident
Coordinator-led United Nations presence, such as in
Guinea. That engagement, and the lessons learned from
it, could be used to enhance policy processes that are
also of direct interest to the Council.
In addition to the follow-up of the 2009 report by
the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict , a similar reporting
structure could also be applied to the civilian capacity
review, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) and the Peacebuilding Support Office (PBSO)
early peacebuilding strategy or the follow-up to the
World Bank’s 2011 World Development Report. The
Chair of the Central African Republic configuration
has written to Under-Secretary-General Malcorra,
suggesting that she take the Central African Republic
and other PBC agenda countries as pilot countries for
the civilian capacity review.
The PBC can help to provide an integrated and
holistic perspective for taking into account the
interdependence between security and development, as
well as the social and economic situation on the ground
in the countries on its agenda. It has the mandate and
the composition to address development issues in a
country in transition, in particular when a
peacekeeping mission withdraws. Peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, as has often been affirmed in this
Chamber, and as is reaffirmed in the new DPKO and
PBSO early peacebuilding strategy, should not be seen
as sequential activities. Peacebuilding activities are
essential to establishing the basis for sustainable peace
and should start at the earliest stages of United Nations
engagement, regardless of the form of the United
Nations presence.
Country-specific configurations are capable of
providing continued political attention to situations not

5

S/PV.6643

constantly on the Council’s agenda. In the case of
Sierra Leone, the PBC played a supporting role with
respect to monitoring the aftermath of the March 2009
violence and will be called upon again over the course
of the coming year as the elections process moves
forward. That is being done in a spirit of partnership,
national ownership and mutual accountability for
results, which permits the establishment of a
relationship going beyond what the Council, with its
very busy agenda, is able to sustain.
By bridging the different points of the continuum
between conflict, early recovery, transition and
development, the PBC country-specific configurations
can play an essential role for strategic coordination.
With its mandate from the General Assembly and the
Security Council, and given its composition and tools,
the PBC can encourage and pursue coherence and
coordination among the various actors of the United
Nations system as well as bilateral actors, including on
the ground, and improve relations between
Headquarters and the field, all the while respecting the
sovereignty and ownership of the process by the
country concerned.
In Guinea-Bissau and the Central African
Republic, known as “aid orphans”, the work of the
PBC country-specific configuration has helped to
increase the number of partners engaged with the
country, both in terms of bilateral and multilateral
cooperation. The Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries, for example, have
developed a stronger cooperation with Guinea-Bissau,
especially with regard to security sector reform and
issues that require a regional approach, such as drugtrafficking.
In the case of the Central African Republic, the
World Bank, the African Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the Central
African Economic and Monetary Community have
deepened their cooperation with the Central African
Republic. African countries have also stepped up their
bilateral cooperation with Guinea-Bissau and the
Central African Republic.
In Sierra Leone, the PBC has explicitly aligned
its work on the second Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (PRSP), the “Agenda for Change”. In Burundi,
the PBC facilitated the timely support to the national
authorities in the second PRSP process by providing an

6

expert in order to ensure that strategic planning was
done in a more conflict-sensitive manner.
In addition to more coherence and harmonization,
the country-specific configurations are also playing an
increasingly important role in terms of resource
mobilization.
The
Central
African
Republic
configuration managed to mobilize resources for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and for
the elections. It organized a high-level event in the
margins of the 2010 Summit on the Millennium
Development Goals with the World Bank and a round
table in Brussels with the Central African Republic
Government and support from the World Bank, the
United Nations Development Programme and the
African Development Bank to raise awareness for the
priorities in the draft second PRSP.
In the case of Guinea-Bissau, the country-specific
configuration has been providing enhanced support to
the country in its efforts to address major economic
imbalances, as well as advocacy for the recognition
that Guinea-Bissau had reached the completion point
of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative. The
World Bank, the African Development Bank and the
International Monetary Fund have all taken steps to
increase resources in key sectors. As the Chair of the
Guinea configuration, I am working with partners on
solutions to fund the retirement of some 4,000 military
personnel from the Guinean army to kick-start the
security sector reform that is a crucial element of
Guinea’s peacebuilding agenda.
However, we have to recognize that we need to
do more in terms of mobilization of partners and
resources to increase the relevance of the PBC for the
countries on its agenda. Efforts are being undertaken
through the working group on lessons learned to pursue
more effective resource mobilization and to improve
coordination among various actors in order to achieve
a more efficient engagement of the PBC.
As mentioned earlier, the PBC has started to
build partnerships with regional and subregional
bodies, most notably the African regional economic
communities, ECOWAS in the context of Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone, the East
African Community in the context of Burundi, and the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community in the context of the Central African
Republic. The same applies to the international

11-57138

S/PV.6643

financial institutions, like the African Development
Bank, which we as the PBC Chairs Group will visit in
Tunis at the beginning of November. We are happy to
share the results of our consultations with those bodies
with the Security Council and to contribute to
deepening and strengthening the partnerships between
the Council and those increasingly important regional
actors.
Finally, the PBC has a clear role in bringing
about the conditions that allow for the withdrawal of
peacekeeping missions, as well as the graduation of
countries off the PBC agenda. In new contexts, like
Guinea, the PBC’s work to accompany the process of
consolidating peace and democracy is also a way to
help the country to stay out of conflict and thus off the
Security Council’s agenda and to contribute more
broadly to the stabilization of the subregion. In the
context of Siena Leone, the PBC will have an
important role to play in ensuring that the United
Nations long and costly investment in the country is
not subject to unnecessary political and financial
shocks when the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone withdraws and
the United Nations moves to a Resident Coordinatorled presence focusing on development.
As foreseen by the founding resolution 1645
(2005), the Security Council
“recommends that the Commission terminate its
consideration of a country-specific situation when
foundations
for
sustainable
peace
and
development are established or upon the request
by national authorities of the country under
consideration”. (resolution 1645 (2005), para.
22)
In the context of Burundi, first discussions have
begun on a further change in approach of the PBC
engagement and on a path towards leaving the PBC
agenda, although several members of the configuration
think that would be premature. The upcoming visit of
the Chair of the country configuration to Burundi will
provide an opportunity to further pursue those
discussions.
The President: I thank Ms. Lucas for her
briefing.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to thank Ms. Judy Cheng-Hopkins, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacebuilding Support, for her

11-57138

comprehensive briefing on the overall peacebuilding
agenda. I also thank Ms. Sylvie Lucas, Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission configuration for Guinea,
for her remarks.
We have emphasized many times that clear
mandates, strategic planning, coherent implementation
and timely and predictable funding are critical
elements of peacebuilding. The thematic debate
organized during our presidency of the Security
Council in January (see S/PV.6472) highlighted the
importance of national ownership and institutionbuilding for peacebuilding efforts and ensuring
sustainable peace.
Building domestic capacities and strengthening
domestic institutions are both included in the
recommendations of the civilian capacities review.
Moreover, comprehensive domestic peacebuilding
strategies are developed in close cooperation between,
on the one hand, the international community, which
often provides its technical and financial expertise in
the process, and post-conflict Governments, to ensure
domestic ownership and leadership, on the other hand.
The contribution of United Nations peacekeeping
to early peacebuilding is undeniable. For that reason, it
is important to clearly define what kind of
peacebuilding activities can be developed at the early
stages of a peacekeeping mission and which should be
part of short-term or long-term priorities. Therefore,
the integrated mission planning process needs to be
improved in order to assist United Nations field
missions and country teams to prioritize, while
domestic capacity assessment should be taken more
into account.
The United Nations must improve its expertise in
working with civilians on peacebuilding. Implementing
measures that support domestic capacity development
and developing policy dialogue with donors on
innovative approaches to the programming and funding
peacebuilding is of vital importance. The United
Nations system must clearly organize the roles and
responsibilities it carries for dealing with core
peacebuilding functions.
The Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund play an important role, in
particular for country-specific configurations, since
their peacebuilding strategies support activities related
to creating environments conducive to sustainable
peace and development. We are convinced that the

7

S/PV.6643

high-level stakeholders meeting of the Peacebuilding
Fund to be held in November will bring about concrete
recommendations on how better to utilize existing
domestic resources for economic recovery in postconflict situations.
The role of the Peacebuilding Fund is significant
with regard to providing a quick response to immediate
peacebuilding needs and post-conflict peacebuilding
opportunities. The recent debate on security sector
reform (see S/PV.6630) emphasized the important role
of the Peacebuilding Fund and funds allocated for this
purpose, not only in United Nations field missions but
also in non-mission settings.
We acknowledge the importance of the World
Bank-United Nations Fragility and Conflict Partnership
Trust Fund. Although it has been operational for just
over a year, the Fund continues to support
peacebuilding initiatives in the field as well as
exchanges of personnel between the two sponsoring
institutions.
We emphasize that timely, predictable and
sustainable funding for peacebuilding is the key to
success. Innovative approaches to peacebuilding
funding need to be explored and supported. Last year’s
review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture brought to light new possibilities for the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission. Improved
methods of work contributed to better interaction
aimed at strengthening impact in the field.
To that end, cooperation between conflictaffected States and donors in terms of support for
peacebuilding needs to be more structured, and
efficiency needs to be supported. Lessons learned and
previous experiences should be taken into
consideration. One-size-fits-all solutions should be
avoided, while the specificity of each country must be
taken into account.
This year’s annual debate on women and peace
and security (see S/PV.6642) stressed important issues
related to peacebuilding, namely, ensuring and
increasing the role of women in peace processes,
conflict mediation and resolution, providing women
with a role in post-conflict needs assessment and
planning, granting women access to justice and
including women in economic recovery processes.
We are therefore of the view that UN-Women and
the Peacebuilding Support Office should cooperate

8

closely on implementing activities on the ground. The
comprehensive economic engagement of women in
economic recovery is not enough. The political
participation of women needs to be a high priority,
while more peacebuilding funds for women’s
empowerment and gender equality should be allocated.
In conclusion, we firmly believe that only the
sustained and concerted efforts of all relevant actors
can provide meaningful and tangible results in the
peacebuilding arena. We should spare no effort in that
endeavour.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We express our
sincere appreciation to the Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacebuilding Support, Ms. Judy Cheng-Hopkins,
and to the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
configuration for Guinea, Ms. Sylvie Lucas, for their
briefings.
Today’s briefing provides an opportunity to
reflect on what we have done as an Organization to
enhance our peacebuilding efforts and continue to
explore further measures to accomplish this important
task. At the centre of peacebuilding efforts lies the
crucial understanding that peacebuilding is the
responsibility of Member States. While we believe that
national ownership is at the core of the success of any
peacebuilding initiative, that does not negate the fact
that the international community has the responsibility
to assist and advise countries, based on their priorities
and policies, on how to consolidate and sustain newly
fragile peace. Consequently, the United Nations should
acknowledge already existing national programmes and
build on them, instead of introducing new programmes,
which are usually complicated and cumbersome.
While we are pleased that progress has been
made in the area of leadership for peacebuilding, we
believe that more can and will be done. The progress
report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2010/386)
identified challenges such as poor coordination or the
lack of it, accountability and effectiveness. The
complexity of peacebuilding tasks requires better
coordination, especially in the field. In the selection
and deployment of leadership, greater flexibility that
takes into account the uniqueness of circumstances
should be maintained.
Furthermore, we commend the action taken to
strengthen cooperation between United Nations
Headquarters and country teams on the ground.

11-57138

S/PV.6643

However, we believe that more needs to be done to
provide support to country-level leadership in order to
enhance coordination, effectiveness and accountability.
South Africa recognizes the importance of the
close cooperation between the United Nations and
other international organizations, especially the Bretton
Woods institutions. The World Bank’s World
Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security and
Development shows that more collaboration between
the United Nations and those institutions could
optimize our peacebuilding efforts. In that connection,
we have noted with appreciation the World Bank’s
fragile States hub established in Nairobi.
With regard to Africa, we would like to
encourage greater cooperation with the African Union,
its regional economic communities and the African
Development Bank. In forging such a partnership,
coordination is crucial in order to facilitate strategic
synergy and avoid unnecessary duplication. We believe
that timely, sustainable and predictable financing
remains a crucial element in realizing the objectives of
post-conflict peacebuilding.
While we acknowledge the funding of the
Peacebuilding Fund secured through donations, we
emphasize that the United Nations should consider
using more sustainable mechanisms to kick-start
peacebuilding activities in countries emerging from
conflict. We welcome plans to implement the
recommendations of the Senior Advisory Group in its
independent review of civilian capacities last year. We
look forward to a comprehensive progress report on
this process. We believe that we have not sufficiently
tapped into the existing international civilian
capacities, especially those from the global South. As
we seek to broaden the pool of civilian experts, we
cannot overemphasize the importance of partnerships
at local, regional and subregional levels in order to
exploit the unique advantages inherent in human
capacities at these levels.
The relationship between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission is crucial. The
growing number of peacekeeping operations and
integrated peacebuilding and political missions with
considerable peacebuilding tasks provides the Security
Council with an opportunity to make optimal use of
Peacebuilding Commission advice. The Council could
seek the Commission’s advice when considering
peacebuilding tasks in specific missions. Peacekeeping

11-57138

and peacebuilding should be mutually reinforcing in
the pursuit of lasting peace in post-conflict countries.
In that regard, we welcome the recent Council decision
to include peacebuilding mandates in the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan and
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya.
In the long term, it is our belief that all United
Nations peacekeeping missions should have some
peacebuilding elements. Based on our past experience,
South Africa is conscious of the centrality of women as
peacemakers and facilitators in political processes and
peacebuilding initiatives, particularly at the grass-roots
level. Women at all levels of society have a role to play
in conflict prevention and peacebuilding. An important
dimension in advancing peace and preventing conflict
is to ensure greater and more equitable economic
justice and development.
Despite the advances that have been made in
positioning women to assume leadership roles in
conflict prevention and mediation, these will be
meaningless if the root causes of conflict, which by
and large are economic in nature, are not adequately
addressed. We look forward to the next comprehensive
report of the Secretary-General in 2012, and hope that
by that time we will have made significant progress in
our peacebuilding efforts.
Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Judy
Cheng-Hopkins for her briefing and Ambassador Lucas
for her observations.
My delegation welcomes the progress achieved in
2011 on the recommendations resulting from the 2010
review of United Nations peacebuilding efforts. The
Peacebuilding Support Office played a large role in
this, in accordance with the commitment made to the
General Assembly in January 2010 to making 2011 the
year that those recommendations would be
implemented. We also welcome the Peacebuilding
Commission’s ongoing efforts in this area as it seeks,
on the basis of the 2011 action plan, to achieve
concrete goals and tangible results in improving its
effect on national capacity-building, mobilizing
resources and bringing key actors together around
common peacebuilding objectives. We also welcome
the progress in strategic and operational cohesion that
Ms. Cheng-Hopkins mentioned in her briefing. If we
are to achieve this vision fully, we clearly need to
strengthen the role of the Peacebuilding Support Office

9

S/PV.6643

and to improve coordination between the Office and
the Commission, which continues to benefit directly
from the Office’s resources.
My delegation also welcomes the information
sessions that the Office conducts for the Commission
on the activities and operations of the Peacebuilding
Fund, which have contributed to a better understanding
of the synergy between the Commission and the Fund
in the countries on the Commission’s agenda. This was
the case at the most recent visit to Bangui a few weeks
ago of the Central African Republic configuration, in
which my country took part.
My delegation takes this opportunity to welcome
the Council’s efforts to encourage participation by the
Chairs of the country-specific configurations to
conduct more interactive and informal exchanges on
the opportunities that peacebuilding offers or the
difficulties it faces in some countries on the
Commission’s agenda. We realize that peacekeeping
and peacebuilding are increasingly linked and thus
demand greater effectiveness from the Commission in
its consulting role as it pursues its mission.
Beyond the tasks of security and stabilization, we
believe it essential for peacebuilding strategies to put
increasing emphasis on socio-economic policies
designed to improve the living standards of the most
vulnerable populations and of former combatants
within the framework of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) — particularly the crucial “R”
stage of DDR, the reintegration of former combatants.
Priorities in this area are training young people and
promoting the advancement of women, which
contribute to fighting poverty. Tangible progress in the
socio-economic area cannot fail to have a positive
impact on the security situation. My delegation
welcomes the Commission’s efforts with donors to
enhance international commitment and mobilize more
funding for the Peacebuilding Fund, without
prejudging what the most effective strategies might be.
Finally, we believe that partnerships are also
crucial to the success of any peacebuilding initiative.
Exchanges and consultations with the international
financial institutions, and with regional and
subregional organizations such as the African Union,
the Economic Community of Central African States,
the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community (CAEMC) and the Economic Community
of West African States, will be very helpful in backing

10

up the Peacebuilding Support Office and the
Commission. In the Central African Republic, for
example, the authorities have emphasized that the
successful launch of DDR operations there last June
was due to the funds provided by CAEMC to support
the electoral process.
My delegation continues to believe that the
United Nations should continue to play the principal
role in the common vision of peacebuilding and in
promoting increased cooperation between its various
stakeholders, and that it should act as the link between
national authorities and the various development and
peacebuilding stakeholders.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to express my appreciation for the
briefings by Ms. Judy Cheng-Hopkins, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacebuilding Support, and
Ambassador Sylvie Lucas, Chair of the peacebuilding
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission for
Guinea and Permanent Representative of Luxembourg.
The Council’s analysis today of strategies for
effectively and efficiently addressing problems of
peacebuilding and peacekeeping is very timely. Going
on previous discussions, and given the high risk of
regression in the first few years of peace, we
acknowledge that the identification, development and
use of national capacities should be a post-conflict
priority.
We also agree that national post-conflict activities
to establish and build peace should be supported by
effective and timely civilian efforts, and that the
international community, especially the United
Nations, should provide speedy and effective
specialized civilian capacity and the experience needed
for supporting national stakeholders working to restore
the rule of law, revitalize the economy, relaunch the
provision of basic services to the population and
develop the capacity to make such efforts sustainable.
As the Secretary-General indicated in his report
(S/2009/304), what must be done in the post-conflict
period is to create basic security conditions and
confidence in the political process and to strengthen
national capacity to take the initiative in peacebuilding
activities and create stable living conditions. We
welcome Ambassador Lucas’s report on the progress of
countries receiving support from the Peacebuilding
Commission. Support for national authorities has
promoted progress in such areas as security sector

11-57138

S/PV.6643

reform, the rule of law, respect for human rights, the
restoration of Government institutions and economic
revitalization.
In this regard, Colombia emphasizes the
importance of ensuring that post-conflict support is
based on the principles proposed by the Senior
Advisory Group: national ownership, more solid
partnerships, experience in supporting national entities
and flexible responses. National ownership is the
guiding principle on which all measures to promote
civilian capacity should be based. In order to
strengthen national ownership, we cannot fail to clarify
and strengthen a Government’s basic post-conflict
functions. It is essential not only to build technical
capacity but also to strengthen institutions and rebuild
the confidence of society as a whole, enabling people
to accept the legitimacy of their own Government.
Another peacebuilding priority is the need to
build more solid partnerships with external actors that
can bring innovative approaches to civilian capacitybuilding. Our Organization must work to facilitate
improvements on the ground by creating effective,
broader partnerships that take supply and demand from
outside partners into account. Clearly, more adaptable,
timely and cost-effective systems are needed to
enhance the flexibility of the responses required by the
changing environment on the ground. Due
consideration must be given to budget implications and
contributions from States, as well as to the need to
fully comply with the mandates set by the competent
organs of the United Nations.
It is essential to strengthen, by providing
adequate technical assistance, monitoring and
accountability mechanisms for United Nations staff as
part of efforts to guarantee impartiality and
transparency and to restore trust. Moreover, the actors
involved in the process must be able to clearly assess
the progress made in the early stages of national
reconstruction. We commend the Secretary-General on
his efforts to improve the accountability mechanisms
for United Nations senior leadership and assessment
methods, and on his initiatives to increase the number
of vacant posts and enhance training for senior-level
personnel.
As I have said, the United Nations and its
Member States must broadly promote all of the pillars
mentioned, including women’s participation in conflict

11-57138

resolution, not only as experts within the Organization
and in Member States but also as true actors of change.
Colombia once again underscores the need to
formulate sustainable long-term strategies based on a
balance between direct international support and
national efforts. This will help to prevent countries’
prolonged dependence on international resources,
which eventually limits their development. The success
of those processes is a responsibility shared by affected
societies and the international community. We
encourage the Steering Group to pursue the open and
comprehensive consultation process, in which due
attention should be given to the concerns of all States.
In conclusion, what countries want is a competent
Organization that provides cooperation while
respecting national ownership and priorities, and that
supports the democratic processes chosen by a
country’s people in peacebuilding.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): We thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this briefing on a topic
to which my country attaches great importance. I
would also like to thank the briefers, Ms. Judy ChengHopkins and Ambassador Sylvie Lucas, for the very
useful views they have shared with the Council on this
matter.
It is now commonly assumed that peacekeeping
and peacebuilding should be seen as an integrated
effort, no longer as a sequence of activities, and that
peacebuilding activities should begin as soon the
situation on the ground so permits, well within the span
of the foreseeable duration of a peacekeeping operation
and throughout its cycle. We believe that we have come
a long way in identifying gaps and mechanisms for
more efficient post-conflict peacebuilding, mainly in
terms of civilian capacity.
The creation of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) brought much-needed consistency to the way
the United Nations links immediate post-conflict
stabilization to the creation and consolidation of State
institutions that can ensure long-term security. The
Security Council must be able to take full advantage of
the work and insights of the PBC and its configurations
when it discusses the establishment, renewal and
conclusion of mission mandates. In this area of our
interaction with the PBC, there is certainly much room
for improvement.

11

S/PV.6643

Allow me to underline a number of aspects that
we believe to be particularly important in the context
of post-conflict peacebuilding. The first is the
importance of fostering national ownership in Statebuilding initiatives. Strengthening national capacities
for fulfilling the core functions of the State should be
the first priority in post-conflict assistance. Choices
always have to be made. International efforts should
therefore be directed to ensure that decisions on policy
objectives and priorities are taken by national actors,
and that international efforts are intended mainly to
assist, and not to replace, State authorities.
Secondly, economic and social development in
countries emerging from conflict is also important.
International economic aid should be concentrated on
projects that take into account the economic, social and
even cultural realities of a country, as well as its
specific capacities and their foreign investment
potential. The issue of unemployment, especially youth
unemployment, must be addressed with concrete and
focused initiatives.
Thirdly, we should pay attention to peacebuilding
tasks from the early stages of the post-conflict period
and reconstruction. Mandates should clearly identify
the role and functions of peacekeepers as early
peacebuilders in such multidimensional areas as the
rule of law and security sector reform. The United
Nations must better articulate the link between civilian
and political tasks and those traditionally performed by
peacekeepers. In many situations, that linkage is
crucial to prevent a relapse into conflict.
As complex as peacebuilding may be, the United
Nations already has its fair share of success stories in
ensuring a successful transition to sustainable peace
and security. For example, Timor-Leste managed to
develop into a solid democracy with stable institutions
in less than a decade. That success was due, first and
foremost, to the Timorese people and their leaders, but
also to the decisive involvement of the United Nations
and its peacebuilding efforts, in which it worked side
by side with the national Government and other
international partners. I am certain that we can learn
from this and other similar cases as we strive to
improve our capacity to carry out peacebuilding tasks.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
also wish to thank Assistant-Secretary-General ChengHopkins and Ambassador Lucas for their thoughtful
briefings today.

12

Peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict is among our highest priorities, representing
the greatest opportunity to transform the dynamics that
led to bloodshed in the first place. If those who seek to
build peace are not successful in the months after a
conflict’s end, then it becomes increasingly difficult to
consolidate peace as time passes. I would like to return
to some key points made by Ambassador Rice during
our most recent debate (see S/PV. 6396) on this
subject.
First, the strength of United Nations
peacebuilding is dependent on the expertise and
capabilities of its field personnel and on the United
Nations agility in deploying, leading and managing
them effectively. The United States welcomes the
Secretary-General’s continuing focus on mission
leadership. Skilled and effective leadership is essential
to success. We also welcome the unfolding civilian
capacity review implementation process, the efforts of
which must improve the flexibility, resourcefulness and
decisiveness of the United Nations in deploying
qualified and capable civilian specialists to the field.
The constellation of United Nations departments,
agencies and programmes represents a deep reservoir
of human talent and organizational resources that can
be effective contributors to peacebuilding. We believe
that more can be done to target the skills and expertise
available within the United Nations family and the
wider international community, including the Bretton
Woods institutions. We also continue to look forward,
as we have noted previously, to further progress in
clarifying key peacebuilding roles and responsibilities.
Secondly, if United Nations efforts to build peace
are to be truly sustainable, they must incorporate
women throughout the process. We echo the comments
of the Secretary-General in his 2010 report on women’s
participation in peacebuilding, in which he stated that
“women are crucial partners in shoring up three pillars
of lasting peace: economic recovery, social cohesion
and political legitimacy” (A/65/354, para. 7).
The United States is currently developing a
national action plan on women and peace and security
so as to focus efforts on women’s participation in relief
and recovery efforts. Women must be empowered not
just as beneficiaries of development, but as agents of
economic, social and political transformation.
The awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize this year
to three women peacebuilders is a strong testament to

11-57138

S/PV.6643

their indispensability to successful peace processes.
Our post-conflict development efforts recognize that
women are essential drivers of the peacebuilding
process. For example, members of the United States
Civilian Response Corps in South Sudan are working
with local women leaders in areas historically
underrepresented in the political circles in Juba to
facilitate their increased participation in political
processes.
We also commend the work of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone, which
has developed an approach on gender matters that
combats gender-based violence and promotes access to
health care, political participation and justice for
women.
This briefing reminds us how vital the work of
peacebuilding and institution-building is. Helping a
society recover from conflict is never an easy task. But
we must persevere in collaborating to formulate the
effective solutions that each post-conflict society
needs. Unless we work together to consolidate peace in
war-torn lands, we will never be able to truly achieve
our goal of international peace and security.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like to thank Nigeria for its initiative to hold
this briefing on post-conflict peacebuilding. We also
welcome the statements made by Assistant SecretaryGeneral Cheng-Hopkins and Ambassador Lucas.
Post-conflict peacebuilding is a major task of the
United Nations that has significant bearing not only on
ensuring lasting peace and sustainable development in
the countries concerned but also on strengthening the
existing collective security system and promoting
common development. In the past decade or so, while
the United Nations has achieved remarkable results in
post-conflict peacebuilding and has accumulated a
wealth of experience, it has also encountered numerous
challenges.
I should like to focus on four specific points.
First, post-conflict peacebuilding should be
carried out on the basis of full respect for the
sovereignty of the countries concerned. Countries in
post-conflict situations bear primary responsibility for
peacebuilding on their own territory. In helping
countries to build peace, the international community
should respect their aspirations and try to help them
strengthen national capacity-building so as to enhance

11-57138

the level of governance. In doing so, integrated,
coordinated and targeted working methods should be
adopted that take into consideration the different
domestic situations of various countries. In addition,
partnerships with the countries concerned should be
strengthened.
Secondly, peacebuilding efforts should have clear
priorities. In helping the countries concerned to
formulate their integrated peacebuilding development
strategies, the United Nations and its relevant agencies
should respect the priorities identified by the countries
themselves, focusing on stabilizing the security
situation, promoting political reconciliation and
strengthening democracy. Particular attention should be
paid to tackling the root causes of threats to peace and
security, particularly in the area of economic and social
development. Peacebuilding efforts should also include
exit strategies so as to enable a smooth transition
towards lasting peace and sustainable development.
Thirdly, resources should be used as effectively
as possible in this field. The United Nations should
continue to pay attention to issues such as
peacebuilding, financing and expertise-building. We
urge the international community to continue to
provide sufficient resources to peacebuilding efforts.
We consider that efforts should be made to expand
fund-raising channels and that the Peacebuilding Fund
should further improve its working methods and
enhance performance management and its resource
utilization rate.
Fourthly, the important role of the Peacebuilding
Commission and regional organizations should be
brought into full play. China hopes that the
Peacebuilding Commission will further improve its
institution-building efforts and strengthen its synergies
with other organizations in its efforts to explore
effective
means
of
peacebuilding.
Regional
organizations such as the African Union should also be
fully utilized.
China has always supported the efforts of
countries in conflict situations to build peace, and we
will further join the international community in making
concerted efforts and contributions aimed at the
promotion of lasting peace.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I wish at the outset to thank
Ms. Judy Cheng-Hopkins for her presentation on recent
developments to further the United Nations
peacebuilding agenda.

13

S/PV.6643

Brazil associates itself with the statement made
by Ambassador Sylvie Lucas on behalf of the Chairs of
the country-specific configurations.
We welcome the discussion of the critical role of
the United Nations in ensuring stability and sustainable
peace in countries emerging from conflict. The Council
has already recognized the interdependence between
security and development, but we have yet to perfect a
truly comprehensive approach that takes into account
the underlying causes of conflict that helps countries
rebuild institutions and supports their efforts to address
the basic needs of their populations.
A stronger relationship between the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) is
crucial for the greater effectiveness of peacebuilding
activities. We should find ways to enable the Security
Council to draw further on the PBC in order to enhance
the system’s capacity to implement peacebuilding
strategies at the early stages of United Nations
involvement in a conflict country.
Early peacebuilding activities are relevant to the
success of peacekeeping operations, through integrated
missions that associate civilian capacities with the
military and police component. Such integrated
missions should ensure that the stability space created
by a peacekeeping force can be sustained through a
simultaneous effort to help the country strengthen its
institutional capacity and restore basic services.
We welcome the efforts being undertaken to
strengthen a regional approach to some of the problems
common to countries on the PBC agenda. Such is the
case of the West Africa Coast Initiative, which brings
together the countries of West Africa in the fight
against drug trafficking. We must pursue more
effective resource mobilization for the implementation
of this important initiative.
We are glad to see that women’s participation in
peacebuilding has gained more attention. Women
should play a central role in post-conflict situations.
There is a greater awareness of their potential
contribution to furthering reconciliation, preventing
conflicts and bolstering economic revitalization. This
potential should be fully tapped into.
This is particularly true for the countries that are
on the PBC agenda. In Guinea-Bissau, for instance,
women make a fundamental contribution to all sectors
of the country’s life, from agriculture, especially as

14

smallholder farmers,
policymaking.

to

law

enforcement

and

We commend the actions taken by the Secretariat
and the relevant United Nations entities, including
UN-Women, to foster the role of women in
peacebuilding, and strongly support the continuation of
such efforts.
We encourage the Secretariat to continue to look
into creative ways of enhancing the United Nations
response to the peacebuilding needs of post-conflict
countries. Brazil will continue to be a strong supporter
of peacebuilding at the United Nations. As a member
of the Peacebuilding Commission and Chair of the
country-specific configuration for Guinea-Bissau, we
reaffirm our commitment to working together with
other interested members in helping bring sustainable
peace and development to the countries on the
Commission’s agenda.
Mr. Ahamed (India): At the outset, I would like
to thank you, Madam President, for having organized
this timely debate. Your initiative will be significant in
determining the relevance and effectiveness of not only
the Council but also of the larger United Nations
system in the decades to come.
I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Judy Cheng-Hopkins and the Chair of the
peacebuilding configuration for Guinea, Ambassador
Sylvie Lucas, for their useful briefings. Our sincere
appreciation also goes to Ambassador Gasana for his
able stewardship of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC).
The idea of peacebuilding essentially emanates
from experience in peacekeeping distilled over
decades. The United Nations has made enormous
investments in manpower and resources in
multidimensional peacekeeping operations. In such a
scenario, the Council would do well to effectively
consult major troop- and police-contributing countries,
both individually and through the instrumentality of the
PBC, when formulating and revising mandates of
United Nations missions.
India’s excellence in peacekeeping is a result of
our long partnership with United Nations missions. Our
consolidated contributions are bigger than the
magnitude of current peacekeeping operations. Our
peacekeepers have invariably also been early
peacebuilders. India has also shared its experience and

11-57138

S/PV.6643

expertise with a range of countries that have embarked
on the path of transition from conflict to peace.
India will happily continue to make our capacities
available to societies emerging from conflict situations
and will partner with the United Nations in its
peacebuilding endeavours. As a member of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission, India has actively partnered with the PBC
since its inception in December 2005 and has
contributed to the Peacebuilding Fund.
Peacebuilding is a cooperative and coordinated
venture. Peacebuilding strategies must first be
harmonized within the United Nations system. The
existing structures and networks need to be
consolidated as we explore alternatives elsewhere.
Harnessing the capacities of the global South will
energize our peacebuilding enterprise. It is also
important to keep in mind that national ownership is
the critical determinant of success in peacebuilding. It
is the duty of the international community to ensure
assistance for capacity-building to national authorities.
Security is, of course, the key pillar for
peacebuilding. However, it is equally important that we
focus on economic opportunity, particularly for the
youth, in tandem with political and social stability.
That demands a holistic approach. It is also important
that there be an effective two-way dialogue between
countries on the PBC agenda and the Commission
itself throughout all phases. Let us also acknowledge
the fact that the lack of funding constitutes a major
impediment to the success of peacebuilding initiatives.
It goes without saying that other elements such as
human resources, technical assistance, managerial
assistance, assistance in kind and other programmes of
assistance
through
provision
of
appropriate
technologies are also important. Predictable and
appropriate resource levels over an extended period
will guarantee the sustainability of peacebuilding
initiatives.
Enhancing civilian capacity will have a major
impact on staffing and resourcing and the peacekeeping
missions themselves. Those are essential, but they
should neither dilute nor detract from the requirements
of peacekeeping. It is also important that civilian
capacities are sourced with the requisite measure of
ground experience. In that context, priority should be
given to obtaining secondment capacities from the
Governments of developing countries.

11-57138

My delegation is hoping for constructive and
meaningful discussions on the substance of the
Secretary-General’s report on civilian capacity in the
aftermath of conflict (S/2011/527). It is essential that
such discussions take place in intergovernmental
settings and involve the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth Committee.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this meeting. Allow me also
to thank Ms. Cheng-Hopkins for her informative
briefing and Ambassador Lucas for her presentation.
We welcome the positive measures adopted in
certain peacebuilding areas, such as the start of the
implementation process of the international civilian
capacities review, ensuring appropriate United Nations
senior leadership capacities, and strengthening
partnerships with the World Bank and other
stakeholders.
However, considerable work remains to be done
to support national efforts in building suitable
conditions for durable peace. I would like to make the
following remarks in that regard.
First, concerning United Nations senior
leadership, my delegation concurs with Ms. ChengHopkins that in certain settings evolving circumstances
on the ground may require a shift in the field
leadership profile and timely deployment of senior
leaders with adequate expertise to support
peacebuilding efforts, with special attention being duly
given to the strategic period immediately following the
end of the conflict.
Secondly,
my
delegation
believes
that
peacebuilding is collective in nature, and its success
depends largely on the clarity of the roles and
responsibilities of a wide array of local, national and
international actors. Since none of those actors can
individually
conduct
an
overall
successful
peacekeeping operation, coherence and coordination
are essential to manage the interdependence of their
roles. In that regard, we welcome the various reviews
carried out by the Secretary-General’s Policy
Committee for the purpose of coherence and the efforts
to strengthen partnership and coordination between the
United Nations and the World Bank.
Furthermore, we strongly believe an integrated
peacebuilding strategy must be developed to create a
reference point for coherence. Such a strategy should

15

S/PV.6643

be based on impartial analysis of the root causes of the
conflict and should be subject to timely review,
according to the dynamic and evolving environment on
the ground.
Thirdly, my delegation is encouraged by the
decision to make national capacity assessment part of
the integrated missions planning process. Strong
partnership among international and national actors is
necessary to operationalize national ownership of
peacebuilding, without which peacebuilding is unlikely
to be sustainable or successful. Despite progress in this
regard, more needs to be done to enable the United
Nations to effectively support national peacebuilding
efforts. That is particularly true for certain
peacebuilding core areas such as rule of law and
security sector reform. As is well known, those areas
are fundamental for ensuring security, preventing new
eruptions of violence and effectively combating drug
trafficking and organized crime.
Fourthly, the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize
to women from Yemen and Liberia was a laudable
recognition of the difference that women can make
when they so courageously engage in rebuilding their
societies. Indeed, existing studies suggest that gender
balance not only reduces corruption but also ensures
greater transparency and responsiveness to community
needs. That is why meaningful participation of women
in decision-making institutions and mechanisms related
to peacebuilding should begin at the earliest stage of
recovery.
Efforts have been made to ensure gender
expertise in mediation and to promote the access of
women and girls to security and justice.
However, we believe that the United Nations and
the Peacebuilding Commission should provide more
systematic assistance to Governments and help them
ensure more consistent participation of women in
peace accords and donor conferences.
Gender analysis is also important and offers a
valuable tool for understanding the gender dimensions
of violence and recovery and for tailoring effective
approaches to gender issues in specific post-conflict
settings.
In conclusion, peacebuilding is often a long,
convoluted and complex undertaking. However, its
success is imperative for durable peace and for the
sustainable development of societies.

16

Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Madam President, for holding this meeting on
peacebuilding. I would also like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Cheng-Hopkins and Ambassador
Lucas for their presentations. It is crucial for the
Security Council, which is responsible for issues of
international peacekeeping and security, to regularly
address the matter of peacebuilding. United Nations
action is not limited to merely supporting or restoring
peace. Building peace once it has been established is
essential to make sure that a country just emerging
from conflict does not relapse into crisis.
We must remember that peacebuilding consists
above all of managing the progressive restoration of all
the capabilities of a given sovereign State with the goal
of giving their people full mastery of their destiny.
Several elements are key to the successful
management that transition. First of all, national
ownership, which is the basis of lasting peace,
demands sizable reforms. Those reforms, which
involve such essential aspects such as governance,
justice and security, or which can also require the
renewal of a development process, cannot be brought
to fruition without national ownership. The key to
success in peacebuilding is the implementation of a
substantial dialogue with the State in question. To
facilitate that dialogue, we have established in some
post-conflict countries, integrated peacebuilding
offices, such as the United Nations Integrated Office in
the Central African Republic and the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi.
The second key element for a successful
transition is good coordination among the stakeholders.
Post-conflict peacebuilding is complex, because it
implies the simultaneous management of very different
tasks. There is often a fine line between those tasks and
peacekeeping operations. Peacekeeping operations
should support that process as much as possible.
However, even during the early stages, peacekeeping
operations cannot necessarily take on all the aspects of
peacebuilding. The earliest possible return of the usual
actors, in the realm of development for example, is
preferable. Careful consultation and coordination
among all stakeholders is therefore necessary for the
most effective international partners to be involved in
peacebuilding programmes, and for each stakeholder to
play the most appropriate role. In addition to the
civilian structure that any peacekeeping operation
implies, this could involve the United Nations agencies

11-57138

S/PV.6643

with solid technical experience, such United Nations
Development Program, or bilateral partners.
It is precisely that level of engagement that the
Peacebuilding Commission, with the impetus provided
by the Luxembourg Mission and the help of the
Secretariat and the Office in Dakar, is attempting to
advance in Guinea, where there is neither a
peacekeeping
operation
nor
an
integrated
peacebuilding office. We are pleased to see that the
support actions have been identified and assigned,
particularly with respect to security sector reform, in
order to help the Guineans to build peace and
consolidate their young democracy.
The third key element is advance planning.
Because the conditions needed for peacebuilding must
to be present from the first stages of crisis
management, it is important to undertake a process of
reflection on the priorities that need to be implemented
in the immediate post-conflict period. In that regard, I
wish to single out the study conducted by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Mission Support Division on the contribution of
peacekeeping operations to the question of
consolidating peace, which was explored during the
last meeting of the Peacebuilding Commission.
What tools do we have for implementing those
transition principles?
First of all, we must work on the quality of the
mandates, which should allow us to lay the
groundwork for the peacebuilding phase. That is what
we did in Côte d’Ivoire, with resolution 2000 (2011),
which gives the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire a clear mandate to support the authorities in
stepping up their security sector. We did the same thing
with the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, with
resolution 1996 (2011), which sets forth support for the
South Sudanese authorities with respect to the reform
of their justice and security sectors, and the
strengthening of the rule of law.
Secondly, based on those mandates, the
Secretariat should implement a planning process that
includes, on the one hand, a mechanism for measuring
the progress of a mission, and on the other, provisions
that allow its end-point to be taken into account from
the beginning. Finally, it is critical to have resources on
the ground in order to implement the transition. For
that reason in particular, the civilian capacity-building
is a key aspect in peacebuilding in post-conflict

11-57138

situations. In order to more effectively help countries
affected by conflict, the efforts of the international
community should be guided by a spirit of partnership
that strengthens the links between United Nations
civilian
capacity,
Member
States,
regional
organizations and civil society.
In that context, I welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s report from last August (see S/2011/552),
which is the first United Nations response to the
Independent Report by Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno on
civilian capacities.
To conclude, I should like to underscore that the
growing mobilization of different stakeholders with
respect to peacebuilding, whether the United Nations
or other international actors, has provided us with
many tools, which we must use in the best way
possible by developing synergies. We will thus ensure
both consistent international action and clear United
Nations work in the area of peacebuilding.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General
Judy
Cheng-Hopkins
and
Ambassador Lucas for their detailed briefings.
This is a welcome opportunity to take stock of the
peacebuilding agenda and to follow up on its
implementation. We share the analysis that progress
has been achieved in various fields since last year’s
progress report of the Secretary-General. However, our
undivided attention and continued support are required
for us to deliver on commitments and to further
enhance our impact on the ground. That includes the
need for continuous adaptation of peacebuilding to
changing and evolving circumstances in countries
emerging from conflict.
It is against that backdrop that I would like to
focus my remarks on three priority areas: first, the need
to further develop and clarify the scope and mode of
action of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC);
secondly, the implementation of the civilian capacities
review; and thirdly, the strengthening of women’s
participation in peacebuilding.
First, with regard to the Peacebuilding
Commission, while the addition of countries to the
PBC’s agenda over the past year proves the
membership’s acknowledgement of and faith in the
PBC, focus needs to be given to developing strategies
that allow countries to graduate from the PBC’s agenda

17

S/PV.6643

and, if needed, to a lighter form of engagement.
Ms. Cheng-Hopkins elaborated on that point as well.
As we witness the increasing inclusion of
peacebuilding
into
national
poverty-reduction
strategies in countries like Burundi and Sierra Leone,
we also need a common understanding of the role the
PBC can realistically play to further promote
peacebuilding at that stage. The PBC should help
support the relevant actors to come to a common
vision. It should ensure that the stakeholders focus on
agreed and shared priorities. It should help countries
address obstacles to peacebuilding and obtain clear
commitments from the Government concerned and the
international community on the implementation of the
peacebuilding agenda. The Commission should raise
awareness; it must not be reduced to the role of a
fundraiser.
Moreover,
enhancing
partnerships
with
international financial institutions and major regional
actors in order to help build coherence remains a
critical task. In that context, we welcome the increased
interaction and cooperation with the World Bank. In
our view, such collaboration should also be deepened
on the ground. The established interaction with the
group of fragile States is also a positive step. A mutual
understanding of how the PBC can best support the
implementation of the Monrovia road map of June
2011 needs to be achieved. Greater clarity on how the
PBC can contribute to the high-level forum on aid
effectiveness to be held in Busan in November, and on
its follow-up, is also needed.
My second point relates to the implementation of
the civilian capacities review. Making civilian capacity
available in an effective, appropriate and timely
manner to support peacebuilding in conflict affected
countries is the best way to secure national ownership
and to render peace and reconstruction sustainable. We
therefore welcome the Secretary-General’s report on
civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict (see
S/2011/85) and its just approach to making better use
of existing resources within the United Nations to that
end.
We
advocate
concrete
steps
towards
strengthening and using national, international and
United Nations capabilities in post-conflict situations
without delay. South Sudan should be a starting point.
Critical needs, notably the establishment of
Government institutions and justice, need to be

18

addressed swiftly. Attention should be
identifying and effectively supporting
capacities, including those of diasporas.

paid to
national

My third point concerns the strengthening of
women’s participation in peacebuilding. Fostering
women’s engagement in peacebuilding requires
integrating that effort into all activities and providing
dedicated funding for women’s needs. One crucial
point in that context is the need for clarity,
comparability and consistency across the United
Nations in monitoring the impact of its agenda on
gender-related issues. We therefore agree with the
necessity mentioned in the recent report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2011/598*) to develop consistent means of tracking
and reporting of spending on gender equality and
women’s empowerment within the next year. The
United Nations presence in conflict and post-conflict
situations should strive to achieve greater coherence.
Sector specific gender expertise is needed for the
effective implementation of the women and peace and
security objectives.
While several countries appear to be graduating
from fragility, there is scope to maximize the impact of
peacebuilding by further developing its strategic
approach and by bridging the policy-practice gap. We
stand ready to work to that end with countries
emerging from conflict, the United Nations and all
relevant stakeholders.
Ms. Hendrie (United Kingdom): I thank
Ms. Judy Cheng-Hopkins and Ambassador Sylvie
Lucas for their briefings.
It seems clear from what we have heard this
morning that we are making real strides as the
international community towards providing support for
countries emerging from conflict. We are now much
better equipped to help them as a collective community
to tackle the challenges that they face.
However, what we have also heard this morning
is that we still have some way to go. Peacebuilding is a
collective endeavour and all of us must work together
to raise our game. A key element of that is getting
strong and effective leadership in the field. The United
Kingdom would like to note that the recent
appointment of experienced individuals with strong
peacebuilding backgrounds, such as the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General in Libya and
South Sudan, indicates that we are making progress in

11-57138

S/PV.6643

that direction. It is possible to put the people with the
right skills on the ground.
Such leadership is important not only in the
context of a mission but also in non-mission settings.
In the latter, it is essential that resident coordinators
also have the right skills and experience to tackle the
challenges that they face in post-conflict settings. They
must be able to access the right kind of support from
Headquarters and the wider international system in a
timely way. The political support that the
Peacebuilding Support Office has provided to the
United Nations team in Guinea is quite a good example
of that.
We are also pleased to hear in the briefing of
Ms. Cheng-Hopkins that the United Nations has
sustained its momentum on integrated mission
planning. That is absolutely essential. A process that
brings together all key actors and clearly sets out the
sector leads and the necessary benchmarks to gauge
progress is the most effective way to ensure wellcoordinated delivery.
In that regard, we would again like to point out
what we think was a good example, namely, the
pre-assessment planning process for Libya. That
involved a team that brought together all relevant parts
of the United Nations system and the World Bank into
the same conversation sufficiently in advance.
As Assistant Secretary-General Cheng-Hopkins
pointed out during her briefing, the review of civilian
capacities is clearly an important vehicle to improve
United Nations performance on peacebuilding. The
United Kingdom welcomes the Secretary-General’s
report (see S/2011/85). Of course, we look forward to
hearing about the results that have been achieved in the
field in consequence of that initiative in the near
future. The report rightly places the principle of
national ownership front and centre. In that regard, we
look forward to progress on identifying and supporting
national sources of capacity and on building global
South capacities and triangular cooperation to find the
most appropriate civilian expertise for the context.
Turning now to a critical issue, which is that of
roles and responsibilities, the United Kingdom feels
that we really need to do more in that area. In
particular, we would like to point to the need to make
progress on the rule of law. That is an area where,
frankly, the least amount of progress has been made
since the Secretary-General’s report of 2009

11-57138

(S/2009/304). We know that our failure to resolve that
affects delivery on the ground. The World Development
Report 2011 has provided evidence that there are
crucial gaps in the international system in the provision
of support for the rule of law, and that the United
Nations has a key role to play in that regard.
Such continued gaps mean that countries are
often unable to access the support that they need on
key issues, such as justice reform. We welcome efforts
at more joint programming, which improves
coordination among actors in the field. However, that
is not the whole story. We need greater clarity over
which part of the system is the global service provider
for which specific function under the rule of law
heading. We need a framework that is clear, but also
flexible enough to be able to adapt to the realities in
the field. We hope that he Secretary-General’s report in
2012 can demonstrate real progress on the issue.
Ms. Cheng-Hopkins rightly said that Member
States need to be engaged in that discussion if progress
is to be made. The United Kingdom agrees with that
and strongly supports it. As Member States that are
also members of the governing boards of the funds and
programmes, we must be ready to actively support
integration in those forums rather than fragmentation.
Finally, the United Kingdom welcomes the
update on women’s participation in peacebuilding and
the partnership between the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office and UN-Women. We
welcome the fact that progress is being made in the
areas of mediation and political dialogue and in
integrating gender equality into post-conflict needs
assessment and rule of law work.
However, there is still much to be done to ensure
the participation of women at all stages of
peacebuilding, including the appointment of more
women as special envoys and chief mediators. In the
words of UN-Women chief, Michelle Bachelet, if
women are not represented at the negotiating table,
society itself is not represented.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Judy Cheng-Hopkins for her comprehensive
briefing on the Organization’s progress on post-conflict
peacebuilding. We would also like to thank Ms. Sylvie
Lucas for her briefing.

19

S/PV.6643

I may be repeating what has perhaps already been
said this morning when I say that the primary role of
States that have experienced the active phase of
conflict is furthering national reconciliation and
rebuilding safe and favourable living conditions for the
entire population of the country. That is absolutely
essential in order to avoid renewed conflict.

must not be duplicated but mutually reinforcing. In that
context, we support statements concerning the activity
of the Peacebuilding Commission, which is striving to
formulate recommendations to ensure uninterrupted
and coordinated international support for countries
emerging from conflict.

Experience shows that, in most cases, countries
exhausted by war or crises are unable to address by
themselves the entire range of problems related to
rebuilding security, ensuring law and order, protecting
human rights and alleviating poverty. There is a
significant need for international assistance in that
regard.

We note with pleasure the heightened attention
being accorded by Member States and the Secretariat
to various aspects of peacebuilding that require further
consideration and the development of strategies and
frameworks for practical implementation. In that
respect, I would refer in particular to security sector
reform, strengthening the rule of law and the
development of civilian capacities.

We are convinced that there can be no successful
and long-term benefits of peacekeeping support
without State ownership of the process. Countries must
define their own peacebuilding priorities, and national
Government bodies must manage the implementation
of those goals. That has been confirmed by experience
in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste, where the
capacity of the international community to take
account of the interests and priorities of the host
country was leveraged by the readiness of national
Governments
to
assume
responsibility
for
implementing reform.

It is clear that positive peacebuilding results have
been achieved by regional actors, including
neighbouring countries and subregional organizations.
A fine example of such regional cooperation is the
experience of several African countries that have
overcome conflict and achieved some success in
peacebuilding. Such countries are ready to share their
experiences and could be the source of initiatives that
could be successfully implemented by States that have
recently emerged from crises. Such experiences are
tried and tested, empirical examples, and not just
theories.

As has been noted, the United Nations
undoubtedly has a special role to play in coordinating
international efforts in post-conflict peacebuilding.
This work requires the coordinated efforts of Member
States, United Nations programme and funds, the
Secretariat, regional organizations and international
financial institutions. I would also note that United
Nations peacekeeping operations now undertake many
early-stage peacebuilding tasks. In addressing their
principal task of disengaging the warring parties,
stabilizing the situation and establishing conditions
conducive to a political process, United Nations
peacekeepers are also playing a critical role in creating
conditions favourable to providing more significant
peacebuilding support.

The Peacebuilding Fund is an important
mechanism for rapid financing that helps to attract
long-term resources for reconstruction. It is important
that we support its work, and my country, Russia, has
confirmed its policy in that respect by making an
annual contribution of $2 million to the Fund, which
we will continue to provide.

We should, however, take into account the fact
that peacebuilding is a multifaceted and long-term
process that extends far beyond the limited time frame
of peacekeeping operations. Therefore, providing basic
assistance
to
States
for
institution-building,
development and social and economic stability falls to
the Organization’s specialized agencies, whose efforts

20

The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Nigeria.
I add my voice of appreciation to Assistant
Secretary-General Cheng-Hopkins for her lucid and
comprehensive briefing. I also want to thank
Ambassador Sylvie Lucas, Chair of the peacebuilding
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
for Guinea, for sharing her perspectives on the PBC
with us.
Nigeria greatly appreciates the continuing
dialogue on the activities, progress and challenges of
United Nations peacebuilding, given our common
efforts to prevent post-conflict countries from sliding
back into war. The Secretary-General’s agenda for

11-57138

S/PV.6643

action delineated the yardsticks for measuring the
effectiveness of the efforts of the PBC, the
Peacebuilding Support Office (PBSO), the Security
Council, the integrated United Nations missions and
other major actors in the peacebuilding arena.
The PBC itself has outlined a road map of actions
in 2011 to add value to its peacebuilding efforts. The
road map identifies resource mobilization and the
building of national capacities as core peacebuilding
priorities. As a lightning rod for the United Nations
major peacebuilding efforts, the PBSO has supported
the progressive realization of the road map over the
past year. Indeed, six years since the inception of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture, the PBC
and the PBSO have undeniably transformed our
collective vision of conflict resolution.
The derivative of this renewed focus on
benchmarks is an emerging resource-driven approach
to peacebuilding by all the funds and agencies
concerned with post-conflict peacebuilding. However,
in this drive for results, we must never lose sight of the
imperative to tailor all peacebuilding programmes to
the specific needs of the host nation. As an ardent
supporter of the peacebuilding agenda, Nigeria is
convinced
that
the
results-driven
approach,
complemented by national ownership, is a prerequisite
for sustaining the high-level political commitment of
Member States and international institutions alike to
programmes that assist countries transitioning from
conflict.
It is our task in the Council to actively engage
with the PBSO and the PBC in exchanging views on
peacebuilding best practices and lessons learned.
Besides providing immense benefits to countries on the
agenda of the PBC, lessons learned can also benefit
other nations emerging from a state of instability. A
case in point is the new Libya, whose current
leadership has reached out to the United Nations for
post-conflict support and assistance. The vision of the
National Transitional Council — and indeed, of all of
us — of a peaceful, harmonious Libya cannot be
realized without social structures in place to ensure the
rule of law and the adequate provision of social and
economic infrastructure.
Over the past six years, the PBSO, the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund have acquired appreciable specialization in
helping nations to their feet after devastating conflicts.

11-57138

Their wealth of knowledge should be mined for
principles of peacebuilding that will be applicable even
in countries that are not on the PBC’s agenda.
The notion of early peacebuilding that PBC Chair
Ambassador Gasana vociferously advocated in March
should be developed, promoted and operationalized. To
address the multidimensional challenges faced in postconflict settings, we must recognize the thin line
between traditional peacekeeping operations and
peacebuilding. Through the rapid deployment of
peacebuilding agents, we can lay the foundations for
long-term peace, independent of external actors.
Providing training for mission leadership and building
national civilian capacity for achieving national
ownership are also critical areas that require intense
focus, as most States often lack national capacities in
the aftermath of protracted conflict. Indeed, given the
complexity of the threats to peace, there is an even
greater imperative for the coordination of responses. A
clear division of labour and accountability must be
agreed, buttressed by a common strategic framework
and aligned with the objectives of each peacebuilding
exercise.
In addition, I wish to emphasize the critical need
for collaboration between the United Nations and the
regional and subregional organizations within the
geographical zones of the countries on the PBC
agenda. The contributions of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and the African
Union in peacebuilding in their various regions have
been very remarkable and enormous.
Turning specifically to Guinea-Bissau, we can
say that the security sector reform programme is
absolutely central to that country’s return to stability.
While the ECOWAS road map has been proven to be
an important rallying point, the country needs
continued technical and financial assistance in the
implementation of the road map’s steps. Therefore, all
stakeholders must remain resolute in our support of the
Guinea-Bissau Government.
As was discussed in the Council only last Friday
(see S/PV.6642), women must play a central role in
conflict prevention and peacebuilding. Indeed, there is
an urgent need to enhance the mobilization of
resources available for initiatives to mainstream
women in peacebuilding activities, in order to address
their peacebuilding needs, promote gender equality and
empower women in peacebuilding contexts.

21

S/PV.6643

We want to call on all stakeholders in the
peacebuilding effort to remain focused on all that can
be achieved in the long term through a sustained
commitment and indeed a collective and sustained
effort.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council. There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

22

11-57138
