S/PV.8648*

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8648th meeting

Monday, 28 October 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Pandor/Mr. Matjila . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Leendertse
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Duclos
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

*Reissued for technical reasons 14 February 2022.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-33714 (E)
*1933714*

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
I give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the representatives of Algeria, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,Bangladesh, Brazil, Croatia, Cuba, Ecuador,
Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan,
Jordan, Lebanon, Malaysia, Maldives, Morocco,
Namibia, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, the
United Arab Emirates and Viet Nam to participate in
this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Mladenov is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Jerusalem.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Neville Gertze, Vice-Chair of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People; and His Excellency Mr. Maged Abdelfattah
Abdelaziz, Permanent Observer of the League of Arab
States to the United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations, to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.
2/57

begin

28/10/2019

its

Mr. Mladenov: We meet today as rapidly shifting
developments in the Middle East continue to underscore
the growing threat to international peace and security.
As new, dangerous flashpoints emerge in the region,
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict also remains one of the
drivers of extremism and instability. The occupation
continues and no progress has been made in realizing a
negotiated two-State solution. It is a multigenerational
tragedy for the peoples of this land.
On 26 September at the General Assembly (see
A/74/PV.7), President Abbas announced his intention
to set a date for Palestinian elections. If that decision
were to materialize, it would be the first Palestinian
elections since 2006, giving renewed legitimacy to
national institutions. The international community
should support this process if it strengthens national
unity and not division. That includes an agreement for
elections that take place across the occupied Palestinian
territory, in line with relevant legislation, international
best practices and an agreed national political platform
that is based on existing agreements.
The past month has also witnessed the continuing
deterioration of the situation on the ground. With no
prospect of final-status negotiations on the horizon,
facts on the ground continue to deteriorate, pushing
us ever further from a viable two-State solution.
During the past month it has been reported that the
Israeli authorities advanced plans for housing units in
Area C settlements. The exact numbers are yet to be
confirmed. Even without this latest advancement, the
number of units advanced or approved in 2019 so far is
already greater than that for all of 2018. Settlements are
illegal under international law and remain a substantial
obstacle to peace. They must cease immediately.
Meanwhile,
demolitions
and
seizures
of
Palestinian-owned structures also continued across the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Citing
the absence of Israeli-issued building permits, which
are nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain, the
authorities demolished or seized 51 structures, resulting
in the displacement of 80 Palestinians, including 40
children. Four of the structures were demolished based
on Military Order 1797.
Demolitions and confiscations of infrastructures
and internationally funded humanitarian projects in
Area C also continue at a concerning pace. The Israeli
authorities must stop this practice, which is not in line
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

with international humanitarian law, and compensate
the population affected commensurately with the
damages incurred.
Violence continues to be a major part of the day-today reality of the conflict. In recent weeks we have seen
a welcome reduction of violence in Gaza, including
in the launching of rockets. The agreements for calm
brokered by the United Nations and Egypt continue to
hold. Despite the overall improvement, however, three
Palestinians were killed by the Israel Defense Forces,
and more than 500 have been injured during protests at
the Gaza perimeter fence.
I take this opportunity to reiterate the concerns
expressed on 10 October by Deputy Special Coordinator
and Humanitarian Coordinator Jamie McGoldrick on
the impact that the violence at these demonstrations
has had on children. The Israeli security forces have
the responsibility to exercise maximum restraint and
use lethal force only when strictly necessary, as a last
resort. I also reiterate the call on Hamas to uphold its
responsibility to ensure the safety of children in Gaza,
including by preventing them from being used and
exposed to the risk of violence.
During the reporting period, six rockets were
launched from Gaza towards Israel, causing no injuries.
Additionally, for the first time in a month, no fires
were caused by incendiary balloons. Meanwhile, in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, two Palestinians
were killed, including one infant following tear-gas
inhalation. In addition, 88 Palestinians, including 11
children, were injured in various incidents, including
during clashes, military operations and settler-related
violence. Six Palestinian security forces personnel were
also injured by home-made explosive devices during
clashes with Palestinians. Four Israelis, including two
Israel security forces personnel, were also injured,
including one by Israeli settlers.
Among the overall incidents, according to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
settler-related violence resulted in 11 Palestinians and
one Israeli injured. In addition, there were 33 incidents
resulting in damage to Palestinian property, including
some 1,236 trees and 63 vehicles, and one incident
resulting in damage to an Israeli vehicle.
I am particularly concerned by the worrying attacks
by settlers in the occupied West Bank, in the context of
the annual olive harvest. As the olive harvest begins,
I call on the authorities to ensure smooth access of

S/PV. 8648

Palestinian farmers to their land and to protect farmers
and their property from attacks.
On 16 October, in an alarming incident, Palestinian
farmers and Israeli and foreign volunteers harvesting
olive trees near Burin village were attacked with stones
and metal rods by people from the Yitzhar settlement.
On 22 October the Yitzhar area was declared a closed
military zone, and forces were deployed in it. An
80-year-old rabbi and four foreign volunteers were also
injured. One of the alleged perpetrators of those attacks
was arrested. In Qaryut, south of Nablus, Palestinians
were also prevented from accessing their lands for the
olive harvest.
During the reporting period, despite attempts to
reach an agreement between the Israeli authorities and
residents of the Al-Issawiya district, tensions remain
high in East Jerusalem.
On 26 September, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians (AHLC) held its biannual meeting in New
York. The United Nations highlighted the critical need
to support the Palestinian people and the Palestinian
Authority (PA) and to advance the two-State solution
as the only viable option for a peaceful resolution
to the conflict. Moreover, at the meeting members
noted that every effort must be made to avoid further
deterioration in the security situations in both Gaza and
the West Bank.
The United Nations also reported on progress in the
implementation of the package of urgent humanitarian
and economic interventions for Gaza, endorsed by the
AHLC in September 2018. The interventions have had
an important impact across many sectors. The average
daily availability of electricity in Gaza has doubled
from 5.5 hours in the first half of 2018 to nearly 12 to
15 hours in the first half of 2019. This has increased
water and wastewater treatment, reduced the need for
expensive fuel to run hospitals and lowered costs for
private businesses and families.
Almost 450,000 people in Gaza have benefited
from emergency health care, and nearly 400,000 have
benefited from the delivery of drugs and medical
supplies. As of October, United Nations temporary jobcreation programmes have produced more than 16,000
jobs, with another 1,000 jobs expected in the coming
weeks. I thank those Member States that have supported
the implementation of the AHLC projects so far and
urge others to contribute to these critical initiatives.

19-337143/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Despite these vital efforts, the humanitarian
situation in Gaza remains dire. As of the end of
September, almost half of essential medications and
about a third of essential medical disposables are still
missing. Health providers continue to struggle to treat
those injured during the weekly demonstrations. Severe
movement and access restrictions continue, including
for those requiring treatment outside Gaza and national
staff from United Nations agencies and international
non-governmental organizations working in Gaza.
While addressing the humanitarian crisis must
remain our priority, I reiterate once again that the core
of the crisis in Gaza is political. It is not possible to
genuinely and sustainably improve the socioeconomic
situation in Gaza without significantly easing
restrictions on the movement and access of goods
and people, with the goal of ultimately lifting them,
in line with Security Council resolution 1860 (2009),
and reuniting Gaza and the West Bank under a single,
legitimate Palestinian national authority.
In this regard, I once again call on all Palestinian
factions to engage with Egypt on reconciliation efforts.
I am encouraged by the agreement reached on
3 October between Israel and the Palestinian Authority,
which resulted in the transfer of some $425 million
of clearance revenues to the PA. Despite the relative
normalization of the fiscal situation of the Palestinian
Authority, both sides must engage in a constructive
manner with the goal of restoring the revenue
transfers in full, in line with the Paris Protocol on
Economic Relations.

28/10/2019

Syndicate and a petition from the National Human
Rights Institution, the interpretation of the cybercrime
presidential decree, which was used as the legal basis
for the decision, was referred to the Constitutional
Court on 24 October.
Turning to developments in the region, popular
protests continue to take place in several countries,
from Jordan to Iraq to Lebanon, with people demanding
improvements to their daily lives and an end to corruption.
In Lebanon, an estimated 1.5 million Lebanese have
engaged in largely peaceful demonstrations against
the deteriorating economic situation and corruption.
In response, on 21 October the Council of Ministers
adopted a series of reform measures and finalized the
2020 State budget, with a 0.6 per cent public deficit
target. The protests, however, continue, with calls for
the resignation of the Government.
In Iraq, from 1 to 9 October anti-Government
protests took place across the country, notably in
Baghdad and in the southern governorates, and turned
violent, resulting in scores of fatalities. The report of
a governmental investigation, released on 22 October,
put the total number of fatalities at 157, citing a lack
of control at the local level by senior officials, in
addition to the unauthorized use of force, including
live ammunition, by security forces. The Government
in Baghdad has announced measures to address
the legitimate demands of the protesters, including
employment opportunities for young Iraqis and housing
subsidies for the poor.

On another positive note, I welcome the Palestinian
Cabinet’s decision on 21 October to advance
amendments to the Palestinian civil-status law in favour
of women. These include increasing the minimum age of
marriage and granting women the right to manage their
children’s bank accounts. In recent months, Palestinian
women have been actively voicing their demands for
recognition of their political, social and economic
rights and protection against gender-based violence.

A second round of large-scale demonstrations
started in the late evening of 24 October in Baghdad
and other locations in the south and continues to
date. Intense clashes have been reported, along with
the destruction of public and private property and
the presence of armed spoilers. As of 27 October, the
Independent High Commission of Human Rights had
registered 74 deaths and 3,654 injured — most of whom
were treated and have left the hospital — as well as 90
buildings burned.

I am concerned, however, about the 17 October
decision by the Ramallah Magistrate Court that ordered
the blocking of some 50 Palestinian and Arabic websites
and Facebook pages deemed critical of the Palestinian
Authority and its officials. The fundamental right of
freedom of opinion and expression and its associated
freedom to receive information are important and must
be protected. Following criticism from the Journalist

In Syria, in almost nine years of conflict we have
witnessed the devastating toll on civilians, including
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law, alleged war crimes and crimes
against humanity, systematic detention and torture,
attacks on medical facilities, schools and camps for
internally displaced persons and the erosion of norms
prohibiting the use of chemical weapons. A whole

4/57

19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

generation of Syrian children has grown up in war.
Hundreds of thousands of people have been killed and
half the country’s population has been displaced.
The Secretary-General and the Security Council
have made it clear that a sustainable solution can be
reached only through a United Nations-facilitated,
credible political process, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015). It is hoped that the launch of the
Constitutional Committee in Geneva will be the first
step in a broader political process that will meet the
legitimate aspirations of all Syrians.
Meanwhile, in the occupied Golan, the situation
has remained calm. The ceasefire between Israel and
Syria continues to be maintained in an environment that
remains volatile. Violations of the 1974 Disengagement
of Forces Agreement, including breaches of the
ceasefire line, continue to occur.
As we work to address the threats to international
peace and security in the Middle East, we must never
forget that preventive diplomacy is one of the most
important tools that we can use in order to defuse
tensions before they turn into confrontation. The
people of the Middle East have seen enough violence
and injustice. The region cannot afford another war and
we must continue our efforts to de-escalate tensions
and create openings for political solutions in the
interest of peace. In that context, I would like to return
to the Israeli-Palestinian question and remind everyone
that despite our collective efforts to prevent war in
Gaza, those efforts cannot be sustained on a purely
humanitarian basis. They need a political perspective
that illuminates a path forward to intra-Palestinian
unity and, ultimately, a two-State solution. We can
no longer continue to address Gaza’s critical needs
on a month-to-month basis while failing to confront
the broader political reality, including the stiffening
closures, violence and lack of unity.
Similarly, we can no longer disregard the cracks
emerging in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
Settlement construction and expansion continue, the
PA financial crisis is not resolved and the economy
continues to stagnate. Therefore, we must reassert that
to advance the goal of lasting peace between Israelis
and Palestinians, the only way forward is to return to
the negotiations with the goal of two States, living side
by side in peace, security and mutual recognition, based
on relevant United Nations resolutions, international
law and prior agreements.

S/PV. 8648

As in Israel and Palestine, so in the rest of the
Middle East, our collective efforts must be guided by
the Charter of the United Nations. In each conflict in
the region, preventive diplomacy and de-escalation
are critical elements of our engagement. Long-term
sustainable peace, however, can be based only on
justice, human rights and international law.
The President: I thank Mr. Mladenov for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I wish to begin by
expressing our congratulations and appreciation to the
Republic of South Africa for its most able leadership of
the Security Council in this month of its presidency. I
would like to welcome you, Madam Minister, and thank
you for presiding over today’s meeting. I would also like
to welcome Her Excellency Ms. Antje Leendertse, State
Secretary of the Federal Foreign Office of Germany.
We thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Mladenov, for his briefing on
the current situation in occupied Palestine, including
East Jerusalem.
Every month, we come before the Security Council
to appeal to it to act to ensure the implementation of
its resolutions on the Palestine question, certain that
only such action can bring us all back from the brink,
stopping the senseless, painful human suffering caused
by the man-made crisis and salvaging the prospects
for a just peace. Yet, every month we are compelled to
listen to reports of a worsening situation, as Israel, the
occupying Power, intensifies its illegal occupation and
colonization of our land and a political horizon for a
peaceful solution remains obstructed.
It cannot be that the role of the Council is reduced
to that of a gathering for the airing of grievances,
statements of sympathy and solidarity, as important as
they are, and helpless hand-wringing. The Palestinian
people and the global community at large expect and
await more. The mandate of the Security Council,
under the Charter of the United Nations, to maintain
international peace and security surely requires more.
As the calls to preserve multilateralism against
current threats grow, shoring up the Security Council’s
role in the peaceful resolution of conflicts must be front
and centre. That requires urgent action to uphold and

19-337145/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

enforce international law, aimed at halting violations,
deterring future violations and fostering an environment
conducive to the pursuit and achievement of peace.
In the case of Palestine, the Council’s relevant
resolutions, from resolution 2334 (2016) to all resolutions
preceding it, provide a solid basis for such action. The
international consensus is firm and attempts to alter or
negate it have failed. Indeed, we have often heard that,
when it comes to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, there
is no need to reinvent the wheel. International law is
clear. The parameters of a just solution are clear and
there is no alternative to the vision of two States, based
on the 1967 lines and in accordance with international
law, the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map. But, in the absence of serious
action to give tangible meaning to that consensus, the
alternative is rapidly unfolding before our eyes and
is one of an apartheid State in control of the lives of
millions who are being oppressively, violently and
unjustly deprived of their fundamental rights, even the
right to live as free and equal human beings.
After over 52 years of illegal occupation and the
cruel exile imposed on millions of Palestinians for
over seven decades, it is clear that the failure to reach a
solution is not for lack of attention to the conflict or lack
of resolutions; it is for lack of genuine efforts to uphold
the rules, decisions and humanitarian commitments
that have been repeatedly pled for. As concluded by
the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the human
rights situation in the occupied Palestinian territory in
his latest report:
“No occupation in the modern world has been
conducted with the international community so
alert to its many grave breaches of international
law, so knowledgeable about the occupier’s obvious
and well-signalled intent to annex and establish
permanent sovereignty, so well-informed about
the scale of suffering and dispossession endured
by the protected population under occupation, and
yet so unwilling to act upon the overwhelming
evidence before it to employ the tangible and
plentiful legal and political tools at its disposal to
end the injustice.”
Without accountability, the deplorable situation
we have faced will surely only worsen, paving the way
for more suffering and insecurity for all, with innocent
civilians, among them children and woman, bearing
6/57

28/10/2019

the heaviest and most heart-breaking weight of the
international community’s negligence. Indeed, despite
decades of global attention, none of Israel’s violations
in occupied Palestine have stopped. Those include the
colonization or de facto annexation of our land by all
means, with the settlements and wall being the most
insidious examples; the inhumane 12-year blockade
and collective punishment of 2 million Palestinians
in the Gaza Strip, inflicting devastating poverty and
despair; the killing and injury of defenceless Palestinian
civilians by the occupying forces and extremist settlers;
the destruction of homes and properties and the forced
displacement of Palestinian families, especially in
occupied East Jerusalem — with 140 homes demolished
in the city in 2019 alone — rendering homeless 238
Palestinians, more than half of them children; the
dangerous provocations and assaults at holy sites; the
impoverishment and detention of thousands of our
civilians, or the blatant theft of our natural and financial
resources. That all continues unabated.
The fact is that the occupying Power has been led to
believe that it has carte blanche to act as a State above
the law, going so far as to openly threaten to annex our
land, in flagrant breach of the universal prohibition on
the acquisition of territory by force. With or without a
formal Government, Israeli politicians and candidates
shamelessly compete to see who can be more brutal and
punishing to the Palestinians and who can cater more
to extremist Israeli groups that will never be satiated,
as evidenced by their daily terror campaign against our
civilians, as well as their incitement and their rabid landgrabs. Nothing else could be expected in the absence
of consequences for such great violations by this most
protracted foreign occupation in modern history.
Only accountability can change that. I repeat — only
accountability can change that.
Therefore, we appeal once more to the Security
Council and all States to act. We urge them to mobilize
the political will to fulfil their obligations by taking
practical measures in line with international law and
the relevant resolutions, which guarantee just and
sustainable peace and security. The Security Council
must shoulder its responsibilities and act immediately
in line with its resolutions to bring about a halt to the
occupation’s crimes, avert further destabilization,
protect innocent civilians and salvage any chance for
peace. States, intergovernmental organizations and
civil society must also uphold their respective roles
and responsibilities.
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Should Israel continue to defy the Council and the
will of the international community, it must bear the
consequences for its violations. All legitimate political
and legal tools and measures available, including
sanctions and court prosecution must be pursued
to ensure accountability. That must include action
pursuant to the call for distinction in resolution 2334
(2016) and other relevant resolutions including, inter
alia, resolution 478 (1980), on Jerusalem, and resolution
465 (1980), in which the Council clearly called on all
States not to provide Israel with any assistance to be
used specifically in connection with its settlements in
the territories occupied since 1967.
We urge States to take concrete steps in that
regard, in both multilateral and bilateral frameworks,
in conformity with their legal obligations and with
affirmed support for the two-State solution. We reiterate
our call for release of the database on businesses
engaged in activities related to the illegal settlements,
which was mandated by the Human Rights Council
and will help States to uphold their obligations. States
also have a duty of non-recognition of any decisions or
measures altering or purporting to alter the geographic
and demographic character or status of the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, in
violation of the law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention. All such decisions and measures must
be deemed unlawful, null and void and should incur
consequences if not rescinded. The legal and historic
status quo at the holy sites in occupied East Jerusalem,
including at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, must be respected,
as must Jordan’s custodianship of the Muslim and
Christian holy sites.
Lastly, we reiterate our call for continued
principled support for the rights of the Palestinian
people, including to self-determination and freedom.
Until they are realized, we shall continue our appeals
for humanitarian assistance to alleviate the plight
of our people, including Palestinian refugees and to
ensure that they are not left behind. We recognize
with deep gratitude the generous international support
in that regard through the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) and urge strong backing for the renewal of
its mandate, an important expression of responsibility
and solidarity and an indispensable source of hope
and stability until a just solution for the Palestinian
refugees is realized based on resolution 194 (II). Only
such determined, collective and coordinated action can

S/PV. 8648

move us from deadlock to finally bringing an end to the
Israeli occupation that began in 1967, thereby fulfilling
the Palestinian people’s right to independence in their
sovereign, contiguous democratic State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and achieving
Israeli-Palestinian peace and security, the cornerstone
for peace and security in the Middle East as per the
long-standing international consensus.
For the sake of peace, the benefit of all peoples of the
region and the respect for the authority of international
law, we must act together to change course, restore hope
and attain just and comprehensive peace. Failure to do
so will have far-reaching repercussions and unravel
decades of efforts and resources invested in our shared
noble goals of peace, stability and human dignity. We
must not let another generation suffer that injustice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Every three months, we meet
here to discuss the situation in the Middle East. As I
am sure will happen today as well, the members of
this organ will choose to talk about Israel, despite the
horrific events that are taking place in the region.
Since our last meeting on this item (see S/PV.8583),
Erdoğan has invaded northern Syria and caused
instability in the region. As shocking as Erdoğan’s
recent aggression is, it should come as no surprise.
For years now, Erdoğan has been destabilizing the
region through violence and by supporting terror
organizations. Erdoğan is dragging Turkey down a
dangerous new Ottoman imperialist path. He threatens
journalists, persecutes religious minorities and
promotes anti-Semitism. It was not enough for Erdoğan
to persecute the Kurdish citizens of his own country.
He has now sent his troops to massacre Kurdish people
in Syria as well. He is responsible for the deaths of
many innocent people and for the displacement of tens
of thousands.
The violence that he has caused in Syria has also
led to the strengthening of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS). While he was busy murdering those
who had helped keep the world safe from the threats of
ISIS, he allowed ISIS members to break out of prison
and subject the world to future attacks. That, too, should
come as no surprise, as Erdoğan has a long history of
supporting terror. Erdoğan has granted Hamas, a terror
organization, political and financial support. He has
allowed Hamas to continue to build its leadership and

19-337147/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

infrastructure on Turkish soil. He has turned Turkey
into a safe haven for Hamas terrorists and a financial
centre for funnelling money to subsidize terror attacks.
Erdoğan’s Turkey shows no moral or human restraint
towards the Kurdish people. Erdoğan has turned Turkey
into a regional hub for terrorism.
As Erdoğan expands his terror campaign in Syria,
the Security Council focuses on Israel. It is a disgrace
to the Council’s mandate that it continues to target
Israel instead of the atrocities that are being committed
by Erdoğan. As we sit here today, recycling old
arguments against Israel over and over again instead
of focusing on the devastation caused by Erdoğan will
not save the lives of the Kurdish people. Israel warns
against the ethnic cleansing of the Kurds and calls on
the international community to take action and provide
aid to the Kurdish people.
Unfortunately, Erdoğan’s support for non-State
terror organizations does not stand alone. For years,
the region has experienced the growing influence of
such organizations, and they now play a substantial
role in shaping the reality of the Middle East. These
terror organizations have been able to grow and act in
an increasingly bold manner because they have been
backed by countries. It is no secret that some in the
region wish to pursue policies and develop capabilities
that put the international community at risk. In some
cases, countries blatantly defy the international
community and pursue their weapons capabilities, as
we have seen with Iran’s continued development of its
nuclear and ballistic missile programmes. However,
in other cases those countries wish to further their
dangerous ambitions without appearing responsible
for doing so. That is why Turkey supports Hamas
and recklessly strengthens ISIS. That is why Iran has
formed militias. The Iranian regime, whose nuclear
ambitions represent the biggest threat to world peace,
uses organizations as proxies to further its dangerous
plans. Those organizations are doing Iran’s dirty work
and granting it a form of plausible deniability.
These organizations have multiplied and spread
like a dangerous virus. They are now present in Syria,
Iraq, Lebanon, Yemen, Gaza, the Sinai peninsula,
Libya and other locations. For example, the Al-Hashd
Al-Shaabi Shia militias have long stopped focusing on
fighting ISIS and have since, under Iranian influence,
been challenging the stability of Iraq. The militias’
stronghold on the Iraqi-Syrian border, an area that serves
as a crucial part of the Iranian land-bridge through
8/57

28/10/2019

the Middle East, poses a threat to the security of the
citizens of Iraq and to the stability of the Government.
In northern Syria, ISIS has recently been strengthened
by Erdoğan’s attack on the Kurds and continues to pose
a threat to peace and stability in the region. Hizbullah
continues to strengthen its hold in western Syria and
arm itself in Lebanon. Ansar Allah Houthis continue to
be a source of violence, both in Yemen and in the rest of
the region, as we recently witnessed in Saudi Arabia. In
Gaza, Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad continue to
target innocent civilians on both sides of the border and
defy the efforts made by parties in the region to bring
the violence to an end.
These terrorist organizations do not all share
the same ideology and they differ in their perverted
interpretation of religious text. However, they all share
one main goal — to rid the region of nation States
and inaugurate a single religious leadership to preside
over the world. These organizations undermine the
sovereignty of States, disregard the rights of citizens
and cause instability. They do not believe in the rights
of women, the rights of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender community, or the freedom of religion.
These organizations have been using brutal force
against civilian populations to pursue their agendas.
They have been murdering and raping. They have
been looting towns and using children as soldiers
and human shields. When one of these organizations
represents a single party to a conflict, its willingness to
do whatever it takes can be dangerous; but when many
parties act that way in a region that is already volatile,
the consequences can be and have been horrific. These
are the actors that are now playing a substantial role in
shaping the reality of the Middle East.
Many of these organizations have set up camp
on Israel’s borders. Up north in Lebanon, there is
Hizbullah; in Syria, there are Iranian militias and
Hizbullah; in Gaza, there is Hamas and Palestinian
Islamic Jihad; and in the Sinai peninsula, there is ISIS.
Israel will continue to do everything in its power to
defeat those organizations and keep our civilians safe.
However, it is not the safety and well-being of only one
country or even one region that are on the line. The
lack of stability has grave consequences for the entire
international community.
The recent Iranian attacks on Saudi Arabia, for
which Iran got the Houthis to claim responsibility, did
not only cause unrest in the region, but also affected
the world economy. The price of oil jumped after the
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

attacks on the oil facilities. Consumers worldwide bore
the literal cost of the harm to the global supply of crude
oil. The non-State terror organizations of the region act
in ways that are dangerous to the world economy and
their effects are felt far beyond the region.
The economy is not the only way in which those
organizations affect the international community.
When citizens are persecuted in their own homes
and are terrorized by those organizations, they do not
stay home. They seek to flee as far as they can and
they become refugees. Sometimes they stay in the
Middle East, but, as we have seen in recent years,
many make their way to Europe. By the end of 2016,
nearly 5.2 million refugees and migrants had reached
European shores after enduring agonizing journeys
from Syria, Iraq and other countries.
Unfortunately, many more did not manage to reach
those shores. In 2018, more than 138,000 people risked
their lives trying to reach Europe by sea. More than
2,000 of them drowned. In Yemen, 3 million people have
been forced to flee their homes because of increased
violence. Many flee to neighbouring countries such as
Saudi Arabia, Djibouti and Ethiopia. The immigration
crisis is a direct result of the growing power of non-State
terrorist organizations in the region. The proxies of
Iran and other terrorist-supporting States are forcing
people out of their homes, leaving the rest of the world
to take care of them.
This organ was created to promote stability and
safety in the world. However, the world in which this
organ was created — a world in which violence was
played out among States — no longer exists. The
international community is trying to win again new
players, using an old strategy in a game that has long
since evolved. If this organ wishes to truly serve its
mandate of promoting safety and stability, it must adapt
itself to a world with non-State actors.
For years, Israel has had to deal with non-State
terrorist organizations that seek to destroy it. Through
its experience, Israel has developed methods for dealing
with them and looks to share those methods with
the world. The international community must come
together to return stability to the region by immediately
taking the following four steps.
First, we must all recognize such non-State
organizations for what they are — terrorist
organizations. The international community must

S/PV. 8648

designate them as terrorist organizations and publicly
condemn them and their actions.
Secondly, we must prevent the funding of such
organizations, which includes using our intelligence
forces to find all sources of revenue that they hold and
cutting them off. It also means forcing regimes to stop
providing funding to those organizations and applying
more sanctions.
Thirdly, we must encourage the countries in which
those terrorist organizations live to take action against
them, and we must assist them in those efforts.
Finally, if all else fails, we must take military action
to stop those terror organizations. Israel congratulates
our dear friend the United States on its recent, successful
operation. Al-Baghdadi, the leader of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham, posed a threat to the safety and
security of the entire world. We thank the United States
for making our world safer.
The four steps I have mentioned are not enough. If
this organ wants to serve its purpose of promoting safety
and stability in the new world order, it must adjust. We
must work together to promote new methods and forms
of cooperation. The Council was created to ensure the
security and stability of the United Nations Member
States. Non-State terrorist organizations represent
the biggest threat to both security and stability. It is
our human obligation to fight for the lives of innocent
civilians; it is our moral obligation to fight for human
rights for all; it is our mandated obligation to ensure
that nation-States are not held hostage by terrorist
organizations and the countries that support them. I
call upon my fellow members to join forces in the fight
against this threat.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Minister for International Relations and
Cooperation of South Africa.
South Africa firmly believes that the question of
peace in the Middle East will not be resolved unless the
question of Palestine is resolved. Today, we debate the
longest-standing subject on the agenda of the Security
Council. Our failure to find a resolution to the plight
of the people of Palestine and to secure their peace and
freedom is a profound stain on our stated mission and
objectives. In the period since our previous debate, the
situation has deteriorated markedly, suggesting even
less hope for peace.

19-337149/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Council has a duty to the people of Palestine,
which is clearly articulated in the Charter of the United
Nations, and it is vital that dedicated attention be
directed towards finally achieving the outcomes stated
in manifold United Nations resolutions.
South Africa believes that it is always possible to
find solutions to seemingly intractable challenges. Our
own struggles were advanced by United Nations action
and determination to end a crime against humanity.
We need similar, vigorous international solidarity,
indignation and commitment for Palestine. The Council
is fully aware that it is in this very organ that the
elusive breakthrough exists — that it is only several
of the members present here that can ensure peace and
security in Palestine and the entire Middle East.
Council resolutions have been breached and
ignored. Resolution 2334 (2016) confirmed that the
Council would not recognize any changes to the 4 June
1967 lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, other
than those that were agreed by the parties through
mediation. Yet those very agreed decisions and
negotiations have been undermined through unilateral
decisions aimed at predetermining the outcome of the
negotiations. That points to bad faith and can never
secure peace.
Of even greater concern is the fact that the people
of Palestine seem to have become a forgotten people
whose hopes are dissipating in the face of diminishing
world support and the absence of any real attempt at
honest and genuine negotiations. We in South Africa
are gravely concerned by the continued disregard for
the long-standing Middle East peace process through
the systematic foreclosing of the final status issues,
particularly with regard to the borders, the return of
refugees, the status of Jerusalem and the ever-expanding
illegal settlements. There is clearly no intention to seek
or achieve peace by those implementing such actions.
How is it possible to believe in the Council, in peace
and security, in the face of such offending breaches of
its very decisions?
The Council must find ways to repair its damaged
and waning credibility as a source of peace and
security. First, the Council must insist on receiving
regular written reports on the implementation of its
decisions, particularly with respect to resolution 2334
(2016). Secondly, the Council must visibly show its
solidarity with the long-suffering people of Palestine
by ensuring that the long-overdue field visit to the
10/57

28/10/2019

occupied Palestinian territory is conducted by those on
the Council willing to do so. Thirdly, the Council must
take further action against the continued violation of
human rights and disregard for international law.
South Africa fully supports a two-State solution
and an agreed peace process aimed at ensuring two
coexisting viable States side by side, offering hope
and example to those who suffer hatred and insecurity.
This solution would bring important benefits for the
entire region. We also utterly condemn the human
rights violations against the Palestinian people and the
violence directed at the people of Gaza and the West
Bank through occupation and aggression by Israel.
The Council cannot be seen to condone such
actions of violence and hostility as the building of
further barriers and walls, the closing of schools and
the killing of civilians. The Council should act to ensure
gestures of hope and the building of trust between the
parties, which requires, as a first step, a firm statement
against intolerance of violent infringements and other
negative actions.
This institution, the United Nations, was founded
on the principles of ensuring the presence and practice
of human rights, respect for the worth and dignity of
every person, equality whether rich or poor, mighty
or weak, and a world of justice, peace and respect for
international law. On the subject of Palestine, we have
clearly failed on these principles. Our commitments
have fallen short, and suffering continues unabated. We
must do more before the next debate.
There are many who will speak on this subject
today, which indicates great trouble and great interest in
this troubling inadequacy. Let us remember that while
debate is important, we lose credibility as an institution
when words are not accompanied by action. The people
of Palestine require action.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the other Council members
who wish to make statements.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): Germany is firmly
committed to a rules-based international order and
multilateral cooperation, which is why Germany,
together with France and other States, hosted a
ministerial event during the high-level week here
in New York under the auspices of the Alliance for
Multilateralism, with the participation of ministers
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

from more than 50 States. Global challenges need to be
addressed together, in a joint effort and in a multilateral
framework that is able to defend what has been agreed.
What is true at the global level is also true at
the regional level, including when it comes to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The best and only way
to achieve a just and lasting solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict is for the international community
to work together, remain committed to a common set
of rules and values, and do so in the framework of the
United Nations.
Germany therefore remains fully and firmly
committed to a negotiated two-State solution based on
the internationally agreed parameters. We believe a twoState solution is the only viable answer to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict that meets Israeli and Palestinian
security needs, fulfils Palestinian aspirations for
statehood and sovereignty, ends the occupation that
began in 1967, resolves all permanent status issues, and
guarantees equal rights for all inhabitants.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is first and foremost
a political conflict that requires a political solution.
Addressing the economic aspects of the conflict alone
cannot replace a political solution negotiated between
the parties for the purposes of achieving lasting peace.
In line with the European Union and our European
partners, we welcome and support any initiative that
aims at reviving the peace process as long as it is based
on a commitment to a viable two-State solution, as
internationally agreed, and as long as it is acceptable to
both parties, Israelis and Palestinians.
Joint efforts to restore a political perspective for the
resumption of the peace process are urgently needed.
We therefore support any attempt to restart meaningful
direct talks and negotiations between the parties with
the objective of reaching a just and lasting solution.
There will not be and there cannot be a fast track
to peace. Forgoing the most controversial questions
of the peace process by taking them off the table or
creating facts on the ground will not lead to sustainable
peace. We therefore call on all parties to refrain from
taking unilateral measures and collectively counter
the negative developments on the ground that are
undermining the viability of a negotiated two-State
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the basis
of the internationally agreed parameters.

S/PV. 8648

One of the main obstacles to a political settlement
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is, in our view,
the continued settlement activities in the territories
occupied since 1967. We reiterate our position that
Israeli settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territories are illegal under international law and
undermine the prospects for a negotiated two-State
solution. We call upon Israel to end the expansion of
settlements, the legalization of settlement outposts and
the demolition, seizure and evictions of Palestinianowned structures. Germany will not recognize any
changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including those
concerning Jerusalem, other than those agreed upon by
the parties. Resolution 2334 (2016) needs to be fully
implemented, not only regarding settlement activities.
The obligations it sets out with regard to acts of terror,
violence against civilians, incitement, provocative
actions and inflammatory rhetoric need to be honoured
as well.
Germany condemns all attacks on Israel, including
the repeated firing of rockets from Gaza by Hamas and
other groups, in the strongest possible terms. Indeed,
Hamas and other groups must stop firing rockets
from Gaza into Israel. They must renounce the path of
violence and allow the Palestinian Authority to return
to Gaza. Against this backdrop, Germany welcomes
the announcement by President Abbas to hold elections
in the near future. Germany remains steadfast in
its commitment to Israel’s security as a Jewish and
democratic State. We will not be silent whenever Israel’s
security or right to exist is questioned or compromised.
The increase in violence and provocative rhetoric
and actions is deeply worrying. We strongly urge all
sides to de-escalate, exercise restraint and refrain from
provocative rhetoric and actions. Considering recent
events at the Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount,
we recall the paramount importance of maintaining
the agreed status quo for keeping the peace at these
holy sites.
The deteriorating humanitarian and economic
situation in Gaza, in particular the situation in the
health-care sector, remains deeply worrisome. We also
call upon Israel and the Palestinian Authority to do their
part to improve the dire humanitarian situation in Gaza.
We encourage States Members of the United Nations
to step up their financial support in order to close the
current funding gaps of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near

19-3371411/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

East (UNRWA), and to ensure the provision of basic
health-care services in Gaza.
UNRWA remains indispensable for meeting the
basic needs of Palestinian refugees. By providing
humanitarian assistance, health-care services and
education, UNRWA is key to maintaining stability in
the region. As the largest bilateral donor, Germany
remains firmly committed to UNRWA and continues
to significantly contribute to the Agency’s budget. We
encourage others to similarly continue their political and
financial support for UNRWA’s crucial work. However,
we also expect UNRWA to work arduously towards the
swift termination of ongoing internal investigations.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): The present
issue is one of the more complex issues that the Council
has to navigate. I therefore wish to thank the Special
Coordinator for his good-faith efforts and for the evenhanded perspective he brings to these briefings.
Before discussing today’s topic, I want to make
brief mention of the important event that occurred over
the weekend. As President Trump stated, the world is a
much safer place following the operation by American
special operations forces that resulted in the death
of Al-Baghdadi. I want to thank Americans, fearless
women and men in uniform, our intelligence community
and our partners, who executed this mission flawlessly,
for their efforts in bringing the leader of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant to justice.
In my remarks on the issue last month (see
S/PV.8625), I largely focused on Israel, which receives
a disproportionate amount of the United Nations
attention when it comes to the discussion of peace and
security in the Middle East. This attention is unfairly
negative and one-sided. In the past two years, there
have been some 20 resolutions in the General Assembly
either implicitly or explicitly criticizing Israel.
Today, I want to use my remarks to shed light on
an actor that somehow receives far less criticism than
Israel and whose behaviour has never been seriously
scrutinized by the Council or by the General Assembly:
Hamas, a terrorist organization that oppresses the
Palestinian people in Gaza through intimidation and
outright violence while inciting violence against Israel.
Hamas is one of the largest obstacles to real peace
and prosperity for Palestinians and to the resolution of
this conflict. If this institution is genuinely concerned
with peace, we should be eager to examine Hamas’
12/57

28/10/2019

behaviour more closely. To begin, Hamas exhibits
a blatant lack of respect for democratic principles.
In recent months, as frustrated residents of Gaza
have voiced their opposition to the intolerable living
conditions created by Hamas’ rule, Hamas has brutally
beaten peaceful protesters, raided homes and detained
organizers and journalists advocating for better living
standards. I condemn this behaviour. We all should.
The disregard Hamas shows for the will and
rights of the Palestinian people is matched only by the
disregard for innocent human life. We all know that
Hamas blindly fires rockets into Israel, as they have
done hundreds of times in 2019. But it is important for
us to understand what that means at a human level. The
vast majority of rockets fired by Hamas are unguided,
which means that a lethal munition is just as likely
to hit a classroom full of children as it is to strike a
military asset. We cannot imagine the fears of Israeli
mothers who know their children may spend recess
running from the playground to the bomb shelter, or the
Palestinian fathers who know that unguided rockets fly
over their roofs while their children sleep. I condemn
these indiscriminate attacks. We all should.
If there is anything more despicable than Hamas’
attacks on civilian areas, it is the way they treat their
own children as pawns in a political game. Every
Friday, Hamas encourages minors to join riots at the
security fence, hoping that violence will erupt and that
the children will be injured or even killed as a result,
thereby feeding their propaganda machine. A more
cynical and shameful approach could not be devised.
This is child abuse, plain and simple, and I condemn it.
We all should.
We have a responsibility to say what is plainly true
about Hamas, as well as the Palestinian Islamic Jihad
and other militant actors in Gaza, just as we have an
obligation to say what is plainly true of human rights
abusers around the world. To remain silent in this
instance would be an act against principle and an insult
to the Palestinian people. It is therefore my genuine
hope that this Chamber and, indeed, the halls of the
United Nations will one day resound with the truth
that we have spoken about Hamas. Lasting peace in
the Middle East and a better future for all Palestinians
depends on it.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): France,
together with the European Union, offers its steadfast
support for the two-State solution. We continue to defend
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

this position, not only because it is just and in line with
international law, but also because it is realistic. It is the
only way to meet the aspirations of both the Israeli and
the Palestinian peoples and, ultimately, bring lasting
peace to the region. It must enable the establishment
of a fully functioning Palestinian State, living in peace
and security alongside the State of Israel, within secure
and internationally recognized borders along the 1967
lines, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States.
For its part, France will continue to defend, as
it always has, the creation of a Palestinian State. We
will also continue to oppose, as we always have, all
those who attack the security — and indeed, the very
existence — of Israel. Every day we witness how
the absence of a political perspective fuels despair,
radicalization in all its forms and the risk of regional
destabilization. The parties must therefore refrain from
any measure contrary to international law that could
endanger the viability of the two-State solution.
Bolstered by those convictions, the international
community and the Council in particular have defined
and endorsed this two-State solution. All Council
resolutions remain valid and relevant, from resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) to resolution 2334 (2016)
on settlement building, as well as resolution 1515
(2003), adopted unanimously by the Council and which
enshrines the two-State solution. The jurisprudence of
the Council must be respected in its entirety; it is not
an à la carte menu.
At a time when the prospect of a two-State solution
may seem to be further and further away, it is more
important than ever to remind the parties that there is
no viable alternative. Any peace plan that distances
itself from the two-State solution is an illusion. The
aspirations of one people cannot be sustainably realized
to the detriment of the rights and aspirations of the other.
The economic development of the occupied Palestinian
territories is a necessary condition, and that is why
France and the European Union support the action of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians. But that is not
enough — there will be no peace without a genuine and
comprehensive political solution.
The most recent developments must be considered
in the light of this collectively defined objective of the
two-State solution. France welcomes the announcement
made by President Abbas to the General Assembly on
the holding of general elections (see A/74/PV.7). In

S/PV. 8648

order for these elections to be pluralistic and inclusive,
it is important that they be held in all Palestinian
territories, including the Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem.
In any case, President Abbas’ announcement must be
an element of inter-Palestinian reconciliation, which
constitutes one of the conditions for achieving peace.
I wish to highlight the efforts made by Egypt in
this regard.
The arrangement reached at the beginning of
October between Israel and the Palestinian Authority on
the transfer of income is also commendable, pending the
conclusion of a comprehensive and lasting agreement.
Despite that, the situation on the ground continues to
deteriorate and renders peace more difficult. In the
West Bank and East Jerusalem, the ongoing building
of settlements, illegal under international law as
reaffirmed by resolution 2334 (2016), is fuelling
tensions and undermining the viability of the two-State
solution. Recent statements on the possible annexation
of certain areas of the West Bank are also very
worrying. This would constitute a barrier to peace and a
grave and unprecedented violation of international law.
Along with our European partners, we will continue to
monitor the situation closely, including any movements
towards annexation, and act accordingly.
In Gaza, despite the maintenance of a precarious
calm and respect for the truce since mid-September,
the humanitarian situation remains catastrophic.
Beyond emergency responses, there will be no lasting
improvement in the situation in Gaza without a
political solution involving the return of the Palestinian
Authority and the lifting of the blockade, with credible
security guarantees for Israel. We call for respect for the
right to peaceful demonstration and the proportionate
use of force.
As we await lasting peace, which will provide a just
response to the issue of refugees, our collective support
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East remains essential.
Such support is all the more important as we approach
the triennial renewal of its mandate by the General
Assembly this fall.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that France will
continue to work towards the two-State solution.
Because France is a friend to both Israel and Palestine,
we stand ready to encourage them to resume dialogue.
Since the spring of 2014, there has been no peace
process, only constant announcements of postponed

19-3371413/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

initiatives that never see the light of day. The Security
Council must play its role, both in terms of ensuring the
implementation of its past resolutions and supporting
the emergence of a solution that can only come from the
parties themselves.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Madam President, we wish to welcome both
your presence in the Security Council today and the
fact that you are presiding over this meeting. We
also welcome the presence of the State Secretary of
the Federal Foreign Office of Germany. We wish to
thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, and reiterate our
full support for his efforts and mandate, which he is
ably fulfilling in a difficult and delicate security and
political environment.
Upon joining the Organization, States Members of
the United Nations adopt the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter, including the specific mandate
given to the Security Council under Article 24, in
which Member States confer upon the Council primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security and agree that in carrying out its
duties under this responsibility the Council acts on
their behalf. Furthermore, Member States agree, in
accordance with Article 25 of the Charter, to accept and
carry out Council resolutions. Today, at a time when
Israel, the occupying Power, continuously ignores or
violates the resolutions of the Security Council, and
make it impossible to resolve the Palestinian question,
which represents the core of the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, and thereby to achieve a just and comprehensive
peace, we would like to highlight the binding nature of
Security Council resolutions.
First, the Charter of the United Nations is an
international treaty, whose articles carry the same
weight and trigger the same kinds of obligations that
other instruments of international law do, particularly
in terms of their mandatory nature, which binds Member
States in terms of such principles of international
relations as the sovereign equality of States and the
illegality of the use of force against States. Since the
founding of the United Nations in 1945, the Security
Council has adopted dozens of resolutions on the
Palestinian question, most of which have focused
on calling on Israel, the occupying Power, to end its
occupation of and violations committed in occupied
Palestinian territory. However, those resolutions have
14/57

28/10/2019

remained ineffectual, despite of the fact that they are
binding on all countries.
Secondly, although States Members of the United
Nations have delegated a major part of their authority to
the Security Council, the Council has regrettably been
incapable of making the occupying Power implement
its resolutions. Of further concern is the contempt with
which the occupying Power treats the Council and
its resolutions, particularly those aimed at protecting
the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people and at
putting an end to all illegitimate and illegal actions
taken against them, their property, sacred places and
fundamental rights.
Thirdly, given that the Security Council is the organ
mandated by the Charter to assume responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
the strength of its resolutions derives from the fact
that no State has the right to renounce its obligation to
implement those resolutions, particularly those adopted
in the context of Council efforts to end conflict.
Fourthly, Council resolutions are of particular
importance in addressing the Palestinian question
because international consensus on the issue is a
fundamental pillar of any peace agreement and
represents the legal basis and key reference point for
all endeavours and negotiations aimed at resolving
the issue, in particular the two-State solution and the
principle of living side by side in lasting peace.
Fifthly, it is regrettable that Israel, the occupying
Power, continues to act as if Council resolutions on the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict are irrelevant. In fact, Israel
is attempting to alter the historical and demographic
situation on the ground, particularly in Jerusalem, by
resorting to military force and expansionist settlement
policies, despite the call in resolution 2334 (2016) for
an end to such policies. Today, Israel is demolishing
Palestinian buildings and houses, resulting in forced
displacement of residents. Violence is committed by
settlers against local inhabitants. The Gaza Strip is
under siege. Attacks on Al-Aqsa Mosque are regular
events. Moreover, the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), which has provided essential services to the
Palestinian refugee community for decades, is under
tremendous financial pressure. We wish to take this
opportunity to express our full support for UNRWA
and its mandate and condemn all practices aimed at
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8648

acquiring territory by force, in violation of international
law and the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.

briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question.

The Security Council has the primary duty of
maintaining international peace and security, acting
on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations
as their executive organ. Council resolutions are
therefore binding, which means that Member States
have an international responsibility to hold to account
those States that are not complying with the Council’s
resolutions, namely, in this case, the State of Israel, the
occupying Power, which has deliberately disregarded
the legal nature of Council resolutions for decades and
has shown nothing but contempt for the Charter of the
United Nations and fundamental human rights.

The 24 October marked the seventy-fourth
anniversary of the adoption of the founding Charter of
the United Nations, the main objectives of which are
to build a world of peace, security and social progress.
Since the adoption of the Charter, the international
community, through the Security Council, has not
flagged in its efforts to promote peace and security
around the world. However, despite our many
successes, several hotbeds of tension continue to afflict
the world and currently represent a genuine threat to
our collective security.

Earlier, my Palestinian colleague mentioned tools
available to the Council, including the imposition of
sanctions under Article 41 of the Charter, that might
ensure that Israel respects and implements relevant
resolutions. We once again call on members of the
Council to visit the occupied Palestinian territory
to see the effects of occupation as well as the tragic
consequences for the Palestinian people, with a view to
taking necessary steps and measures to put an end to
the occupation.
Finally, while Israel occupies Palestine and ignores
the will of the international community, we reiterate
our support for the Arab, Islamic and international
stance that holds that peace is the strategic choice and
that a lasting, comprehensive and just solution must be
based on the two-State solution, in accordance with the
agreed terms of reference, namely, relevant Council
resolutions, the principle of land for peace, the road
map and the Arab Peace Initiative. Accordingly, the
Palestinian people will be assured of all their legitimate
political rights, including the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Madam President, my delegation welcomes your
participation in today’s meeting in your capacity as
Minister for International Relations and Cooperation of
South Africa, and we are pleased to see you presiding
over our work. We also welcome the presence of Her
Excellency Ms. Antic Leendertse, State Secretary of
the Federal Foreign Office of Germany. We also wish to
commend Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his excellent

The decades-old Israeli-Palestinian dispute is
representative of those conflicts, the regional and
international repercussions of which continue to
undermine peace and security on a global scale. That is
why Côte d’Ivoire remains deeply concerned about the
political impasse that has prevailed since the signing
of the Oslo Accords, as well as the cases of sporadic
violence that contribute to moving us further away
from the hope for a peaceful and lasting solution to the
conflict. My delegation welcomes the holding of this
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, which provides us once again
with an opportunity to reiterate our firm belief that
only constructive dialogue between the two parties on
all of the issues causing current divisions might lead to
a lasting and mutually acceptable solution.
Côte d’Ivoire launches once again an urgent call for
the resumption of negotiations without preconditions
between Israelis and Palestinians, while also urging
the international community, including the United
Nations, to work with stakeholders to achieve the twoState solution, with two independent States peacefully
coexisting within the 1967 borders. In this regard,
my delegation commends the visit of Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, from 5 to 11 October, to the
Middle East, in particular to Jerusalem, where she
spoke of the need to revive the dialogue between
Israelis and Palestinians in order to promote the twoState solution. It is therefore important that both parties
refrain from unilateral actions that could further
degrade an already precarious security environment
and jeopardize the international community’s efforts
towards rapprochement and reconciliation.

19-3371415/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

My country would also like to reiterate its
commitment both to Israel’s security and to the
inalienable right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination. Those are two fundamental requirements
that are not mutually exclusive, but rather mutually
reinforcing, and are in strict keeping with the twoState solution.
My delegation believes that the humanitarian
situation in the Palestinian territories continues to
worsen, fuel tension between Fatah and Hamas, and
stoke Palestinian resentment against the State of Israel.
This very worrying situation is undeniably exacerbated
by persistent youth unemployment and water and
electricity shortages, all in the context of an acute
economic crisis in the Palestinian territories. In this
regard, Côte d’Ivoire urges the international community
to provide the needed humanitarian assistance to the
Palestinian population in distress and to promote the
economic recovery and reconstruction of the Gaza
Strip through adequate financing and investment.
Accordingly, we welcome the pledges of support to the
budget of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in order to
reduce the Agency’s budgetary deficit.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire renews its support for
the efforts of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov to promote peace
and stability in the Middle East, in general, and between
Israeli and Palestinians, in particular. It is fully aligned
with the objective of a comprehensive and lasting peace
in the Middle East and reiterates its readiness to work
together with all Council members to ensure a peaceful
resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian crisis in accordance
with the relevant Council resolutions.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome the Foreign Minister of South Africa as she
presides over today’s meeting, and I thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.
At the root of the turbulence in the Middle East,
the Palestinian issue must be placed at the centre of the
international agenda. At present, the Middle East peace
process is stalled. The conflict over the final status
of Jerusalem continues, the humanitarian situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory remains grave, and
settlements continue to be built. China finds all of these
elements to be very concerning. What we lack is not a
grand plan, but the courage to deliver on commitments
and the conscience to uphold justice. I wish to make
some observations.
16/57

28/10/2019

First, we must promote the overall goal of the
two-State solution. The two-State solution and the
principle of land for peace represent the bottom line
of international justice, from which we cannot retreat
any further. The establishment of an independent
State is an inalienable national right of the Palestinian
people, a right that cannot be traded away. In the spirit
of responsibility towards the Palestinian and Israeli
people and with a view to achieving regional peace,
the international community, especially countries with
influence over Palestine and Israel, should uphold
the two-State solution, the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the principle of land for peace and other
international agreements based on consensus in order
to get the Middle East peace process back on track.
Secondly, we should stick to the general approach
of maintaining a peaceful dialogue. The task at hand is
to act to prevent the escalation of tensions and resume
Palestinian-Israeli peace talks as soon as possible.
We should immediately put an end to all actions that
undermine peace talks and mutual trust, earnestly
implement Council resolution 2334 (2016) and cease
new settlements and violence against innocent
civilians. The recent clashes at the Al-Aqsa Mosque are
disconcerting. All parties must remain committed to
the relevant United Nations resolutions and resolve the
final status of Jerusalem through political negotiations.
We should gradually rebuild and increase mutual trust
and create favourable conditions for peace talks.
Thirdly, we should continue to pursue a
comprehensive solution. We should promote political
negotiations and concentrate on development. We must
also closely follow and improve the economic and
humanitarian situation of the Palestinian people and
unwaveringly promote peace through development.
China encourages both Palestine and Israel to resolve
the issue of tax collection through consultation and calls
for the earnest implementation of the Paris Protocol,
other relevant international treaties and the relevant
United Nations resolutions. We also call for the formal
lifting of the blockade on Gaza as soon as possible.
The international community should continue to
firmly support the work of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East and improve the humanitarian conditions
of Palestinian refugees. China is ready and willing to
continue its cooperation with Palestine in the areas of
the economy, finance, culture, education and health,
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and take concrete actions to promote the national
stability and development of the country.
The world today faces the prominent threat of
unilateralism and protectionism. Tension in the Middle
East is escalating, and its spillover effects are becoming
increasingly apparent. Furthermore, terrorism is
presenting additional challenges. At this critical
juncture, when the future and fate of the world are at
stake, major countries bear a special responsibility for
maintaining international stability. In this regard, the
permanent members of the Security Council should
play an exemplary role. In his address at the general
debate in the Assembly in September, Chinese State
Councillor and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Wang
Yi, put forward a three-point proposal on the situation
in the Middle East and the Gulf (see A/74/PV.9).Russia
also recently released its collective-security concept for
the Gulf region.
China welcomes any dialogue initiative that is
conducive to peace and security in the Middle East
and will maintain open lines of communication with
all parties. As always, China will stand on the side of
peace and justice and is committed to resolving disputes
through dialogue and consultation and to addressing
common threats through international cooperation. We
also pledge to promote a world of lasting peace and
universal security and to play a constructive role in
maintaining international peace and security.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to welcome
Mrs. Naledi Pandor, Minister for International
Relations and Cooperation of South Africa, to the
Security Council today. I take this opportunity to
congratulate her and her delegation for the success of
their presidency of the Council this month. We also
welcome Her Excellency Ms. Antje Leendertse, State
Secretary of the Federal Foreign Office of Germany.
We would also like to once again thank the team
represented by the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, for their significant contributions.
We also welcome the presence of the Israeli and
Palestinian delegations, as well as that of other
delegations here in the Chamber, for the importance
they attach to this question, manifest in their having
joined the list of speakers.
Two months from the end of the year, we find
ourselves in the Council again engaging in the monthly
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including

S/PV. 8648

the Palestinian question, at a time when insurgency
and the lack of political will have not yet stopped
producing deaths, destroying infrastructure and
forcibly displacing millions of innocent people from
their homes and properties.
It is disheartening that despite the numerous
initiatives and regional unilateral and multilateral
efforts to put an end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
we are still far from discerning a mutually acceptable
peaceful solution. The two-State solution continues to
be the only viable option to put an end to the conflict.
There is no reasonable alternative plan to replace it.
Since the consideration of this issue at the United Nations
first began in 1947, with unquestionable repercussions
throughout the region, that has been the wish of an
overwhelming majority of its Members, as attested to
by the various resolutions adopted on it to date. Many
of the eminent persons from around the world who have
spoken in the Council and the General Assembly have
affirmed it too. In the long term, it is the choice that
will benefit both Israelis and Palestinians, and to reject
it would be to repudiate the multilateralism that we
embraced once more with the foundation of the United
Nations after the Second World War.
Equatorial Guinea supports a two-State solution
based on direct negotiations between Israelis and
Palestinians. While it may well entail painful
concessions by both parties, the very nature of dialogue
involves being willing to make concessions and
accepting their necessity. All negotiations should be
conducted within the framework of the relevant Security
Council resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. One
of the outcomes of the negotiations must determine
the final status of Jerusalem. These negotiations have
been stagnating for several years, during which time
events such as Israel’s policy of building and expanding
settlements have increased tensions on the ground
while fomenting further hatred between the parties.
Many reports confirm that this policy undermines the
viability of a two-State solution and the prospects for
lasting peace in the region.
The militant actions of armed groups from Gaza
must also cease. Provocations and attacks on Israel
will not help to reach a solution to the conflict. On the
contrary, they can increase the tensions between the
parties even more, thereby endangering the lives of
women and children and of the peoples on both sides
in general. Given the situation, we continue to insist
on the need to support Egypt’s efforts to facilitate an

19-3371417/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

intra-Palestinian reconciliation and thereby enable the
reunification of Palestine under a single, legitimate,
democratic Government that not only takes into
account the aspirations of the Palestinian people but
also helps to substantially improve the socioeconomic
and security conditions there.
I should not conclude without paying tribute to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East for the noble humanitarian
services it provides and calling on the international
community to continue to furnish it with the financial
support it needs to improve their effectiveness.
In compliance with the mandate of the United
Nations established in the Preamble to the Charter of
the United Nations, Equatorial Guinea reaffirms its
commitment to supporting every initiative that takes
into consideration existing instruments of international
law such as the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions and others that are internationally
recognized. For us, the most important thing is to find
a solution based on negotiations between the Israelis
and Palestinians and endorsed by the international
community. That can only be a solution involving
two independent States living in peace, with security
guarantees for both sides and for the other States of the
region. Palestine and Israel must respect each other’s
right to exist.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to welcome
you, Madam President, to today’s debate, along with
the State Secretary of the Federal Foreign Office of
Germany. At the outset, I also want to thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his very comprehensive briefing.
Let me begin by reaffirming Poland’s commitment
to a comprehensive settlement of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict through a two-State solution and
an agreement that ends the occupation that began in
1967, ending all claims and fulfilling the aspirations
of both parties, including the security needs of both
Israelis and Palestinians and Palestinian aspirations for
statehood and sovereignty, on the basis of the relevant
Security Council resolutions and internationally
agreed parameters.
We should continue to seek an end to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict by reviving the peace process. A
return to meaningful bilateral negotiations, based on the
relevant United Nations resolutions and international
law, can only make a positive contribution to the
18/57

28/10/2019

process. That is the only path to a two-State solution
and a resolution of all final-status issues. At the same
time, we encourage the parties to the conflict to take
action in order to achieve reconciliation and safeguard
the dignity and sanctity of the holy sites, particularly
in Jerusalem. We strongly believe that the aspirations
of both parties for Jerusalem must be fulfilled, and a
way to resolve its status as the future capital of both
States must be found through negotiations. The status
of Jerusalem should also take into account the mutual
recognition of the historical relations and national rights
of both parties to the city. A key element in that context
would be a meaningful dialogue among the three main
monotheistic religions.
We continue to follow developments in the
intra-Palestinian reconciliation closely. In that context,
we have taken note of the Palestinian Authorities’ call
for general elections, the first in 13 years. The issue
is very important, especially because the reconciliation
process has reached a stalemate, despite Egypt’s best
efforts to facilitate it.
Turning to Gaza, I want to underline that the
situation remains dire and continues to fuel extremism
and radicalization and foster instability. We call on all
the parties to take urgent steps to promote fundamental
change in the humanitarian, political, security and
economic situation in Gaza, as well as to end the closure
policy and ensure the sustained opening of the crossing
points that are important for Gazans’ daily lives, while
at the same time addressing Israel’s legitimate security
concerns. We commend the efforts led by Egypt, Qatar
and the Special Coordinator to improve the humanitarian
situation in Gaza as part of a future Palestinian State. I
also want to underline the importance of the agreement
reached by the Palestinian Authority with Israel on
restoring some of its tax revenues. We strongly believe
that additional revenue will ease the financial crisis
and at least partially ensure payments to civil servants.
More than 160,000 Palestinian Authority employees
will receive their salaries.
Today I would also like to underline our commitment
to Lebanon’s unity, stability, independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity. In considering the difficulties
faced by the Lebanese economy, exacerbated by regional
turmoil and the refugee crisis, we greatly appreciate
the efforts of the Government in Beirut to address the
concerns in that regard. Introducing reforms can be
challenging, but they must be implemented to avoid
further deterioration in the country’s socioeconomic
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

conditions. Along those lines, we believe that the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) is
providing the stability needed in the mission’s mandate
area. Today it is difficult to imagine the security
environment in southern Lebanon without UNIFIL’s
presence. The international community must fully
appreciate UNIFIL’s contribution to the stability of
Lebanon, and we are very happy to contribute to that
endeavour, as Poland is returning to UNIFIL.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome you, Madam, as you preside over
the Security Council today. We also thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing.
Today we are once again discussing the situation
in the Middle East. What is the Middle East? Is it even
possible to consider the region in isolation from North
Africa or the Persian Gulf? In our opinion the answer
is obvious. However, the issue of a Palestinian-Israeli
settlement is central to all the problems in the Middle
East. We have recently been seeing attempts to shift
the focus away from this problem, which underlies
everything that has been happening there, and replace
it with other issues that are often artificially pumped
up. Besides that, we are seeing dangerous trends on the
Palestine-Israel track aimed at expanding unilateral
measures and aggressively revising formerly settled
arrangements. To state it unequivocally, as far as we are
concerned the internationally recognized foundations
for a settlement in the Middle East, including the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Madrid principles, remain unshakeable.
We believe that today it is more essential than ever
to take practical measures to extract the peace process
from its dangerous impasse. Russia is continuing
its efforts to revive a direct dialogue between the
Palestinians and Israelis both bilaterally and in other
formats. We are extremely disturbed by Mr. Mladenov’s
analysis of the situation in which he says that in the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip the situation is barely being
prevented from even further deterioration, let alone
improving. Sooner or later, and most likely sooner,
that state of affairs will end up erasing the already
unacceptable virtual boundary between shaky stability
and chaos. Concrete measures to improve the situation
are therefore essential, and the recipes for them are
obvious. First of all, Israel’s settlement activity in the
West Bank and its policies of confiscation of Palestinian
property must end. Both Palestinians and Israelis must

S/PV. 8648

refrain from violence and aggressive and provocative
rhetoric. The same goes for the announcements of plans
to annex residential areas in the West Bank.
We believe firmly that no breakthroughs can be
achieved through actions undertaken on their own, as
the history of the Middle East has repeatedly confirmed.
And yet despite that there are continuing persistent
attempts to impose so-called alternative schemes for
a settlement of the situation that undermine the longestablished internationally recognized parameters for
resolving the question of Palestine. The decision by
the current United States Administration on Jerusalem
and its illegitimate recognition of Israel’s sovereignty
over the occupied Syrian Golan are gross violations of
international law and Security Council resolution 497
(1981) in particular. In that context we want to emphasize
that there can be no question that the Golan Heights are
Syrian territory occupied by Israel as a result of the
1967 war and unlawfully annexed 14 years later. It is
clear to us, like most of our colleagues, that the only
way out of all of this is through concerted international
and regional efforts, with the United Nations and its
Security Council playing a central role.
Active steps are needed to improve the depressing
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. We will
continue to assist the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, whose
activity has a political as well as a humanitarian
dimension and an important stabilizing effect in
the Palestinian territory and the countries of the
Middle East.
Israel and Palestine have major religious
significance for hundreds of thousands of adherents
of the monotheistic religions. The establishment of
a lasting peace in these lands is in the interests of
every Christian, Muslim and Jew. Meanwhile, the
destabilization of the situation in the Middle East
and North Africa has been a terrible blow to the
region’s religious and ethnic minorities. Extremists
are exploiting ethnic and religious factors in order
to incite hatred and add to their own ranks. We must
take immediate measures to stop the mass exodus of
Christian and other minorities from the countries of the
Middle East and preserve the unique balance in which
the peoples of the region have coexisted for centuries.
The unresolved problem of Palestine, along with
the years of instability in the region as a whole, has
built up the potential there for protests and radicalism.

19-3371419/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The situation demands concerted efforts on the part of
responsible members of the international community.
The Secretary-General was instructed to work on this
issue under resolution 598 (1987), and there is interest
in pursuing this among the countries of the region. The
need to develop a sustainable mechanism for collective
security in the region through dialogue on an equal
footing is becoming all the more urgent. Russia’s
initiative in that regard is aimed both at unblocking
conflict situations and developing measures for
confidence and control. We urge our international and
regional partners to carefully consider Iran’s initiative
on confidence and security measures in the Strait of
Hormuz. It is an invitation to a serious dialogue with
the goal of improving the situation in the region that we
will always firmly support.
If we do not consolidate the efforts of all interested
parties, including the countries of the region and its
immediate neighbours, it will be impossible to create
the conditions necessary to end the bloodshed in
Libya and make progress towards a dialogue aimed at
a political and diplomatic settlement of the situation
there under the auspices of the United Nations.
We have been carefully following the current
situation in Lebanon and hope that the country will be
able to surmount these difficult times and emerge from
them even more united.
There have been signs of a modest de-escalation
in the situation in Yemen, with prospects for making
progress on a path to a peaceful settlement with the
assistance of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, and we will work to reinforce those trends.
Russia has put a great deal of effort, through
constructive, inclusive and honest work, with no double
standards, into shifting the focus of the conflict in
Syria onto a political track. We hope to see progress
in its resolution based on agreements reached by the
Syrians themselves. It is they, and only they, who bear
the chief responsibility for their country’s fate.
We are ready to cooperate constructively with our
partners on every item on the Middle East agenda. We
believe that it is crucial to improve our coordination
and our development of consolidated and unbiased
approaches in the interests not of external actors but of
the Governments and the peoples of the Middle East.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
your presence here in presiding over today’s open
20/57

28/10/2019

debate, Madam President, and we thank Mr. Mladenov
for his comprehensive briefing.
Peru has been following the situation in Palestine
with deep concern. The rigidity of the positions and
the absence of dialogue between the parties, along
with the continuing eruptions of violence, make for
a highly volatile environment with unpredictable
consequences, including ongoing acts of terrorism. We
deeply deplore the fact that we continue to see fatalities,
many of them children, as a result of the situation,
and a marked deterioration in security conditions for
millions of Palestinians and Israelis. We emphasize
the importance of ending the violence and holding the
parties accountable for the numerous serious violations
of international law and international humanitarian
law. Impunity exacerbates the conflict and helps to
normalize a disregard for human rights.
In the current circumstances, a solution based
on two States with internationally recognized and
secure borders, negotiated directly by the parties
themselves, on a basis of existing resolutions and
agreements, is the only viable pathway consistent with
international law. We therefore consider it vital to end
the actions that undermine the necessary trust. That
means in particular the harmful practices of building
settlements, demolishing houses and evicting people in
the Palestinian territories that have been occupied since
1967, which undermine the possibilities for a two-State
solution and are contrary to the Council’s provisions
in resolution 2334 (2016). These illegal practices must
cease. We also consider it imperative to reject hate
speech, anti-Semitism and discrimination in all its
forms. It is the responsibility of the leaders of both
parties to demonstrate concrete signs of moderation and
a commitment to peace. In that regard, we emphasize
how important it is that the Council show that it is
capable of a minimal degree of consensus and can
speak out when the situation on the ground warrants it,
in accordance with international law and the Charter of
the United Nations.
Peru has been dismayed to see the growing
deterioration of living conditions in the occupied
Palestinian territory and how that contributes to
higher levels of radicalization and extremism among
its population. We are particularly alarmed at the
worsening humanitarian situation in Gaza. We believe
that providing basic goods and services in this
area, as well as ending the confinement of millions
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8648

of Palestinians, should be priority issues for the
international community.

serious and clear threat to the two-State solution. With
that in mind, allow me to make the following points.

In that regard, we deem it indispensable to make
progress on the intra-Palestinian reconciliation process,
making it possible for the legitimate Palestinian
Authority to resume effective control of Gaza. This
would alleviate the humanitarian situation and lay the
foundations for a resumption of dialogue with Israel.

First, Israel must be held accountable for its illegal
actions. Indonesia condemns the continued expansion of
illegal Israeli settlements and the intended annexation
of the occupied Palestinian territory. A recent report
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs stated that 547 Palestinians have lost their
homes this year alone to demolitions in the West Bank.
Furthermore, 443 structures have been targeted in more
than 80 communities in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem; that is a 43 per cent increase compared with
the same period in 2018.

We thus underscore the work of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East. It is important to endow it with stable
and predictable financing and to allow for the normal
functioning of its offices in East Jerusalem, in line with
the existing legal framework.
Bringing an end to the deterioration in the political
and humanitarian conditions underlying the question
of Palestine is a complex but urgent undertaking. The
risk of further escalation in the Middle East must be
addressed by the Council as a serious threat to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Madam President, it is an
honour to have you here presiding over this important
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. My delegation would also
like to welcome Her Excellency the State Secretary
of the Federal Foreign Office of Germany, who has
contributed to this debate.
We wish also to thank Special Coordinator
Mladenov for his comprehensive briefing. We agree
with many of the points he made, in particular the
importance of prioritizing preventive diplomacy.
Indonesia takes this opportunity to reiterate once
again its unequivocal support for the Palestinian cause,
the same support that Indonesia, together with other
members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
reaffirmed a couple of days ago at the Movement’s
Summit, held in Baku. As many speakers have stated
this morning, this issue has been one of the longest
standing ones on the Council’s agenda. The question
was asked as to how many more debates we need. We
agree that there is a need to have closure on this issue,
but so long as there is no independence for the people
of Palestine, we will continue to raise our voice, loudly.
It is a matter of great significance that this
morning’s debate follows disturbing new Israeli threats
of the formal annexation of Palestinian lands in the
occupied territory, including East Jerusalem. This is a

Also of grave concern to us are the continuous
provocations by Israeli settlers and security personnel
at the holy sites. These actions constitute a flagrant
violation of international law and the relevant United
Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016),
and a great obstacle to a peaceful resolution of the issue.
I reiterate Indonesia’s persistent call on the Council to
stand by its obligation to hold Israel accountable.
Secondly, sustaining humanitarian assistance is
crucial. The blockade of Gaza, alongside the relentless
expansion of settlements, violence and demolition of
property in the West Bank, have, sadly, continued to
degrade the humanitarian situation of Palestinians. The
Gaza blockade represents a collective punishment of
all Palestinians. It is unjust and does not contribute to
resolving the conflict. It must be lifted.
Let me also draw attention to the serious financial
situation that continues to confront the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), hampering the organization’s
ability to perform its vital mandate. Indonesia once
again stresses that UNRWA’s role is critical, not only
as a lifeline but also as a safeguard for the Palestinian
right of return. We thus need to reinforce our support
for the Palestinian people, including through ensuring
continuation of the work of UNRWA.
Thirdly, there is a need to consolidate our efforts
to reverse the negative trends. As each day passes, the
prevailing negative trends in the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict continue to increase the threats to international
peace and security. These trends have to be stopped and
reversed. We cannot afford inaction. Our failure to act
will have great repercussions not only for the prospects
of a peaceful and lasting solution to the Israeli-

19-3371421/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian conflict, but also for peace and stability in
the whole region.
In this regard, I wish to reiterate Indonesia’s
profound commitment to, and support for, all efforts
to bring the peace process back on track, based on the
internationally agreed parameters, the relevant United
Nations resolutions and previous agreements.
Convinced that unity and reconciliation are
of paramount importance, we again encourage
all Palestinian factions to work harder towards
reconciliation, for in unity lies strength.
To conclude, there is no viable solution to the
conflict other than the two-State vision. Renouncing
this vision can only lead to an endless cycle of violence
and instability in the region and beyond, with the
threat of a humanitarian catastrophe. We can and must
do much better than that. We as the Council have the
power, the duty and the moral obligation to do the right
thing for the sake of the Palestinian people.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom
remains concerned by the negative trends on the ground
in Israel and the occupied Palestinian territories. We
continue to be deeply concerned by ongoing Israeli
settlement advancements in the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, in violation of international law. We
urge Israel to fulfil its obligations as an occupying
Power under the Fourth Geneva Convention.
I would also reiterate here the United Kingdom’s
position that annexation of any part of the West Bank
would be destructive to peace efforts and could not
pass unchallenged. Annexation of territory by force is
prohibited under international law.
We are troubled by the increase in settler violence.
Many recent incidents, including assaults on Palestinian
farmers, setting fire to olive trees and the stealing
of produce have coincided with the Palestinian olive
harvest, which began earlier this month. The Israeli
authorities have a responsibility to provide appropriate
protection to the Palestinian civilian population.
We are also extremely concerned at the fact that
the number of structures demolished this year has
increased by almost 40 per cent compared with the
same period last year. We condemn the demolition
of Palestinian property and evictions of Palestinians
from their homes. Ongoing and periodic tensions on
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, or Temple Mount, are a further
source of concern. We recognize that Jerusalem holds
22/57

28/10/2019

huge significance and holiness for Jews, Muslims and
Christians, and reiterate the fundamental necessity of
maintaining the status quo at the holy sites.
Turning to Gaza, the reduction in violence at the
border fence is welcome, and we urge continued calm.
Indiscriminate attacks against civilians are unacceptable
and unjustifiable. Hamas and other terrorist groups
must cease all actions that are violent or provocative.
The United Kingdom fully supports Israel’s right to
defend its citizens from such acts of terror.
I would also like to echo the concern relayed by the
Special Coordinator that Hamas is putting children at
risk of violence at the demonstrations at the Gaza fence.
Children should never be the target of violence. They
must never be put at the risk of violence or encouraged
to participate in violence. It is totally unacceptable that
Hamas and its operatives have been cynically exploiting
the protests for their own benefit. Hamas must cease all
actions that proactively encourage violence or that put
civilian lives at risk.
The United Kingdom underlines the damage that
Israeli restrictions are doing to the living standards of
ordinary Palestinians in Gaza. We call on Israel, the
Palestinian Authority and Egypt to work together to
ensure a durable solution.
In more positive developments, we welcome the
agreement between Israel and the Palestinian Authority
on the transfer of tax revenues. We urge Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to continue to work together to
meet their obligations under the Oslo Accords. We
continue to urge the Palestinian Authority to make
reforms to prisoner payments, ensuring that they are
needs-based, transparent and affordable.
We welcome the work of the Palestinian leadership
towards genuine and democratic national elections for
all Palestinians.
We need a viable Israeli-Palestinian peace
agreement that addresses the legitimate concerns of both
parties, which means we need genuine and committed
engagement from both Israelis and Palestinians,
including the end of actions that undermine trust and
threaten the viability of the two-State solution.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): We also thank the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process for his briefing.
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8648

The Dominican Republic remains its previously
expressed deep concern about the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and its enormous consequences for the civilian
population. The continuing conflict trends in the
occupied Palestinian territory, as well as the ongoing
deterioration of the humanitarian and socioeconomic
situation, heightens the level of uncertainty about
the future of the Israeli-Palestinian peace process. In
the same vein, we join the concern expressed by the
Secretary-General about the possible annexation by
Israel of the Jordan Valley and the northern Dead
Sea, which would constitute a serious violation of
international law and could spell disaster for the goal of
resuming negotiations between the parties.

two-State solution on the basis of the 1967 lines. We
encourage all parties to put an end to actions that
undermine support for the two-State solution and
ultimately hinder peace.

The Security Council adopted resolution 2334
(2016), which calls on the parties to put an end to
territorial claims, respect sovereignty and liberate
occupied territories. However, we continue to see
demolitions and seizures of Palestinian property
structures by the Israeli authorities.

I would like to focus my attention on two recent
developments. The first is President Abbas’ recent
announcement that a date would be set for elections
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and in
Gaza. A credible electoral process, which ensures, in
particular, the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women, is essential to building democratic and
inclusive institutions in order to establish a democratic,
viable and sovereign Palestinian State. We expect all
Palestinian factions to engage in this process, with full
respect for human rights and the rule of law. In this
regard, we also reiterate our call on the Palestinian
factions to engage in good faith in the reconciliation
process. As an integral part of a future Palestinian
State, it is essential that the Gaza Strip be returned to
the control of the Palestinian Authority.

The Dominican Republic believes that it is crucial
to redouble efforts aimed at conciliation between
the parties, with the support of the international
community, through meaningful and just dialogue
about the many obstacles that threaten the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to national independence
and sovereignty. Similarly, we also believe that it is
crucial to respect Israel’s right to live in peace, within
safe and recognized borders, free from threats or acts of
violence. The firing of rockets and mortars at civilians
is an inhumane act. Hamas and other groups must put
an immediate end to that practice.
The Dominican Republic deplores the grave
humanitarian situation on the Gaza Strip and calls upon
the international community to respond effectively to
the urgent needs of the affected population. Palestinian
refugees face many health challenges, due to poor
sanitation and inadequate infrastructure, limited access
to medications, the lack of nutrition and deficiencies in
hygiene. Malnutrition occurs in all Palestinian refugee
camps, regardless of their location, but is particularly
problematic in Gaza. We acknowledge the work and
challenges of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which
requires adequate funding for its critical work.
The Dominican Republic continues to defend the
existing international consensus that the only way
forward for Palestinians and Israelis is to negotiate a

In conclusion, we reiterate the importance of
creating an environment conducive to the advancement
of peace, which will pave the way for a comprehensive
process of negotiations aimed at resolving all final
status issues, including Jerusalem.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): First of all, I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing.

Secondly, we have taken note of the negotiations
between Palestinians and Israelis that have led to a
transfer of tax revenues. We encourage both parties to
continue negotiations in order to find a lasting solution.
The continuation of the settlement policy and its
related measures in the West Bank, including in East
Jerusalem, brings us ever closer to the point of no
return for the two-State solution. It is illegal under
international law, including resolution 2334 (2016). The
recent events near the settlement of Yitzhar and the
Palestinian village of Burin illustrate that the settlement
policy leads to tensions and violence on the ground. We
condemn the use of all violence, call for a de-escalation
of tensions and ask that those acts of violence do not
remain unpunished. It is essential to preserve the status
quo in the holy places in Jerusalem.
Lastly, we reiterate our deep concern about the
worrisome increase in the number of demolitions and

19-3371423/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

seizures of infrastructure and humanitarian projects in
Zone C. We urge the Israeli authorities to put an end to
those demolitions and to return what has been seized
or pay compensation for the damages suffered, for the
benefit of the Palestinian people.
With regard to the situation on the Gaza Strip, we are
deeply concerned about the impact of the demonstrations
on children. While we recognize Israel’s right to ensure
its security, we condemn the disproportionate and
indiscriminate use of force. We urge Israel to respect
the right of Palestinians to demonstrate peacefully.
However, it is not acceptable for demonstrations in
Gaza to be hijacked by extremist elements.
We would like to commend the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, whose mandate and work we fully support.
I would like to conclude by stressing that there is
no alternative to the two-State solution, with the city
of Jerusalem as the future capital of those two States,
in accordance with internationally agreed parameters.
Peace can be comprehensive, just and lasting only if
it meets the legitimate aspiration of each party to
build its national destiny in peace and security in a
stabilized region.
The President: I would like to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate their text in writing
and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): Every three months we
meet here to debate the agenda item “The situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question”.
If these meetings are really meant to be helpful, we
must start by finding a more appropriate and more
frank name for the agenda item. I suggest that the
name be “The situation in the Middle East, including
the suffering of the Palestinian people at the hands of a
Government that sponsors terror” or, if we want to be
more precise, we can call it “The situation in the Middle
East, including Israel’s crimes against humanity”.
We need to make that change because in all these
meetings we hear stories about how the Government
of Israel violates the basic rights of Palestinians on
a daily basis. We are told of the number of children
24/57

28/10/2019

killed by the extremists running the Government of
Israel. We learn about the number of Palestinians
who cannot receive medical treatment or who cannot
go to school just because the Israeli Government is
hijacked by a terrorist state of mind. We hear of how
many Palestinians are in prison for protesting Israel
and how many Gazans are starving just because the
current Government of Israel believes that inhumane
policies will help them to extend their borders. And
as if all those stories were not enough, in all these
meetings we have to listen to the delusional excuses
of the representatives of that Government of terror as
to why killing a child is in line with international law.
Today, once again, we have listened to our daily dosage
of lies. When these lies come from the representative of
a Government of terror, they are just a waste of time.
And no — those who want to advance their political
careers over the dead bodies of children cannot lecture
us about international law and human rights.
Recently,
the
independent
international
commission of inquiry on the protests in the occupied
Palestinian territory indicated that during the Great
March of Return, Israeli soldiers committed violations
of international human rights and humanitarian law,
some of which may constitute war crimes or crimes
against humanity. According to the report, week after
week at the protest sites by the separation fence, more
than 6,000 unarmed demonstrators have been shot by
military snipers. Israeli snipers have shot at journalists,
health workers, children and persons with disabilities,
knowing they were clearly recognizable as such. Is it
perhaps time for the representatives of Israel to tell
us what is the purpose of those killings? Why would
anyone kill a kid or a disabled person? How does that
help the security of Israel?
Israel must also immediately stop all settlement
activities, as well as house demolitions, land confiscation
and other policies that deny the Palestinians’ right
to development. The attempts to deny the historical
and legal rights of the Palestinian people violate
international law. These rights, including the right to
return, cannot be withheld. The continuation of those
practices will only deepen the sense of injustice and
breed desperation. That is not in anyone’s interest.
This ongoing tragedy was created by the current
Government of Israel. And now it wants to discredit the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and end it. But we
are not going to allow that. For seven decades, UNRWA
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

has been indispensable to the well-being of Palestinian
refugees and to the stability and security of the region.
At a time when the region is witnessing conflict
and significant volatility, the impact of a potential
disruption in UNRWA services would be gruesome.
Can anyone imagine the terrible repercussions of
the closure of 700 UNRWA schools? We cannot fail
530,000 Palestinian refugee children. Next month,
together we should task UNRWA to continue to provide
assistance and protection to about 6 million Palestinian
refugees. We have an obligation to support UNRWA
until a just and lasting political solution is found. That
is our collective responsibility.
A two-State solution, with the establishment of
an independent State of Palestine based on the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, is the only
way to achieve just, comprehensive and lasting peace. It
is also the only way to protect the Palestinians against
the terrorist ideology of the current Israeli Government.
Any peace plan or initiative should be and will be based
on those established parameters. That requires unity,
courage and resilience, particularly on the part of the
Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, and South Africa on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month and to thank you for your wise leadership of the
Council’s work. I would also like to welcome the State
Secretary of the Federal Foreign Office of Germany
and to thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process.
In his speech before the General Assembly at its
seventy-fourth session, His Majesty King Abdullah II
ibn Al Hussein, who is the custodian of Islamic and
Christian holy sites in Jerusalem, stated the following:
“It is a terrible irony that a land holy to three
faiths that share the great commandment to love
one’s neighbour should ever be a place of conflict.
That is the land where prophets have walked and
where generations of Muslims, Christians and Jews
have sought to live in obedience to God, teaching
their children compassion, mercy and respect for
others. Segregation, forced displacement, violence
and mistrust do not belong in that Holy Land.”
(A/74/PV.3, p. 39)

S/PV. 8648

Based on our strong belief in those principles, the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan continues to strive to
protect Jerusalem and its holy sites — both Islamic
and Christian — and to preserve its Arab, Islamic and
Christian identity, as well as its legal and historical
status. Jerusalem has always been the key to peace.
Moreover, we will continue to work with the
international community to break the deadlock in
the political process and put an end to the Israeli
occupation so as to achieve comprehensive and just
peace. However, Israel’s daily actions, which include
violations of the rights of the Palestinian people, illegal
settlement activities and the confiscation of property and
attacks on Islamic and Christian holy sites, undermine
any chance of achieving peace in accordance with a
two-State solution, which is the only path to just and
comprehensive peace. Israel’s continued violation of
resolutions of international legitimacy and its persistent
occupation, oppression and repression will neither
achieve peace and development in our region, nor will
it guarantee security or stability.
Next month, the General Assembly’s Special
Political and Decolonization Committee will consider
its agenda item on the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNWRA). In that regard, we call on all fraternal
and friendly States to vote in favour of extending the
mandate of UNWRA and to work to meet its financial
needs and maintain its role and mandate until a just
solution is achieved with regard to the Palestinian
refugee issue, in accordance with international law and
in a manner that guarantees refugees the right of return
and compensation.
Preserving UNRWA and its services in its five
areas of operation means preserving the right of
5.5 million Palestinian refugees to a dignified life,
maintaining the right of half a million students to
education, and preserving the right of hundreds of
thousands of people to access health care and many
other essential social services. That is our collective
international responsibility until we find a just solution
to the Palestinian refugee issue within the framework
of a comprehensive solution and in accordance with
the Arab Peace Initiative and the relevant international
resolutions, first and foremost General Assembly
resolution 194 (III) of 1948.
We reaffirm that there can be no military solution
to the crisis in Syria. We must intensify our efforts to

19-3371425/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

put an end to that crisis in a manner that would preserve
sisterly Syria and its people through a political solution
developed and accepted by Syrians that would safeguard
the unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty of Syria;
bring security and stability to the country and rid it of
terrorism; and guarantee the voluntary and dignified
return of the Syrian citizens who have been displaced
by the crisis. We would also like to stress the need for
sisterly Syria to recover its health and role as the pillar
of security, stability and development in the Middle
East and of the system of collective Arab action.
Jordan has always been a destination for all those
seeking succour and we have opened our hearts, our
doors and our homes to all those who have sought
our help. We have faced many challenges since the
Syrian crisis began and, from the very start, we have
shouldered a large part of the humanitarian disaster
that ensued. We have borne that burden on behalf of
the international community. Today, Jordan hosts the
second largest percentage of refugees compared to
the size of its population, according to statistics of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. From
this Chamber, we reiterate our call on the international
community to assume its responsibilities and to provide
Jordan and other countries hosting refugees with
continuous support. Syrian refugees are the victims of
the disastrous Syrian crisis and it is incumbent upon
all of us — not just the host countries — to collectively
bear the responsibility of offering them a dignified life
until they can return home.
Serious collective action and diligent multilateral
diplomatic efforts must succeed in tackling these urgent
international issues and arriving at peaceful political
solutions to crises, as well as supporting efforts to
achieve sustainable development. We must offer more
opportunities and hope, especially to young people,
men and women so as to avoid despair and prevent the
spread of violence, extremism and terrorism — scourges
that find fertile ground in poverty, oppression, injustice
and the absence of hope.
In conclusion, the primary crisis in the Middle East
is the Palestinian question. The region will not enjoy
security, stability and peace without the elimination
of occupation and a solution to the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict based on a two-State solution that will
guarantee the Palestinian people their right to liberty,
statehood and a dignified life. Such a solution must lead
to the establishment of a sovereign and independent
Palestinian State within the 1967 borders and with East
26/57

28/10/2019

Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel
in peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I welcome the presence of Her Excellency
Mrs. Naledi Pandor, Minister for International
Relations and Cooperation of friendly South Africa,
and thank her for presiding over this important meeting
of the Security Council. I also welcome the positions
taken by her country based on international law and the
Charter of the United Nations. I greet all those who have
focused on the essence of this agenda item, namely, the
Palestinian question and the Arab-Israeli conflict and
nothing else, without deviating from it.
The founders of the United Nations sought to
establish our Organization based on the principles of
international law, foremost of which is respect for the
sovereignty and equality of States, non-interference
in the internal affairs of other States and rejection of
aggression, occupation and hegemony. The founders
gave our Organization the mission to realize and
achieve the ambitions of our peoples in terms of peace,
security, development and prosperity. However, the
winds were favourable neither to our ship nor to its
sailors. A handful of powerful Western countries have
tried to knock the ship of peace off course and turn it
into a tool to serve their agenda of hegemony and piracy.
Since the creation of the United Nations, we have seen
a significant increase, not a reduction, in the number of
crises, wars and practices of aggression. Unfortunately,
our Organization has been a mere spectator with regard
to many of these conflict situations. The Organization
has sometimes been used to propagate false accusations
and to provide grounds for legitimizing invasions and
occupations in various regions. The peoples of our
Arab region have been suffering the lion’s share of
such aggressive practices and artificial crises. One
such conflict in particular continues to have grave
repercussions for our situation today, after 70 years of
conflict — the Israeli occupation of the occupied Arab
territories in Palestine, the Syrian Golan and southern
Lebanon. The United Nations, especially the Security
Council, has been incapable of enforcing the relevant
resolutions calling for an end to this occupation.
In light of the current backdrop and challenges,
many diplomats and interested parties are faced with
several legitimate questions. What has become of
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Organization, which today is unable to uphold
the principles of international law and the provisions
of its Charter? Will the role of the Organization be
limited to mourning the victims of wars, aggression
and occupation? Will the Organization limit itself to
addressing the rights of the peoples suffering under
the yoke of occupation in Palestine, the Syrian Golan
and southern Lebanon merely in public debates so as to
temporarily vent tensions, cause confusion and carry out
manoeuvres in order to hinder a solution? Is it possible
to accept that the Secretariat remains indifferent while
its Special Coordinator Mladenov pays no heed to the
issue of the occupied Syrian Golan in his briefings?
What significance does the Charter have if some of
its supposed guardians are those who violate it, either
directly or through their own tools? Were the provisions
of the Charter intended to apply only to small countries
and be manipulated for purposes that violate its very
purpose? Is it time to admit that the United Nations
was a beautiful dream that has now shattered and begin
asking ourselves what the alternative might be?
Instead of witnessing efforts to achieve peace and
stability in our region, we have recently witnessed a new
chapter of the Israeli escalation that has led to record
levels of tension. The occupying Israeli authorities have
repeatedly carried out attacks on Syrian territories,
as well as the territories of other neighbouring Arab
countries, in flagrant violation of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations, including relevant
Council resolutions. Moreover, Israel, the occupying
Power, pursues its attempts to distort the history of
the occupied Syrian Golan, stealing its monuments
and wealth and modifying its demographic nature and
Syrian national identity by seizing the lands of resistant
Syrian citizens in the Golan, with a view to extending its
illegitimate settlements and launching new occupation
projects, for example by building wind turbines for
energy production. Our inhabitants of the Golan are
forced to register the land they inherited from their
fathers and grandfathers with the Israeli land registry at
the risk of having these lands confiscated if they protest.
There are also so-called local elections to appoint
Israeli puppets. All of these are serious violations of
international law and international humanitarian law,
committed by some with double standards and a great
deal of hypocrisy.
These Israeli violations would not have continued
and escalated without the blind support for the
occupying authorities from known Governments.

S/PV. 8648

These Governments are therefore responsible for
the consequences of Israeli practices, crimes and
violations. We have seen the decision of the United
States to recognize Israeli sovereignty over the occupied
Syrian Golan and, before that, to recognize Jerusalem
as the capital of Israel and transfer the United States
Embassy there. We have also seen the United States
tireless efforts to eliminate the Palestinian question.
Such events constitute an ugly manifestation of this
support, while all these decisions are null and void and
have no effect. These decisions show pure contempt for
international legitimacy.
In conclusion, the Government of my country
affirms that the occupied Syrian Golan is an integral
part of the territories of the Syrian Arab Republic and
that restoring the borders of 4 June 1967, through all
means enshrined in international law, will remain a
priority and a compass for Syrian policy. My country’s
Government reiterates its call on Israel to release the
captive Sedqi Al-Maqet, the Nelson Mandela of Syria,
and all other Syrian captives in Israeli jails. We reiterate
our support for the right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination and to establish their independent State
throughout their national territory, with Jerusalem as
its capital. We also underscore the right of refugees to
return to their homes under resolution 194 (III) of 1948
and we reiterate our call to grant the State of Palestine
full membership to the United Nations.
The President: I appeal to all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than the four minutes allocated.
I now give the floor to the representative of Norway.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I would like to take a few
moments to address the situation in the region. Norway is
deeply concerned about the situation in northern Syria.
We note the recent agreement reached between Turkey
and Russia but remain worried about the consequences
for both the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) and the humanitarian situation, which
is already deteriorating. Protection and access remain
critical to the humanitarian response in north-eastern
Syria, and whoever exercises control there will face
the expectation and close scrutiny of the international
community, including with regard to safeguarding
detention centres for ISIL prisoners. We strongly
support the work of Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and
welcome the convening of the important first meeting
of the Constitutional Committee.

19-3371427/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The increased tensions in the Gulf region remain
a matter of great concern. We urge all actors to refrain
from actions and statements that could contribute to any
further escalation. Norway is deeply concerned about
the humanitarian crisis in Yemen. We acknowledge the
recent pledges of humanitarian assistance while also
noting that a substantial funding gap remains. However,
we are encouraged by the reports of progress being
made in the Jeddah talks and by the recent decrease in
violence and release of prisoners. We support the efforts
of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths. The participation of
more women in political talks will be important. Only
an inclusive political solution can resolve the conflict
and bring lasting peace and stability to Yemen and
the region.
The Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of International Assistance to Palestinians, the
international donor group to Palestine, met at the
ministerial level in New York on 26 September. The
meeting, which was hosted by the United Nations and
chaired by Norway’s Foreign Minister, emphasized the
broad international support for a negotiated two-State
solution as the basis for resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The members of the Liaison Committee called
for taking immediate steps to resume the transfer of
revenues collected by Israel to the Palestinian Authority.
In that regard, Norway welcomes the recent arrangement
reached between the parties. We encourage Israel and
the Palestinian Authority to extend their dialogue with
a view to finding durable solutions to other outstanding
economic issues. Furthermore, the members of the
Liaison Committee urged donors to step up their
humanitarian support for Gaza. Ending the blockade of
Gaza, facilitating trade and opening up Area C in the
West Bank for Palestinian use are all preconditions for
achieving a sustainable Palestinian economy.
Norway is concerned about the recent Israeli
calls for annexing large areas of the West Bank. As
determined by the Security Council, any future decision
by Israel to change the status of the occupied West Bank
or impose its laws, jurisdiction and administration in
the area will have no international legal effect. Actions
such as settlement expansion, house demolition, the use
of violence and the unilateral use of force, including in
East Jerusalem, are unacceptable. They undermine the
possibility of a two-State solution, the peace process
and the Palestinian economy and threaten regional
stability. We call on the parties to comply with their
obligations under international law. Norway has a long28/57

28/10/2019

standing and continuing commitment to enabling and
improving the conditions for peace and security in the
Middle East. Promoting the resolution and mediation
of conflicts in the region remains a key priority of
Norwegian foreign policy. If elected to the Security
Council for the 2021-2022 term, we will accord that
issue the highest possible priority.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Souza Monteiro (Brazil): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this quarterly
debate on the Middle East.
The Middle East continues to occupy a large
portion of the Council’s attention as new challenges
emerge and existing crises continue to unfold. The
lack of progress in resolving conflicts and improving
people’s lives is causing frustration, especially among
young people, who are increasingly leaving the region
to seek opportunities elsewhere. Long-term political
stability and economic prosperity are tied together,
and we hope that the international community can
act as one in carrying out effective strategies towards
achieving those goals.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains one of
the central causes of instability in the region. Brazil
reiterates its support for a two-State solution to the
conflict, with Israel and Palestine living side by side
in peace and security. We encourage the parties to seek
to establish a constructive political environment that
is conducive to a return to meaningful negotiations.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza remains extremely
fragile and highlights the need for a fair, just and
mutually agreeable political solution to the conflict. In
that spirit, Brazil encourages all the parties involved to
engage in new and creative diplomatic efforts with an
open mind in order to achieve a just and comprehensive
settlement. Peace will be achieved only with difficult
decisions and concessions being made by all sides.
Regarding the situation in Syria, Brazil remains
concerned about the escalation of violence throughout
the north of the country. We encourage the Council
to find common ground with a view to establishing
a lasting ceasefire in Idlib province. With regard to
developments in north-eastern Syria, Brazil urges all
parties concerned to exercise maximum restraint and
ensure safe and unimpeded access for humanitarian aid
in the region. We emphasize the obligation of all parties
to respect international humanitarian law and strongly
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

condemn any attack that might affect civilian lives
and infrastructure, including on medical facilities and
medical workers, who must be protected at all times.
Brazil underscores its support for the work of
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and welcomes the
establishment of the Syrian Constitutional Committee
as an encouraging step towards achieving an urgently
needed political solution, based on the parameters set
forth in the relevant Council resolutions, especially
resolution 2254 (2015), and the Sochi declaration. We
also welcome the convening of the first meeting of the
Constitutional Committee, to be held in Geneva. We
continue to believe firmly that only a Syrian-owned
and Syrian-led United Nations-facilitated political
process, with due regard for the preservation of Syria’s
territorial integrity, will bring about lasting peace and
alleviate the Syrian people’s humanitarian suffering.
Brazil condemns in the strongest terms the
September attacks on oil facilities in Saudi Arabia
and commends the Saudi Government for inviting
international experts, including from the United
Nations, to take part in the investigations. The attacks
increased the risk that the Yemeni war could expand
into a wider regional conflict. We therefore call on
all the parties to refrain from any actions that might
lead to a further increase in hostilities and to take the
necessary steps towards the full implementation of
the Stockholm Agreement. Furthermore, we urge the
parties to continue to work with Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths regarding a comprehensive political solution
to the conflict and the provision of continued and
unimpeded humanitarian assistance. Brazil reiterates
its commitment to the monitoring of the ceasefire by
the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement, to which we have agreed to deploy Brazilian
military and police officers. We hope that the activation
of the tripartite monitoring mechanism of the ceasefire
may further contribute to the prevention of military
escalation in the port city.
Lastly, Brazil is closely following developments in
Libya and urges all sides to exercise maximum restraint
in order to avoid an escalation of violence, and to
engage with the United Nations, the African Union and
the relevant stakeholders with a view to achieving a full
and comprehensive cessation of hostilities throughout
the country. We condemn the recent attacks on the
Libyan population and United Nations personnel.
Brazil urges all parties to abide by international
humanitarian law and uphold their obligation to protect

S/PV. 8648

civilians. We remain convinced that establishing peace
and national unity in Libya and countering terrorism
and transnational crime in the region ultimately require
the establishment of an inclusive Libyan-led and
Libyan-owned political process, in accordance with
the Libyan Political Agreement and the United Nations
Action Plan for Libya. We therefore call on all the
parties to work with Special Representative Ghassan
Salamé with a view to reaching a comprehensive
political solution to the security crisis and the dire
humanitarian situation in Libya. We continue to hope
that a Libyan national conference will be held at the
earliest possible opportunity.
The President: I once again remind all speakers to
keep to the allocated time limits.
I now give the floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.
Japan remains committed to supporting a twoState solution to the Palestinian-Israeli question. The
final status of Jerusalem should be resolved through
negotiations based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions and the known parameters. We must continue
to encourage the parties to seek a solution through
negotiations. Japan will remain engaged with both
sides and will continue to promote confidence-building
measures. The continued settlement activities and the
demolition of Palestinian-owned structures, which
Mr. Mladenov briefed us about today, undermine the
viability of a two-State solution. Japan once again
urges Israel to cease those activities. We are also deeply
concerned about the continued violence in both Gaza
and the West Bank. We strongly condemn violence and
terrorism against innocent civilians, and call on the
parties concerned to take immediate steps to prevent
all acts of violence, provocations and incitement.
Last month in the General Assembly, President
Abbas of Palestine announced his intention to hold
general elections (see A/74/PV.7). Elections are
fundamental to democracy. We call on all the parties to
take the necessary measures for free and fair elections
and hope that they will contribute to peace and stability
in the region. Japan firmly believes that we can shed
light on the pathway to peace and security by offering
hope to Palestinians for their future and helping them
maintain their dignity. Japan believes that the assistance
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) plays a

19-3371429/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

crucial role in that regard. We have already disbursed
more than $32 million to UNRWA this year and will
soon provide additional assistance of around $11 million
for education, water and sanitation and food assistance.
Along with other international partners, Japan will
continue to support the Agency in this difficult time
through multidimensional contributions.
We believe that every country can contribute to
creating an environment that is conducive to peace
efforts. In 2013, Japan, together with regional partners,
initiated the Conference on Cooperation among East
Asian Countries for Palestinian Development in order to
promote Palestine’s economic development by utilizing
the resources and experiences of East Asian countries.
An increasing number of countries and partners from
civil society and the private sector have joined the
initiative, and we hope that still more will do so.
Let me conclude by briefly addressing wider
regional issues. Since energy resources and many other
goods are transported from, to and through the Middle
East, peace and security in the region, including securing
the safety of navigation, are extremely important to
international peace and prosperity, including for Japan.
The current high tensions in the region are therefore
of serious concern. Japan believes that continued
diplomatic efforts are needed to decrease the tensions
and stabilize the situation. In cooperation with the
relevant parties, we will make further diplomatic
efforts to that end.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation thanks
the South African presidency for convening today’s
important debate.
In my very first statement to the Council on
the situation in the Middle East in April 2015 (see
S/PV.7430), I spoke of a growing tide of complex and
interconnected challenges that threatened to push the
region into a fresh vortex of violence and instability.
Today, as I take the floor in what will be my last
statement on the issue, I say with a heavy heart that
the grim situation prevailing on the ground appears
to have confirmed some of our worst fears. Riven by
protracted and emerging conflicts, escalating violence
and worsening humanitarian crises, the Middle East’s
geostrategic landscape is clouded by competing and
divergent interests among the major regional Powers.
The role that external actors are playing adds another
30/57

28/10/2019

layer of complexity to an already fraught regional
situation. Meanwhile, non-State actors and terrorist
organizations have tried to exploit the turmoil to gain a
foothold across the region. The activities of these terror
outfits, including the Kurdistan Workers’ Party and its
affiliates, have created legitimate security concerns for
regional States. At this precarious moment in history,
reconciliation within the region is imperative if we
are to avoid further instability. It is also essential if
we are to achieve our shared vision of a peaceful and
prosperous Middle East.
The framework for regional peace must be built
on the abiding virtues of mutual respect and peaceful
coexistence, which are not merely principles of
international law or the Charter of the United Nations
but also constitute the fundamental essence of the
Islamic teachings of amity, goodwill and brotherhood.
Guided by those considerations, Pakistan’s Prime
Minister Imran Khan has been consulting with the
leaders of Saudi Arabia and Iran to forge unity within
the ranks of the Muslim Ummah. Pakistan will continue
to play its part in promoting peace and stability in the
region, and there are certain points that we consider
critically important.
First, durable peace can be achieved only through
inclusive political solutions. We must therefore
prioritize respect for dialogue and diplomacy.
Secondly,
de-escalatory
steps
and
confidence-building measures are vital to reducing
tensions and preventing the eruption of new conflicts.
In that connection, we welcome the recent gains
made in advancing the political process in Syria. We
are also encouraged by the positive overtures by the
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for Yemen on the
political situation in the country. That momentum must
be sustained.
Thirdly, it is critical to abandon narrow national
interests and instead invest in lasting stability. Any
attempts to shape the region according to specific
political preferences are counterproductive and must
be avoided.
Fourthly, while the stability of the Middle East
has always been a question of global concern, the
involvement of the international community must be
based on an unequivocal commitment to multilateral
solutions and political processes. Not only are the threat
or use of sanctions, embargoes and kinetic actions
a throwback to imperial tactics, the recent history of
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the region also affirms that unilateral measures have
brought only greater suffering and pain to its peoples.
Yet nowhere is this more apparent than in the case of
the occupied Palestinian territories, where established
norms of international law, including Security
Council resolutions, continue to be deliberately and
systematically flouted. Meanwhile, the continued
military occupation and expansion of settlement activity
in the occupied territory, including East Jerusalem,
along with the looming threat of the annexation of the
West Bank, have not only undermined the goal of a
two-State solution, they have also imperilled peace and
security in the Middle East and beyond.
Pakistan’s solidarity with the people of Palestine is
firm and unwavering. It is, after all, an abiding lesson of
history that attempts to suppress and subjugate people
living under foreign occupation and to deny them
their fundamental rights, including the right to selfdetermination, are ultimately bound to fail. Yesterday,
Kashmiris across the world marked the seventy-second
anniversary of the illegal Indian occupation of Jammu
and Kashmir. Next month the Palestinians will mark
the seventy-second anniversary of a partition plan that
outlined the creation of an independent Palestinian
State. Despite the fact that the continuing tragedy of
the Palestinians and the Kashmiris still waits to be
addressed, they are nonetheless reassured in their
conviction that while it may be dark and forbidding,
the night of occupation will one day yield to the light of
freedom and dignity for them and other people living
under foreign occupation.
Let me say finally that your own struggle against
apartheid, Mr. President, is itself living testimony to
that eternal prophecy.
The President: I wish the representative of Pakistan
well in her next assignment.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Namibia, who will speak both in his national capacity
and in his capacity as Vice-Chair of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): Namibia thanks you,
Sir, for organizing this open debate on the important
topic of the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. I would also like to thank the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
for his briefing on the situation in the region.

S/PV. 8648

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of Azerbaijan on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Since my previous statement to the Security
Council (see S/PV.8583) on this most fundamental issue
of international peace and security, the situation on the
ground has not changed. Furthermore, as the Special
Coordinator outlined in his eleventh briefing to the
Security Council on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016), no concrete steps have been taken to
implement the resolution, and no steps were taken
to immediately and completely cease all settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem. On the contrary, Israeli authorities
advanced approximately 3,000 housing units in the
occupied West Bank, including some 400 in East
Jerusalem. I want to take this opportunity to reiterate
that settlements are illegal under international law and
represent an obstacle to peace and the achievement of
a two-State solution. We are also extremely concerned
about statements made concerning Israel’s annexation
of the Jordan Valley. Annexation is strictly prohibited
under international law. The demolitions and seizures of
Palestinian-owned structures by the Israeli authorities
also represent an obstacle to peace. Those actions
have continued unabated, displacing men, women
and children.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) plays a
fundamental role in the region. The Agency provides
services to the more than 5 million Palestinian refugees
in Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, the West Bank and Gaza.
Its provision of vital services represents a stabilizing
element in a region that continues to be a victim
of violence. Namibia remains concerned about the
ongoing financial shortfall that UNRWA continues to
suffer from. We also want to take this opportunity to
reaffirm Namibia’s support for the Agency, and we look
forward to the renewal of its mandate.
We have taken note of the fact that the overall
levels of violence in Gaza have decreased and also
take this opportunity to condemn all forms of violence
committed against civilians. Namibia welcomes the
increase in the energy supply to households in Gaza,
which has more than doubled, according to the Special
Coordinator’s report. Israel’s easing of the import and
export restrictions and extension of the permitted
fishing zone to 15 nautical miles from the coast are
also welcome developments. But despite those positive

19-3371431/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

steps, the humanitarian situation remains extremely
concerning. Namibia is particularly worried about the
state of the health system, which remains on the brink
of collapse. In July, 44 per cent of essential medicines
in Gaza were completely depleted, and there was
less than a month’s supply remaining of 26 per cent
of essential medical disposables. Those staggering
numbers underline the fundamental necessity of the
ongoing presence of UNRWA health centres, which see
an average of 100 patients a day.
Finding a solution to the ongoing fiscal crisis
facing the Palestinian Authority is a matter of urgency.
The continuation of the crisis is affecting the already
fragile Palestinian economy and threatens to destabilize
an already volatile situation. We urge the parties to
implement and respect their bilateral agreements.
It has been almost three years since the adoption
of resolution 2334 (2016), a historic document that
gave Palestinians hope and expectations for a solution
to be found to this protracted conflict. However, the
humanitarian, social and political situation has only
worsened since its adoption, and tensions have risen
drastically. Actions have been taken that have severely
undermined the process of reaching a mutually
acceptable, just and lasting solution. The people of
Palestine have a fundamental right to self-determination
and independence. We must achieve a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace between the Israelis and
the Palestinians with the establishment of two States
coexisting in an atmosphere of peace and security.
No amount of humanitarian and economic support
can substitute for a negotiated two-State solution, the
only one that can meet the legitimate aspirations and
security needs of both Israelis and Palestinians.
I will now deliver a statement in my capacity under
rule 39 as Vice-Chair of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
At the outset, on behalf of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
people, I would like to commend the leadership of
the delegation of South Africa in its presidency of the
Security Council this month.
As we gather quarterly in the Council to collectively
consider the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, I can only lament the ongoing
illegal occupation of the Palestinian territory and
the worsening situation on the ground, which have a
negative impact not only on the rights of Palestinians,
32/57

28/10/2019

including children, but also on the security of Israelis
and the prospects for a peaceful and just solution to the
question of Palestine, which has already been too long
delayed. The violence and loss of life have continued,
illegal Israeli settlements have expanded, demolitions
of Palestinian homes and evictions of their inhabitants
have accelerated, and the humanitarian and economic
situation in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem
and the Gaza Strip, has continued to deteriorate under
the oppressive weight and as a result of the illegal
practices of Israel’s 52-year military occupation.
I want to reiterate in the strongest terms that the
Israeli settlements in occupied areas are illegal under
international law, and that as has been reaffirmed in
resolution 2334 (2016), among other things, Israel must
halt its expansion immediately and completely. The
Committee joins the calls for the Secretary-General’s
reports on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016)
to be provided in writing and to include Member States’
reports on how they comply with operative paragraph
5, which requires Member States to distinguish in their
dealings between Israel and the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. Such measures of
distinction are crucial to upholding international law,
including the relevant United Nations resolutions, and
to ensuring that this illegal situation does not receive
support or recognition. In that regard, the Committee
looks forward to the publication by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
of the relevant database, as mandated by Human Rights
Council resolution 31/36.
The Committee would like to express its profound
concern about the escalating rhetoric and threats
by Israeli officials concerning intentions to annex
settlements and the Jordan Valley. The Jordan Valley
makes up 30 per cent of the occupied West Bank and is
home to more than 65,000 Palestinians. Annexation is
strictly prohibited under international law and cannot
go unchallenged by the international community,
obliging the Council to act should any such aggression
be committed. As was recently stated by Human Rights
Council Special Rapporteur Michael Lynk,
“By annexing these areas, Israel will further
confine Palestinians to live in small, fragmented
and disconnected cantons while others will continue
to live under Israeli military rule. The annexation,
if realized, will effectively ... entrench a one-State
reality of separate and vastly unequal legal systems,
political rights and social opportunities.”
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The international community must consider what
that would mean with regard to the viability of the
long-standing international consensus on a two-State
solution, based on the pre-1967 borders, which such an
action would effectively terminate.
The Committee is also gravely concerned about the
recurrent and rising tensions in Jerusalem at the holy
sites, including continuing provocations, incitement
and violations at the Al-Aqsa Mosque. The Committee
urges Israeli authorities to abide by international law
and avoid actions that undermine an already fragile
situation there, and calls for respect for the historic and
legal status quo and the sanctity of the holy sites.
In Gaza, the situation also remains volatile, as
weekly Great March of Return demonstrations and
the ensuing casualties among Palestinian civilians
have continued, alongside the indiscriminate firing
of rockets into Israel. The dire economic situation,
especially the insufficient energy supply, combined
with the scarcity of essential medicines, is causing a
health crisis, with the health system reported to be near
collapse. We reiterate our call on Israel, the occupying
Power, to abide by international standards with regard
to the use of force. We also call on Palestinian militants
in Gaza to stop the indiscriminate firing of rockets into
southern Israel.
The Committee welcomes the steps taken by the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians as presented in
its September report to bring relief to the population
through a package of urgent humanitarian and economic
interventions for Gaza. These measures should go hand
in hand with efforts to address the continuing fiscal
crisis faced by the Palestinian Government, which
hampers its ability to deliver services to the population.
In September, UNRWA was able to reopen
709 schools, allowing 530,000 refugee children to
continue their education. However, the Agency’s
financial situation remains challenging albeit improved
following the ministerial pledging conference held on
26 September in New York. The Committee reiterates
its call on all Member States to provide UNRWA
with the reliable and sustainable funding necessary to
deliver critical humanitarian services to Palestinian
refugees in all five fields of operation, contributing
to their development and protection and to stability in
the region. We also urge Member States to continue

S/PV. 8648

strongly supporting its General Assembly mandate,
which is to be renewed in November.
We commend Egypt and others for their ongoing
efforts to advance the reconciliation process and call
on the Palestinian parties to actively engage towards
that end. Achieving reconciliation and holding general
elections, which will be organized soon, as announced
by President Mahmoud Abbas during the general
debate of the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth
session (see A/74/PV.7), would constitute positive steps
towards reuniting the Palestinian people under a single,
legitimate Palestinian national Government.
Finally, the only just and viable solution to
ensure peace and prosperity in the region remains the
international consensus on how to resolve the conflict:
two States living side by side in peace and security
along the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the
capital of the Palestinian State.
We are at a critical juncture, and it is time for the
parties and the rest of the international community
alike to break the inertia and walk the talk. We must
implement all the resolutions adopted in this Chamber
and face our collective responsibility vis-à-vis past and
future generations of Palestinians and Israelis.
We all know that making the two-State solution a
reality is the only way forward for peace and stability in
the region. It is time to act to bring an end to the Israeli
occupation; to realize the long-denied Palestinian
rights, including to self-determination and freedom;
and to make peace a reality. Failure to act will only
hasten the demise of the two-State solution and bring
more conflict and suffering.
The President: On behalf of us all, I really want to
thank the interpreters, security personnel and engineers
for having donated 15 minutes of their available time
for peace and hope in the Middle East.
There are a number of speakers remaining on my
list for this meeting. I intend, with the concurrence of
the Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m. and
resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate the text in writing

19-3371433/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your friendly
country’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month. We wish you every success.
We also thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process for his invaluable efforts
and for his briefing this morning.
The international community is following the
accelerating events and developments unfolding in the
Middle East. However, the Arab-Israeli conflict, after
more than seven decades, remains at the core of the crises
in the region. More time continues to elapse and we still
have not found a just and comprehensive solution to the
Palestinian question. That could lead to a deterioration
of the situation and have serious repercussions on
regional and world stability and security.
The international community recognizes that
ending the Arab-Israeli conflict is a precondition for
restoring peace and stability in the Middle East. That is
why the United Nations bears responsibility for ending
the suffering of the Palestinian people. It must allow
them to regain their rights and fulfil their legitimate
aspirations. Today, after a number of solutions have
been examined but have not led to the outcome
desired by the Council and the world, it is asserted
that settling the Palestinian question will be possible
only on the basis of the terms of reference agreed by
the international community, in particular ending the
Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories,
including the occupied Syrian Golan and the occupied
Lebanese territories; accepting a two-State solution;
establishing a viable independent Palestinian State
within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living side by side with Israel in peace and
security, in line with relevant Council resolutions and
the Arab Peace Initiative; the return of refugees; ending
settlement activities; dismantling Israeli settlements in
the occupied territory; and lifting the blockade on Gaza
Strip and other Palestinian areas.
The State of Qatar recognizes its responsibilities for
achieving stability and peace in the Middle East. That
is why it has not stood idly by. Despite the obstacles to
the peace process, we have made tireless and concrete
efforts to improve the humanitarian situation and that, in
34/57

28/10/2019

turn, will help reduce tensions and achieve peace. This
year, the State of Qatar has contributed $480 million
to promote the Palestinian Authority’s budget. We
have provided humanitarian assistance to the Gaza
Strip, as well as fuel to enhance the electricity supply.
We have also supported United Nations recruitment
programmes for securing jobs in the Gaza Strip. The
State of Qatar continues to coordinate with our partners
in the international community to make every effort to
find a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the
Palestinian question, leading to stability and peace in
the whole region.
The brotherly Syrian people continue to seek
security, peace and a life of dignity through a political
solution that meets their legitimate aspirations, based
on the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and
resolution 2254 (2015), in a way that preserves the unity,
territorial integrity, independence and sovereignty of
Syria. We look forward to launching the Constitutional
Committee and have hopes in that regard. The State
of Qatar will continue to support all efforts to remove
all obstacles to achieving peace and implementing a
political solution, based on the legal terms of reference
of the United Nations.
In Libya, the military operations launched by
militias against Tripoli, targeting the legitimate,
internationally recognized Government, threaten the
unity and stability of Libya. We call on all actors to
shoulder their responsibilities and to respect the will
of the fraternal Libyan people in achieving a peaceful
solution. We warn that any interference in the situation
in Libya would further complicate the crisis, prevent
international consensus and contravene Security
Council resolutions. We fully support the efforts of
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya.
With regard to Yemen, we again stress that ending
the conflict will require all authorities to engage in
dialogue to achieve a political solution and national
reconciliation, based on resolution 2216 (2015), so as
to preserve the unity of Yemen and achieve its security
and stability. We express our support to the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen. We stress
the dire need to meet the basic needs of all the Yemeni
people, facilitating the delivering of humanitarian aid
and protecting human rights.
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The serious situation and the plethora of crises
in the Middle East underscore the need to respect
international law, international humanitarian law and
international human rights laws, on which there can
be no compromise or delay. That is why the Security
Council must take the appropriate measures to stop
violations and defuse tensions, which could have further
catastrophic consequences for international peace and
security and place an additional burden on the United
Nations, while distracting it from discharging its main
duties. That is why refraining from instigating crises and
levelling accusations to achieve illegitimate objectives
will help enhance the ability of the United Nations and
the Security Council to confront all challenges.
In that regard, the illegal unilateral actions and
unjust blockade imposed on the State of Qatar for more
than two years now by the siege States, as well as the
cybercrimes committed against the Qatari news agency
to justify the blackmail and extortion campaign against
the State of Qatar, contravene United Nations efforts in
the area of preventive diplomacy and peaceful resolution
of crises. In addition, those illegal measures flagrantly
violate the Charter of the United Nations, international
law and human rights. The bad intentions behind the
imposition of the blockade and the attempts to offend
Qatar have been made clear by the fact that to this day
the siege States have failed to provide any evidence
for their allegations, while still refusing to come to the
negotiation table. The State of Qatar is committed to
stability and security in this region, one that is so vital
to the world. We are also committed to implementing
our well-known policy of respecting international law
and resolving disputes and conflicts through peaceful
means, in line with the Charter. We have stressed our
willingness to settle the crisis through unconditional
dialogue based on mutual respect. In that regard, we
want to once again express our appreciation for the
sincere efforts made by Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad
Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Amir of our sister State of Kuwait.
In conclusion, the challenges that we face in our
region, which are based on policies that disrespect
international will and international law, require that we
act quickly and effectively to end their implementation
and ensure the accountability of those responsible for
them, in line with the purposes and principles of the
Charter and while continuing to maintain international
peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Arab Republic of Egypt.

S/PV. 8648

Mr. Ahmed (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Mr. President, I would like to congratulate you
on your brotherly country’s successful presidency of the
Council this month. I also want to take this opportunity
to express our appreciation to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing.
We are meeting today as the security and stability
of the Middle East continue to deteriorate, thanks to
the various crises afflicting the region, particularly in
the occupied Palestinian territories, with the situation
in the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem
worsening owing to the practices and policies of the
Israeli occupation, as has been described in reports
of the United Nations and the relevant international
organizations. Egypt has always stressed that we
cannot achieve stability and security in the Middle East
without a just and durable solution to the Palestinian
question that will fulfil the aspirations of the Palestinian
people to establish an independent State within the
borders of 4 June 1967 and with East Jerusalem as its
capital, in line with the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions, as well as other terms of
reference, particularly the Arab Peace Initiative, which
Egypt still considers a viable basis for a solution to the
Palestinian question.
Egypt is concerned about Israel’s announcement
that it intends to annex territories in the West Bank,
including the Jordan Valley and the northern Dead
Sea area, in addition to its announcement that it will
construct new housing units as part of its expansionist
settlement activities, all of which undermines the
possibility of a two-State solution and contravenes
Security Council resolutions, especially resolution
2334 (2016).
Israel’s continued blockade of the Gaza Strip and
closure of all the crossings between Israel and Gaza
has led to deteriorating living standards for Palestinian
citizens and a decline in or even prevention of the
provision of basic services to them. Egypt is committed
to assisting its Palestinian brothers and alleviating
their suffering. We are working to maintain calm and
stability in the Gaza Strip and to create conditions
conducive to intra-Palestinian reconciliation. Here we
should not fail to mention the Israeli practices that
are aimed at altering the historical and legal status of
East Jerusalem, which is of profound significance to
the Islamic and Arab worlds. There have been repeated
incursions into the Al-Aqsa Mosque. The continuing

19-3371435/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Israeli practices violate the rights of the Palestinian
people as well as all the relevant United Nations and
Security Council resolutions. Such practices contribute
greatly to destabilizing the region and encouraging the
dissemination of terrorism and extremist ideology in
the absence of a just solution to the Palestinian question.
Egypt is still hopeful that a just and comprehensive
solution can be found to the Palestinian question,
ending the suffering of our brother Palestinian people
and fulfilling their long-awaited desire to establish an
independent State based on the 4 June 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. Until then, we call
on the international community, especially donor
countries, to continue lending their support by backing
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). The
Agency plays a vital role in providing basic services
to Palestinian refugees, which is why we should all
support it. Egypt would like to take this opportunity
to call on all Member States to ensure that during the
current session of the General Assembly we can extend
UNRWA’s mandate for three years, thereby enabling it
to continue to play its important humanitarian role.
Egypt once again stresses that the international
community, as embodied by the Security Council, must
shoulder its responsibility, end the suffering of the
Palestinian people and resolve the Palestinian question
by implementing the relevant Council and General
Assembly resolutions. We cannot achieve security and
stability in the Middle East without finding a solution
to the Palestinian question and ending the suffering of
the Palestinian people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Ireland,
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands,
Poland, Portugal, Romania. Spain, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Sweden, the United Kingdom and my own country
Croatia, all of which are also members of the European
Union (EU).
Our discussions today come at a critical juncture
for the Middle East peace process and the viability of
a two-State solution. Security Council resolution 2334
(2016) calls for positive steps to be taken immediately in
order to reverse the negative trends on the ground that
36/57

28/10/2019

are imperilling the prospects for a two-State solution.
Almost three years after the adoption of the resolution,
the situation on the ground has continued to deteriorate.
Israel has continued its occupation of the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, and its settlement activities.
Recently there have also been calls for annexation. The
constant threat of violence, the incitements to hatred
and violence from extremists and terrorists and the lack
of progress on intra-Palestinian reconciliation all erode
the prospects for peace and a two-State solution. In the
meantime, no proposals for peace have been made.
Against that backdrop, the EU reiterates its
readiness to work with both parties and our partners
in the region and the international community towards
a resumption of meaningful negotiations, aimed at
resolving all final-status issues and achieving a just
and lasting peace. We continue to advocate for a
negotiated two-State solution and for finally putting
an end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, with an
agreement that would end the occupation begun in
1967, put a stop to all claims and fulfil the aspirations
of both parties, including ensuring the security needs
of Israelis and Palestinians and meeting Palestinian
aspirations for statehood and sovereignty on a basis of
international law, the internationally agreed parameters
and the relevant Security Council resolutions. The
EU’s firm and united position has been set out in detail
on numerous occasions. In line with international
law, including resolution 2334 (2016), the EU has
consistently reiterated its strong opposition to Israel’s
settlement policy and actions taken in that context.
Any settlement activities in East Jerusalem seriously
jeopardize the possibility of Jerusalem serving as the
future capital of both States. The EU has also made
clear that it will not recognize any changes to the pre1967 borders, including with regard to Jerusalem, other
than those agreed to by the parties. We expect both
parties, including any future Israeli Government, to act
in accordance with international law.
The political and security situation in Gaza remains
volatile, and the humanitarian situation continues to
be a matter of grave concern. All violence, including
the firing of rockets into Israel from Gaza, reminds us
that restoring a political horizon for peace is essential
to reducing violence and containing extremism in the
region. We reiterate our call on Israel to respect the
fundamental right to peaceful protest, as well as our
call on Hamas to ensure that protests remain strictly
non-violent. We call once again on all parties to take
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

urgent steps, in line with resolution 2334 (2016), leading
to a fundamental change in the humanitarian, political,
security and economic situation in Gaza, including
through an end to the closure policy, the full opening
of crossing points and the granting of humanitarian
access, while also addressing Israel’s legitimate
security concerns. Such steps would implement
resolution 2334 (2016) and would increase the chances
for a two-State solution.
Since the refugee issue — another internationally
agreed parameter for the resolution of the conflict — also
remains unsolved, it is of the utmost importance that
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) be able
to continue to provide Palestinian refugees with the
necessary protection and essential services. The work
of UNRWA is also important for the stability of the
region, and the EU will continue to support it.
The Palestinian Legislative Council was dissolved
in December 2018. Strong, inclusive, accountable and
functioning democratic Palestinian institutions that are
based on respect for the rule of law and human rights
are vital to the two-State solution. In that context,
and taking note of the announcement by President
Abbas concerning the holding of elections (see A/74/
PV.7), a date should be set very soon for elections in
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and in the
Gaza Strip. The EU calls on all Palestinian factions to
unequivocally commit to democratic principles prior to
the elections.
Successful negotiations between the parties are
possible, as we saw recently when an arrangement was
reached on tax revenue transfers. The agreement shows
that progress can be made if there is political will.
Both parties should summon the courage to use such
political will to advance a two-State solution. It is still
possible to reach peace based on the two-State solution
if credible steps are taken. Ultimately, and as the EU
has said previously, it is the lack of implementation
of international law that is the real challenge to the
achievement of peace and security in the Middle East.
Progress towards a resolution to this conflict would
also have an impact on efforts to resolve other crises
in the region.
Allow me to briefly turn to the situation in Syria. It
remains one of the worst crises of our times — a conflict
that has killed half a million people, displaced half of
the Syrian population and threatened the stability of the

S/PV. 8648

entire Middle East. It has also provided fertile ground
for the rise of the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS). Barely a month ago, during the high-level
week at the General Assembly, the European Union
hosted a ministerial event on Syria with the objective
of reaffirming the strong commitment to achieving a
political solution to the Syrian conflict and to sustaining
international support for the Syrian people through
the pledges made at the three Brussels conferences.
The event also helped to reiterate our support for
refugee-hosting countries while reaffirming the EU’s
firm position on reconstruction, namely that the EU
will be ready to assist in the reconstruction of Syria
only when a comprehensive, genuine and inclusive
political transition, in the framework of resolution 2254
(2015) and the Geneva process, is firmly under way.
During the event, there was a rare spark of optimism
in the Hall in the light of the Secretary-General’s
announcement on 23 September that the Syrian regime
and the opposition had reached an agreement on the
launching of the Constitutional Committee — the first
inter-Syrian agreement since the start of the war in
2011. However, events move fast in Syria, and only two
weeks later we witnessed Turkey’s unilateral incursion
into north-eastern Syria. The EU swiftly condemned
Turkey’s military action, as it seriously undermines
the stability of the whole region, and called for an
immediate cessation of hostilities. The fighting has
resulted in civilian suffering and further displacement,
and has also hindered access to humanitarian
assistance. Extrajudicial killings have been reported,
and they need to be investigated thoroughly in order to
establish accountability.
The Turkish incursion has significantly undermined
the progress achieved so far by the Global Coalition
to Defeat ISIS, the latter which remains a threat to
European, regional and international security. It
has also made the prospects for the United Nationsfacilitated political process to achieve peace in
Syria far more difficult. The continued efforts of the
international community, including in the Security
Council, are needed in order to permanently halt this
military action. Turkey’s security concerns in northeastern Syria should be addressed through political
and diplomatic means and in full accordance with
international law and international humanitarian law.
The situation in north-western Syria, where
violence and civilian displacement persist, also remains
of great concern. The presence of United Nations-listed

19-3371437/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

terrorist groups in the area contributes to the suffering
of civilians, yet fighting terrorist groups cannot be
used by the regime and its allies as a reason to justify
violations of international humanitarian law. The EU
continues to call on Russia and Turkey to restore the
ceasefire in Idlib upon which they agreed under the
Sochi memorandum.
As we have always said, there can be no military
solution to the Syrian crisis. We will maintain our
strong support for the United Nations-led process in
Geneva and continue to support the United Nations
Special Envoy’s efforts to revive the political process
and assist in the establishment of a balanced and
inclusive Constitutional Committee to pave the way for
free and fair elections in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015); to support Syrian civil society, including
women and their equitable and meaningful engagement
in the political process; to identify confidence-building
measures between parties to the conflict, including
on the issue of detainees and missing persons; and to
maintain an international dialogue on Syria.
Furthermore, we will remain at the forefront
of international efforts to promote accountability
and justice and to combat impunity as part of any
future process of national reconciliation in Syria,
and we reiterate our support for the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011. We reiterate the EU call to have the situation in
Syria referred to the appropriate justice mechanisms,
including the International Criminal Court.
The EU strengthened its sanctions against the Syrian
regime earlier this year and will continue to consider
further restrictive measures as long as the repression
continues. We support the right of Syrian refugees and
internally displaced persons to a safe, voluntary and
dignified return. Conditions defined by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
need to be put in place and robustly monitored.
Finally, we are pleased to report that since March,
when the third Brussels Conference on Supporting
the Future of Syria and the Region was held, where
pledges reached a total of €8.3 billion for 2019 and
beyond, two-thirds of those funds were pledged by the
EU and its member States, of which 92% have already
been committed.
38/57

28/10/2019

The President: I thank the representative of
Croatia for delivering the shortest speech of the day; he
spoke for an average of 40 seconds per European Union
country. If everybody could speak for only 40 seconds,
we would be finished before 4 p.m.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Viet Nam.
Mr. Dinh (Viet Nam): My delegation wishes to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
quarterly open debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. I also thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his informative briefing
and continuous efforts.
Peace cannot be sustained in the Middle East unless
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is resolved. For over half
a century, the international community, and the Security
Council in particular, have been making tireless efforts
to address the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. However,
hope for achieving a just and viable peace process
through meaningful dialogue and negotiation is waning
during a period in which provocations, violence, the
demolition and seizure of Palestinian structures, the
injury and killing of children and innocent civilians
and the implementation of unilateral actions occur
every single day.
According to the Protection of Civilians Report for
1 to 14 October 2019 of the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, during the
first half of October one Palestinian was shot dead and
261 Palestinians, including 127 children, were injured
by Israeli forces in protests in Gaza; while another
37 Palestinians, including 2 children, were injured in
protests in the West Bank. We also note with great
concern that the Israeli authorities continue to demolish
or force people to demolish Palestinian structures in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem. It is very worrisome
that the movement of people and commodities in the
occupied Palestinian territory is still restricted when
the economic and humanitarian situation in Gaza
is worsening.
There is an urgent need to act and make many more
efforts to avoid further deterioration of the situation on
the ground. In such an alarming and critical situation, I
would like to stress the following three points.
First, tension on the ground must be de-escalated;
that is the first step towards creating an environment
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

conducive to dialogue and negotiation. We condemn all
attacks on Palestinian and Israeli civilians, including
firing on Palestinian demonstrators and rocket launches
into Israel. We therefore urge all concerned parties to
strictly comply with international law, refrain from
all acts of provocation or violence and end attacks on
Palestinian and Israeli civilians. We also commend and
encourage all Palestinian efforts, as well as initiatives
of the United Nations and its Member States, aimed at
fostering unity among the Palestinian people in their
national quest for an independent and prosperous State.
Secondly, illegal occupation is the root cause
of the conflict and illegal settlement constitutes the
biggest obstacle to the peace process. Negotiations are
impossible in the context of ongoing construction of
illegal settlements. We call on Israel to immediately
cease all its settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory and fulfil its obligations pursuant
to resolution 2334 (2016).
Thirdly, we call on Israel to lift its restrictions on
the movement of people in the occupied Palestinian
territory and urge all parties concerned to take more
action to improve the living conditions of the Palestinian
people in Gaza. We reiterate our full support for the
mandate of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
In conclusion, Viet Nam reaffirms its unwavering
support for the legitimate struggle of the Palestinian
people for their inalienable rights, including their
rights to self-determination and establishment of an
independent and sovereign State. We firmly believe
that the only viable solution is to establish a Palestinian
State on the basis of the pre-1967 borders, living side
by side with the Israeli State in peace, security and
mutual recognition.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Observer State of the Holy See.
Archbishop Auza (Holy See): The latest briefings
on Yemen heard by the Council just over a week ago (see
S/PV.8642) indicated that the humanitarian situation
remains very dire. Children are starving, access to
clean water is scarce, the economy continues to struggle
severely and those who cannot flee the front lines of
war remain cut off from basic supplies as humanitarian
workers are impeded from operating in some areas.
The Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs described September as the deadliest month
this year, with an average of 13 people being killed

S/PV. 8648

every day. Although the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy for Yemen spoke of signs of hope, he also added
that they were “fragile and in need of our diligent
care and attention” (S/PV.8642 p.4). In spite of some
small positive steps, a nationwide ceasefire, which the
Council has repeatedly called for, is essential if the
intolerable suffering of the Yemeni people is ever to
come to an end. Coherence and honesty demand that the
call for a ceasefire be accompanied by a concrete end
to the flow of arms in the region. Indeed, the world’s
worst humanitarian crises play out where weapons and
ammunition freely circulate.
In Syria, the formation of the Constitutional
Committee, scheduled to convene in Geneva on
30 October, is a very important step towards rebuilding
trust and confidence among Syrians in a Syrian-owned
constitution and between the Syrian authorities and the
international community. However, the recent events in
north-eastern Syria are a cause for great concern. Pope
Francis renews his appeal to all to spare the population
from further suffering. He calls on all the actors
involved, as well as the international community, to
commit themselves to sincere and transparent dialogue.
Moving now specifically to the Palestinian
question, we are approaching the three-year anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), and there is
indeed cause for concern as the situation on the ground
worsens. As the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process noted in his 20 September briefing
in this Chamber:
“Settlements have expanded, demolitions have
accelerated, violence and incitement have continued.
Achieving intra-Palestinian unity seems an evermore distant prospect, and credible negotiations
have yet to be launched.” (S/PV.8625 p.6)
All of that impacts the prospects of durable peace
and a two-State solution. Israel’s failure to form a
Government is also a cause for concern.
While everything must be done to ensure that the
Holy Sites are protected, in line with international law
and the status quo in the city of Jerusalem so that people
of all religions can visit and worship without fear, it is
of deep concern that native Christian communities feel
constrained to abandon those lands — the very cradle
of their faith — in search of peace and security for
themselves and for their children. More should be done
to ensure their protection and their full flourishing in
the land of their birth and of their ancestors.

19-3371439/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Some have claimed that the Council’s credibility
is being eroded precisely because of the failure to
fully implement its own resolutions regarding the
Palestinian question. It is high time that decisions taken
and mechanisms already in place be used effectively
to realize the objective of a Palestinian State living in
peace and security alongside the State of Israel, within
secure and internationally recognized borders.
In conclusion, as we consider the tragic conflicts in
the Middle East, it becomes all the more pressing that
all those concerned observe the limitations imposed by
international humanitarian law. It is indeed essential
to protect the life and dignity of the victims of armed
conflicts and to ensure the protection of defenceless
peoples and civilian structures, especially hospitals,
schools, places of worship and refugee camps.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
thanking the presidency of South Africa for a successful
steering of the work of the Security Council during the
month of October.
I take this opportunity to thank Mr. Nikolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his comprehensive briefing.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
that will be made by the representative of the United
Arab Emirates on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.
The volatile situation in the Middle East,
particularly that of Palestine, is one of the most
regrettable and long-standing crises of our times. It
remains one of the root causes of so many other crises
and dilemmas. Yet a peaceful, just and viable political
solution to that very central crisis continues to elude
the international community. The widely expected
meaningful and decisive political and legal actions to
end Israel’s illegal, decades-long foreign occupation
of the Palestinian territory have been lacking from the
Security Council.
The limitless aggression, indiscriminate killing
of innocent Palestinians, including women and
children, intensification of Israeli settlement policies,
ongoing assault on Islamic and Christian holy places,
particularly the Al-Aqsa Mosque, constitute the most
blatant manifestations of the injustice committed
against the Palestinian people. These are changing the
40/57

28/10/2019

demographics of the occupied territory. The Israeli
illegal blockade is making the already volatile situation
more perilous, thereby exacerbating the humanitarian
catastrophe. More and more Palestinian civilians
are being made homeless and forced to live under
inhumane conditions. An Israeli rights group recently
stated that Israeli authorities have demolished at least
140 Palestinian homes in occupied East Jerusalem
this year — the highest annual number since it began
keeping records, in 2004. Bangladesh condemns all
those acts of wrongdoing and reaffirms its commitment
to the inalienable rights of the people of Palestine.
We are deeply concerned by the continued
socioeconomic downturn faced by the Palestinian
people, particularly the challenges they face in
the achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. The Israeli occupation has been directly
contributing to prolonging poverty, unemployment
and humanitarian crisis in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals will fail miserably if our Palestinian brothers and
sisters continue to languish in their political, social,
economic and cultural hardships. The international
community must deliver on its commitment to leave
no one behind by giving due attention to the legitimate
rights and needs of the Palestinian people. We are
concerned that the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) programmes, which over the years have
been providing essential humanitarian services to
refugees, are faced with serious budgetary shortfalls.
We urge the international community to come forward
in a collective show of generosity to ensure enhanced,
predictable and sustainable funding for UNRWA.
Israel’s continued acts of aggression have given
rise to an egregious culture of impunity; ensuring
accountability is therefore a must. The international
community, with the Security Council at the forefront,
must fulfil its responsibility in ensuring accountability
for all Israeli atrocities and human rights violations,
upholding the rule of international law and providing
protection for the Palestinian people in the occupied
territories. We reaffirm our support for the accession of
the State of Palestine to international organizations and
treaties and reiterate our call for the Security Council
to recommend and positively consider its admission
as a full Member of the United Nations. We also urge
for the timely implementation of the relevant Council
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016), to end the
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Israeli occupation, which is the bedrock for achieving
lasting peace in the Middle East. The implementation
of the Quartet road map and the Arab Peace Initiative,
along with the efforts of Middle East Quartet, is also
crucial.
During our war of liberation, in 1971, our people
had to endure the worst form of genocide — about
10 million Bangladeshi people had to take refuge
in neighbouring India. Our painful experiences
have emboldened us to stand by oppressed peoples,
which is why our Constitution stipulates our nation’s
unequivocal support for oppressed peoples waging
a just struggle throughout the world. That is why we
did not hesitate to respond to the call of the distressed
humanity and opened doors to over 1 million Rohingyas
fleeing atrocious crimes in Myanmar. Driven by our
constitutional and moral obligations and the avowal of
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina — expressed yet again
during the recently concluded high-level week of the
General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session — to
“stand firm in our support for our Palestinian brothers
and sisters” (A/74/PV.10, p. 22), Bangladesh will
continue to firmly stand by the cause of the Palestinian
struggle until the establishment of the State of Palestine
on the basis of a two-State solution and the pre-1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Sir, on successfully presiding over the Security Council
for this month. I wish friendly South Africa all the best.
On 14 September, my country endured awful
attacks against Saudi ARAMCO oil facilities using
Iranian weapons, which led to a decrease in oil
production by almost 50 per cent. That act of aggression
is a flagrant violation of international rules and norms
and against international peace and security. The
international community must take a historic stance.
This is a grave threat to the world oil supply and the
international economy, and not only to the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia. However, my country was able to contain
the repercussions of those attacks and resume normal
production in record time.
It is clear that those and other attacks against
international energy production, as well as missile
attacks against my country, are in defiance of the strong
and steadfast policies of my country. They are in defiance

S/PV. 8648

of collective international counter-terrorism efforts and
an attempt to intervene in the internal affairs of States
in our region. In that regard, my country appreciates the
condemnation of the international community for those
attacks. We call on the international community to take
stronger and more comprehensive measures to assume
its responsibilities in confronting those subversive
policies that support terrorism and foment sectarianism
in the region. They support armed militias and seek to
destroy the countries of the region by sowing strife and
threatening the world oil production. The international
community must realize that it is time to act decisively
and form a united front to protect the region and the
world’s economy from any reckless behaviour that
could lead to further crises in the region and the world.
I reiterate the clear position of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia against any strife and war in the region.
We do not seek war. However, at the same time, we
will not hesitate in protecting our territories from
any aggression. We will not hesitate in protecting our
citizens and the resources of our country by all legitimate
means. We believe in the principles of dialogue and the
peaceful resolution of disputes. However, any dialogue
must be coupled with an effective cessation of threats
and hostilities. All countries that call for dialogue must
abandon their policies of exporting their revolutions
and creating sectarian pockets in other countries as a
means of interfering in their internal affairs.
Over the course of past century and up until
today, the world has not seen a crisis as prolonged
as the Palestinian crisis, suffering as deep as that of
the Palestinian people or policies as repressive as
those of Israel. Although Israel joined the United
Nations as a State Member, it has disregarded all the
resolutions of this international Organization and the
Security Council, which was tasked with maintaining
international peace and security. Israel continues its
heinous violations of human rights in Palestine before
the eyes of the entire world. Israeli policies are based
on a fait accompli — an approach that must change
in order to end the greatest crisis in the world to have
befallen an entire people.
The Palestinian people have suffered one of the
most heinous forms of occupation in modern history.
However, Palestinians have not given up. They have
continued to struggle amid the support of their brothers
and friends in order to reach a just solution. This crisis
cannot be resolved without addressing its root causes,
namely, Israeli occupation and its hostilities. We believe

19-3371441/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that the Palestinian question is of the utmost importance
to stabilizing the region. Any solution must be based
on a two-State solution, in line with the international
terms of reference and the Arab Peace Initiative of
2002, which calls for establishing the Palestinian State
along the borders of 4 June 1967, with Jerusalem as its
capital. It also calls for the return of refugees and an
end to the Israeli occupation of the Syrian Arab Golan
and of Lebanese territories.
Historically, my country has been among the largest
donors and supporters of the Palestinian people. That is
why, in September, we announced the contribution of an
additional $50 million dollars in support for the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) and its programmes and
in order to provide humanitarian assistance and basic
needs to the Palestinian refugees. Therefore, in total,
we have contributed nearly $800 million to UNRWA
over the past two decades.
My country once again welcomes the agreement to
create the Syrian Constitutional Committee. It gives us
hope for the possibility of reaching a political agreement
that would put an end to the suffering of the fraternal
Syrian people and ensure the safe and voluntary return
of Syrian refugees in line with international standards.
My country condemns the Turkish military operations
in northern Syria. It is important not to take any
measure that would exacerbate the Syrian crisis and the
suffering of the Syrian people. All parties must refrain
from any measures that would undermine international
efforts against terrorist Da’esh or threaten Syria’s unity
and territorial integrity.
The Government of my country reiterates its call
for confronting the armed militias and expelling them
from Syria. Those militias serve foreign agendas and
seek to destroy Syria by fomenting instability in the
region. We call on the international community to unite
against any unilateral measure that would undermine a
political solution in Syria, in line with resolution 2254
(2015).
My country fully supports the Yemeni Government
and the fraternal Yemeni people during the current
crisis in their country and will continue to do so until a
comprehensive political solution is reached and stability
is restored in Yemen. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
recently provided $500 million to Yemen, through the
United Nations, to support the humanitarian response
plan in the country for 2019. This means that the
42/57

28/10/2019

Kingdom has contributed more than $14 billion in the
form of support and aid to Yemen. We also hosted a
dialogue recently between the Yemeni Government
and the Southern Transitional Council to bridge any
differences regarding the solution in Yemen and
addressing the Houthi coup. The dialogue concluded
with what will be known as the Riyadh agreement,
which will be signed soon. According to this agreement,
a new Government in Yemen will include 24 efficient
ministers and will seek to create a united front, using
State institutions in the service of all the Yemeni people
while providing them with their essential needs.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia supports United
Nations efforts to solve the crisis in Yemen and welcome
the progress made in creating joint observation posts
in Al-Hudaydah. My country once again calls on the
international community to take all necessary measures
to support the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement, which was adopted almost a year ago but is
yet to be implemented due to the stalling of the Houthi
militias. The Stockholm Agreement is necessary to
reach a comprehensive solution in line with the three
terms of reference, in particular Council resolution
2216 (2015).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate the delegation of South Africa on
presiding over the Council throughout October. I also
thank the Russian Federation for successfully presiding
over the Council last month.
Despite resolutions and agreements adopted at the
international level, including at the United Nations,
the Palestinian people are still waiting for the Israeli
occupation to end and to exercise their legitimate right
to establish an independent State with East Jerusalem
as its capital. Under His Majesty King Mohammed
VI, Chairman of the Al-Quds Committee of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the Kingdom of
Morocco calls on all parties to refrain from any acts
of violence and unjust policies against the unarmed
Palestinian people, including settlement policies,
the demolition of houses and any other practices that
constitute a flagrant violation of international law,
the Fourth Geneva Convention and international
humanitarian law and that stand in the way of the twoState solution. The Kingdom of Morocco condemns the
latest announcement to annex the Jordan Valley and
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

northern Dead Sea. Such announcements constitute a
grave escalation and, if implemented, would represent
a new violation of international law and international
resolutions and jeopardize all efforts under way to find
a just and comprehensive solution to the PalestinianIsraeli conflict.
The Kingdom of Morocco also rejects any attempt
to alter the legal and historic status of Jerusalem.
His Majesty King Mohammed VI has launched
several serious and practical initiatives to serve
the Jerusalemites and Palestinians in general. In
cooperation with His Holiness Pope Francis, and in
the context of his visit to Morocco on 30 March, at the
invitation of His Majesty, the King called for measures
to be put in place to serve the people of Jerusalem. His
Holiness and His Majesty agreed that it was important
to maintain the current status of Jerusalem as the
common heritage of humankind. Its special character
as a multi-religious city must be preserved. All its
inhabitants of the three monotheistic religions must
have access to the religious sites.
In that context, the Kingdom of Morocco, during
a reception that His Majesty King Mohammed VI
organized for His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn Al
Hussein during his visit to Morocco on 28 March,
launched a joint initiative with the sisterly Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, aimed at defending the holy city
and protecting it from any attempts to change its
historic, legal and political status, as well as its Islamic
and Christian religious and cultural landmarks. The
Kingdom of Morocco stresses the importance of the
historic Jordanian custodianship of the Islamic and
Christian holy sites in Jerusalem.
It is incumbent upon the international community
to shoulder its responsibilities and to find a way out of
the stalemate that we have been witnessing ever since
the interruption of negotiations between Palestinians
and Israelis, leading to more violence and tension.
That is why the international community must take
the lead and bring Palestinians and Israelis back to the
negotiating table to implement the two-State solution
along the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as
the capital of the State of Palestine. These negotiations
must be based on genuine foundations of goodwill and
in line with a set time frame in order to restore trust
among all parties and establish a viable country. This
will enable both States to live side by side in safety and
stability in line with international legitimacy resolutions
and the Arab Peace Initiative. We also appreciate the

S/PV. 8648

efforts made by various States with a view to establish
lasting peace and security in the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mrs. Baghirova (Azerbaijan): It is an honour for
the Republic of Azerbaijan to take the floor on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries at this
quarterly open debate on a matter to which we have
historically attached special importance, namely, the
situation in the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine.
At the outset, it is a great privilege to convey
our profound respects to Her Excellency Mrs. Naledi
Pandor, Minister for International Relations and
Cooperation of the Republic of South Africa, a fellow
non-aligned country, and to congratulate her delegation
on its presidency and leadership of the Security Council
throughout this month.
Just five days ago, the Ministerial Committee of the
Non-Aligned Movement on Palestine was convened in
Baku to review the latest developments in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
Regrettably, the situation remains critical and clearly
unsustainable. In its unanimously adopted political
declaration, the Ministerial Committee renewed, inter
alia, the Movement’s abiding solidarity with, and
unwavering support for, the inalienable rights and just
cause of the Palestinian people and called once again
for a just, lasting and comprehensive solution to the
question of Palestine, which has been delayed for too
long and caused too much human suffering and tragedy
over the decades. In that regard, the member States
of the Movement seize this opportunity to once again
reaffirm that the Palestinian-Israeli conflict — with
the Israeli occupation at its core — continues to pose
a serious threat to regional and international peace and
security and requires urgent attention and action, in
accordance with international law, the relevant United
Nations resolutions and, of course, the Charter of the
United Nations itself, as well as the tools provided
by multilateral diplomacy for the peaceful resolution
of conflicts.
The Security Council has a clear responsibility
to ensure the maintenance of international peace
and security. It must uphold its Charter duties and
act to implement its own resolutions, which not only
constitute the foundation for a peaceful, just and lasting
solution to the conflict but are also legally binding on

19-3371443/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

all States Members of the United Nations. The question
of Palestine cannot be the exception. Hence we remain
deeply concerned that this organ has for too long been
unable to fulfil its mandate on this important question,
owing to the use of the veto by one of its permanent
members. The members of the Movement called on the
Security Council to overcome its paralysis and fulfil
its Charter duties on the Palestine question in order to
restore its credibility and uphold its obligations towards
the achievement of a just and peaceful solution.
The Non-Aligned Movement still believes that
resolution 2334 (2016), which reaffirmed many other
relevant Council resolutions on the matter, provides
the only viable path to peace, setting forth the essential
requirements and parameters for achieving a just
settlement on the basis of the two-State solution based
on the pre-1967 borders and in accordance with the longstanding terms of reference for peace endorsed by the
international community, namely, the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles — including
the principle of land for peace — the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map, and ensuring the
fulfilment of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including their rights to self-determination
and independence within their own State of Palestine
and with East Jerusalem as its capital. Hence we
call for full respect for resolution 2334 (2016) and
the effective implementation of its provisions and
obligations, particularly on the part of the occupying
Power, including States’ obligations with regard to
distinction — a matter that is central to accountability.
Similarly, the member States of the Movement
continue to call for full respect for and the implementation
of all other relevant resolutions, including with regard
to the complete cessation of all Israeli settlement
activities and the status of occupied East Jerusalem,
as that would create the necessary conditions to put an
end to the occupation, justly resolving the conflict in
all its aspects and making Palestinian-Israeli peace and
security a reality, which would be to the benefit of both
peoples, the region and the international community
as a whole. It is imperative that action be taken
immediately, in line with international law and the
relevant United Nations resolutions, in order to redress
the situation on the ground, de-escalate tensions and
foster an appropriate environment for the pursuit of
peace, including by averting unilateral, provocative or
arbitrary measures that serve only to embolden Israel
in further pursuing its illegal policies and practices
44/57

28/10/2019

in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem. Actions that violate Security Council
resolutions and the historic status quo of Jerusalem and
its holy sites are provocative and dangerous and destroy
the prospects for peace. They should not be supported
or celebrated by any country. Threats of annexation by
Israeli officials must be unequivocally condemned, and
any measures taken in that regard must be forthwith
rejected as null and void and without any legal effect
and must be met with firm measures of accountability
for such grave breaches.
In relation to the Gaza Strip, the situation remains
of great concern to the Movement, particularly the
grave humanitarian situation, which regrettably
continues to deteriorate day by day. The Non-Aligned
Movement reiterates its call for the complete lifting of
the Israeli blockade, which continues to impose untold
humanitarian, social and economic suffering on the
more than 2 million Palestinian children, women and
men in Gaza. This crisis must be comprehensively
addressed in accordance with international law,
including international humanitarian law, international
human rights law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions. That should be done in the context of the
overall situation regarding the continuation of the
illegitimate and belligerent Israeli foreign occupation
of Palestinian territory since 1967, including East
Jerusalem, and the unequivocal calls to put an end to
that more than half-century occupation.
In the absence of a solution, the member States
of the Movement reiterate their call for the continued
provision of needed humanitarian and socioeconomic
assistance to the Palestinian people, including
Palestinian refugees. The Non-Aligned Movement
therefore stresses the importance of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), along with other United Nations
agencies and international organizations, in alleviating
the plight of the Palestinians. We call for full support for
the renewal of UNRWA’s mandate in order to ensure the
continuity of its vital programmes and its contribution
to regional stability. Given that Israel — the occupying
Power — has clearly abdicated its obligations to protect
the Palestinian civilian population in respect of the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, we also reiterate
our long-standing call for the international community
to ensure the protection of the Palestinian people. That
is urgent in order to alleviate the dire state of insecurity
of the occupied population and prevent the further
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

loss of innocent human lives. Failure to do so can lead
only to further escalations and the tragic loss of more
civilian lives.
In that connection, we reiterate our grave concern
about the lack of accountability for all the violations
committed by Israel, many of which may amount
to war crimes. The absence of justice fosters greater
levels of impunity, leads to the recurrence of crimes
and destabilizes the situation on the ground, thereby
further diminishing the prospects for peace. We
continue to call for international action, particularly on
the part of the Security Council, in order to ensure a
cessation of, and accountability for, the violations that
are being systematically committed by the occupying
Power against the Palestinian civilian population under
its occupation. Israel must comply with its duties
and responsibilities under international law and must
be held to account should it continue to show blatant
contempt for the Council and its own international
legal obligations.
With regard to the situation in the occupied Syrian
Golan, the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all
measures and actions that have been or will be taken by
Israel — the occupying Power — that purport to alter its
legal, physical or demographic status or its institutional
structure, such as its illegal decision of 14 December
1981, as well as any Israeli measures to apply its
jurisdiction or administration there, are null and void
and have no legal effect. In that regard, in line with our
principled position, we once again demand that Israel
abide by resolution 497 (1981) and fully withdraw from
the occupied Syrian Golan to the lines of 4 June 1967,
in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973). In addition, we reiterate our condemnation of
the unilateral and arbitrary proclamation of the United
States of America in recognizing the Golan Heights as
part of Israel, and we renew our call for the Security
Council to unequivocally condemn that provocative
act. Moreover, the member States of the Movement
emphasize the necessity that Israel withdraw from all
Lebanese territories, including the Shaba’a farmlands,
the Kfar Shuba Hills and the Lebanese part of Al-Ghajar
village up to the Blue Line, in accordance with the
relevant United Nations resolutions, in particular
resolution 1701 (2006).
To conclude, we take this opportunity to reiterate our
call for the international community to act collectively
and with responsibility to uphold international law and
to exert and intensify all necessary efforts in support

S/PV. 8648

of the Palestinian cause, the ultimate goal of which is
to bring an end to this historic and grave injustice. We
reaffirm our commitment to promoting a just, lasting,
comprehensive and peaceful solution to the question
of Palestine in all its aspects, including the plight of
the Palestine refugees, and reaffirm our support to the
Palestinian people in their struggle to achieve justice
and fulfil their inalienable rights and legitimate national
aspirations, including to self-determination, freedom
and independence in their sovereign and independent
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Bougacha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I
am pleased at the outset to announce that Tunisia is
delivering this statement on behalf of the Group of
Arab States in New York.
I thank you, Sir for convening this debate and
commend your able leadership of the Council for the
month of October. I also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
on behalf of the Arab Group, for his briefing.
Over the past decades, the Security Council has
adopted dozens of resolutions on the Palestinian
question in particular and the Israeli-Arab conflict
in general. However, they are yet to be implemented.
That has allowed Israel, the occupying Power, to
continue its aggressive and repressive policies against
the Palestinian people, its systematic violations of
holy sites and its expansionist settlement activities,
thereby defying international will, rejecting peace and
disregarding the relevant United Nations resolutions.
This situation has prolonged the conflict and
deepened the suffering of the Palestinian people. It has
raised tensions in the region and threatened regional
and international stability, peace and security, which
are at the heart of the Security Council’s mandate. The
region and the world cannot enjoy peace, stability and
security without a comprehensive and just solution
to the Palestinian question that would allow the
Palestinian people to regain their legitimate rights,
notably their right to self-determination and to establish
an independent State on their territories, based on the
4 June 1967 borders, with Jerusalem as its capital, and
enable the settlement of all final status issues in line
with the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the two-State solution.

19-3371445/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In order to achieve those goals, there must be
an international desire for peace. The Security
Council must assume its historical responsibility for
maintaining international legitimacy and compelling
Israel to respect the United Nations resolutions, end
its occupation of the Palestinian and Arab territories,
cease its expansionist settlement activities and lift the
unjust blockade on Gaza.
The stalemate continues in the peace process as
Israel continues to block all initiatives aimed at reviving
it. The intransigent Israeli policies have led to serious
escalation as Israel continues to impose a fait accompli
and flout all relevant terms of reference, including by
attempting to change the historical and legal status of
Jerusalem, the occupied Syrian Arab Golan and the
occupied Lebanese territory, as well as by violating
the sovereignty of Lebanon by air, land and sea. In
furtherance of that policy, the Prime Minister of Israel
announced last September his intention to annex parts
of the occupied West Bank, in flagrant defiance of
international law, the Charter of the United Nations and
the relevant United Nations resolutions, which would
lead to further violence and escalation in the region.
The Arab world remains committed to peace as a
strategic choice. However, that does not mean accepting
Israeli occupation and aggressions indefinitely or
the continued Israeli attacks on and killings of the
Palestinian people. It does not mean accepting violations
of international resolutions, attempts to change the
historical and legal status of Jerusalem and other Arab
and Palestinian territories or attempts to pre-empt the
final status negotiations.
The Arab States renew their commitment to their
principled positions, as announced by their leaders at
various international and regional forums, including the
most recent, the thirtieth summit of the League of Arab
States in Tunisia and the fourteenth Islamic summit of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation in Mecca.
The Arab Group in New York would like to stress
once again the following points.
First, we reject all unilateral policies and measures
taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to alter the
historical, legal and demographic status of East
Jerusalem and to violate Muslim and Christian holy
sites in the city. We call on the countries of the world
to not recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel
and not move to their embassies there. We support
the historical Hashemite custodianship of the Muslim
46/57

28/10/2019

and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem, and we believe
that the Jordanian Jerusalem Waqf Council is the only
legal authority over the Al-Aqsa Mosque in terms of
management, maintenance and organization of entry
and exit.
Secondly, we again condemn the so-called Jewish
nation-State law, which perpetuates racism and denies
the rights of the Palestinian people, especially their
right to self-determination.
Thirdly, we call on the international community,
especially the Security Council, to assume its
responsibility in providing the necessary protection
to the Palestinian people, in line with the Geneva
Conventions and the relevant United Nations resolutions,
including those of the Security Council and the General
Assembly — most importantly resolution ES-10/20, of
13 June 2018. We also call for the implementation of
the Secretary-General’s recommendations, issued in
accordance with that resolution.
Fourthly, we call on the international community
to continue supporting the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East in order to allow it to carry out its mandate and
overcome its current financial difficulties.
The Arab Group reiterates that it stands ready to
support any serious efforts to revive the peace process,
end the occupation and reach a comprehensive and
just solution to the Palestinian question, including the
Israeli-Arab conflict, in accordance with the relevant
international terms of reference, the Madrid principles
and the Arab Peace Initiative. That solution should
follow a timetable that would lead to an agreement on
the final status issues with international guarantees,
including the status of Jerusalem.
The Arab Group stresses that any effort or initiative
to settle the conflict that does not take into consideration
the aforementioned terms of reference and the twoState solution will fail to make any progress towards
the settlement of the conflict. The Arab Group affirms
once again that it stands with the State of Palestine in
its endeavours to become a full-fledged Member of the
United Nations.
In conclusion, the Arab Group is committed
to respecting international legitimate resolutions,
international law and international humanitarian law.
We call for intensifying international efforts to ensure
the implementation of the relevant Council resolutions,
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

promote peace in the service of international peace and
security and enable the peoples of the region to live
safely and peacefully.
The President: I now give the floor to the
permanent Observer of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council and
to thank you for holding this important meeting, which
coincides with a number of significant international
developments concerning stability in the Middle
East region.
Those developments required the League of
Arab States to convene a number of extraordinary
meetings at the summit and ministerial levels, while
the Security Council is still incapable of effectively
dealing with them although they are directly linked to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
There are many hotbeds of tension throughout
the Arab world. However, the Palestinian question
remains at the heart of such tension. The League of
Arab States is extremely concerned about the electoral
crisis in Israel, which means that there is currently no
recognized partner in the peace process. Nevertheless,
we underscore once again the unchanging principles
and international parameters underpinning the peace
process, most importantly the two-State solution, the
establishment of a Palestinian State within the 4 June
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and the
need for negotiations to include the five key issues of
the final status: settlements, water, refugees, security
and Jerusalem. The League reiterates its rejection of
any unilateral decision that would undermine the
Palestinian negotiating position in any final peace
negotiations. We also reiterate our refusal to change the
status of Al-Quds Al-Sharif.
We call for effectively countering the Israeli
settlements brutal attacks against Palestinian
territories. The defenceless Palestinian people must
be protected against Israeli attacks. The Security
Council must consider the alternatives proposed by the
Secretary-General in his report (A/73/346), following
the resumption of the tenth emergency special session
of the General Assembly on 13 June 2018.
We also underscore the importance of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and its role

S/PV. 8648

in assisting Palestinian refugees and meeting their
humanitarian needs until they are allowed to enjoy the
right to return in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 194 (III) of 1948 and until a comprehensive
and just solution to the Palestinian question is reached.
The League hopes that peace negotiations on all
issues between the Palestinian and Israeli parties will
begin as soon as the new Israeli Government is formed,
based on the internationally agreed parameters, the
Oslo Accords, the Madrid principles and the Arab
Peace Initiative. We are convinced that the international
actors, especially the Security Council, will provide
their support for a comprehensive and just solution to
the Palestinian question and the Arab-Israeli conflict
in its entirety.
Meanwhile, we commend all the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Coordinator,
Mr. Mladenov. We welcome the reports on illegitimate
Israeli settlement activities, which are provided pursuant
to resolution 2334 (2016), which is and will remain a
milestone in the work of the Council and a cornerstone
of international legitimacy that must be respected.
Iran’s flagrant interference in the internal affairs
of Arab countries continues. Iran is supporting
terrorist organizations and cells that are opposed to
the Governments of Arab countries, which is a source
of deep concern for the League of Arab States and the
international community. That is why the Arab Summit,
held in Mecca in May, dealt with that issue and issued
the Mecca communiqué, reaffirming the declaration
issued at the previous Arab Summit held in Tunisia.
The recent Arab ministerial meetings held in Cairo in
September and the ministerial coordination meeting
held at the beginning of the seventy-fourth session of
the General Assembly adopted declarations confirming
the firm and unequivocal position of the Arab League,
including the need for the Security Council to counter
these threats.
Although we have communicated all of those
statements to the Secretary-General to be circulated
to the Security Council and the General Assembly as
official documents, I will focus only on their most
salient points.
First, we condemn Iranian interference in the
domestic affairs of Arab States, in particular in the
Arabian Gulf region. We condemn military actions
carried out and supported by Iran against the Kingdom

19-3371447/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

28/10/2019

of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and in the
Gulf of Oman.

the targeting the leader of Da’esh in the north-western
part of Syria, which was announced yesterday.

Secondly, all countries of the League of Arab States
stand in full solidarity with the States of the Arabian
Gulf in countering threats and acts of aggression. We
urge the Security Council and various international
and regional Powers to redouble their international
cooperation to ensure international and regional peace
and security while forcefully and decisively confronting
attempts to threaten energy security, safety of maritime
facilities in the Arabian Gulf and other waterways
whether by Iran or its followers.

In that regard, the League of Arab States reiterates
the contents of the outcome document of the regular
Arab Summit held in Tunisia, which refused to
recognize Israel’s sovereignty over the occupied Syrian
Arab Golan. We also stress Syria’s sovereignty over the
Golan, in accordance with resolution 497 (1981), which
was adopted unanimously. We also reiterate that we are
ready to officially refer the issue to the Security Council
and the International Court of Justice, notwithstanding
the fact that Syria’s membership in the League is still
suspended. We are undertaking consultations in that
regard with the parties concerned, in coordination with
the Arab member in the Security Council.

Thirdly, Arab States are committed to meeting all
challenges and countering flagrant Iranian interference
under international law, international legitimacy and
the Charter of the United Nations, while compelling
Iran to meet its obligations as a State Member of the
United Nations and as a neighbouring country of the
Arab States in the Arabian Gulf. That will also avoid
any military confrontation in our region.
Our region has seen other developments with
regard to the issue of Syria. While we were expecting a
de-escalated situation thanks to the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, leading to
the establishment of the Constitutional Committee,
we were surprised by the withdrawal of United States
forces from the north-eastern part of Syria, which
enabled Turkey to launch a military offensive in Syria
with a view to establish a buffer zone.
Although Syria is a suspended member of the
League of Arab States, on 12 October the Council
of Ministers of the League adopted resolution
8454, condemning fully the Turkish act of military
aggression and explicitly calling on the Security
Council to intervene to stop it. We commend the efforts
undertaken by the United States and Russia, which have
led to successive agreements with Turkey, including
ambiguous arrangements on Arab Syrian territory. The
League nevertheless reiterates the need to stop Turkey’s
military aggression in Syria and the withdrawal of all
Turkish aggressive forces from Syria.
We call on the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibilities and ensure the prevention of any
provisional agreement that would undermine the
territorial integrity and unity of Syria or have a
negative impact on the international efforts under way
that have enabled the eradication of Da’esh in Iraq and
countered its activities in Syria, the latest of which was
48/57

In conclusion, the League of Arab States will
continue to play its key role, together with the United
Nations, the African Union and the European Union, in
support of the efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, Ghassan Salamé, to bring
about comprehensive peace. We will spare no effort
to support the work done in Yemen by Mr. Griffiths
in his capacity as the Special Envoy. We will continue
our support for the stabilization efforts under way in
Algeria, the Sudan, Somalia, Iraq and other Arab States.
We hope to step up our cooperation and joint action
with the United Nations and with all other regional
and political organization in order to bring peace and
security to the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Othman (Malaysia): I join others in welcoming
and thanking our briefer today and commend you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate.
Malaysia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
For decades, the Palestinian-Israeli conflict has cast
a shadow over the Middle East. The region continues to
experience a vicious cycle of war, political tensions and
divisions. Many have been killed, injured or displaced.
For Palestinians, humanity is on the brink of failure.
Let me be clear: the Palestinian-Israeli conflict is
not just about a land dispute. All Palestinians, including
women, young people and children, are entitled to
the same rights as we are — the right to a dignified
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

life, justice, freedom from fear and prosperity. But
our solidarity with the Palestinian people must not be
based only in empathy, as worthy as that is. We have an
obligation to them to do everything in our power to end
their long ordeal.
For the same reason, Malaysia continues to extend
its support and commitment to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, which provides assistance, protection
and advocacy for over 20 per cent of the world’s
refugees. This is not a matter of charity. We see this
as the responsibility of the international community to
protect and promote the human rights and dignity of
our Palestinian brothers and sisters.
The recent violence in Gaza and the West Bank
continues to undermine hopes for a peaceful settlement
of the question of Palestine. We cannot continue to
stand idle and allow Israel to continue to carry out its
brutal occupation and repressive policies that violate
numerous United Nations resolutions and international
law, including humanitarian law.
Malaysia cannot and will not recognize any
blatant seizure of Palestinian land by Israel for its
settlements, as that constitutes a flagrant infringement
of the Palestinian people’s rights and their right to selfdetermination. We also reject any unilateral action
regarding the final status of Jerusalem.
Malaysia therefore calls upon the international
community to act swiftly and decisively to prevent any
further loss of defenceless, innocent Palestinian lives.
When we served on the Council in 2016, Malaysia, along
with other Council members, succeeded in adopting
the historic resolution 2334 (2016), which, inter alia,
demanded that Israel immediately and completely cease
all settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. We remain hopeful
and urge the relevant parties to ensure full respect for
and the implementation of this important resolution.
Malaysia also firmly upholds its position that a twoState solution with the Palestinians and Israelis living
side by side in peace, based on the pre-1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine, is the
only viable solution to the conflict.
The tragic circumstances surrounding the
Palestinian people are nothing new. The Council has
arduously debated them for decades. We must act now.
It is absolutely necessary to work collectively to reverse

S/PV. 8648

any threat to the two-State solution. We must continue
to encourage dialogue and demonstrate our faith in
diplomacy and multilateralism.
We also need to do more to bridge or possibly even
close the gap between words and deeds. We need strong
political will, and if we are to succeed in resolving
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, we believe that such
success may create new openings to forge progress
towards broader and peaceful conflict resolution in
other parts of the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Rivero Rosario (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to begin by expressing our delegation’s gratitude
for South Africa’s exemplary leadership of the work of
the Security Council as President of the Council for the
month of October. We take this opportunity to welcome
the presence of Mrs. Pandor, Minister for International
Relations and Cooperation of the Republic of South
Africa. We welcome also the Secretary of State of the
Federal Foreign Office of Germany.
We align ourselves the statement made by the
representative of the Republic of Azerbaijan on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).
Since the previous quarterly open debate on the
Middle East, including the situation in Palestine (see
S/PV.8583), far from taking measures to immediately
and completely put an end to the illegal Israeli occupation
of Palestinian territory, Israel has with impunity
continued to expand settlements in occupied areas and
has threatened to annex the Palestinian territories of
the Jordan Valley in the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
These fresh actions are serious and troubling.
Cuba condemns the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territory and all illegal and colonization policies,
practices and measures, including the construction and
expansion of Israeli settlements in occupied Palestinian
territory, punitive demolitions, seizures of Palestinian
structures by the Israeli authorities, the forced
displacement of hundreds of Palestinian civilians, the
blockade of the Gaza Strip and the increased violence
and use of indiscriminate and disproportionate force
against Palestinian civilians, in flagrant violation of
the Charter of the United Nations and international
humanitarian law.
We call once again upon the Security Council
to demand an immediate end to the occupation of

19-3371449/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian territory and to Israel’s aggressive and
colonization policies, in accordance with the resolutions
adopted on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, particularity resolution 2334
(2016). It is unacceptable that the Security Council has
not even condemned the escalation of violence or the
tragic events in the Gaza Strip since 30 March 2018.
The repeated obstruction of the United States, which is
complicit with Israel’s occupation and aggression, is a
discredit to this body.
The international community cannot remain
silent. International peace and security must be
safeguarded, and we must ensure compliance by Israel
with international law, including humanitarian law and
international human rights law, and with all the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and of the Council,
particularly the aforementioned resolution 2334 (2016).
We reiterate our unconditional support for a just,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict that will make it possible for
the Palestinian people to exercise their right to selfdetermination and live in an independent, sovereign
State, within pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, and that guarantees the right of return
of refugees.
We reject the unilateral action by the United States
Government in recognizing Jerusalem as the capital
of Israel and establishing its diplomatic representation
in that city, without regard to its historical status.
We condemn the cutting off of financial support to
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, as well as all unilateral
measures aimed at undermining the two-State solution,
which is the only viable and realistic solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
We reiterate our rejection of the so-called deal
of the century drawn up by the current United States
Government, which does not envision the creation
of a State of Palestine and ignores the two-State
solution, which has received the historical support of
the United Nations, NAM, the League of Arab States,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and other
international stakeholders.
We call for respect for multilateralism and an
end to the use of double standards and to interference
in domestic affairs, foreign aggression, illicit arms
trafficking and the sponsorship of terrorist groups in
the region.
50/57

28/10/2019

We reiterate our strong condemnation of the
decision by the United States Government to recognize
the occupied Syrian Golan as Israeli territory, which is a
grave and flagrant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, international law and the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council, in particular 497 (1981).
We will continue to support the demands of the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to recover
the Golan Heights, and again call for Israel’s total and
unconditional withdrawal from the Syrian Golan and
all occupied Arab territories.
We express our firm rejection of the application
of new, arbitrary and unjust unilateral coercive
economic measures announced by the Government of
the United States against the Islamic Republic of Iran.
The withdrawal of the United States from the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action on the Iranian nuclear
programme, the increase in the number of unilateral
sanctions and the military threat against the Islamic
Republic of Iran have all led to greater instability in the
Middle East.
We condemn the attacks on two oil facilities in the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
We call for restraint and moderation so as to
prevent instability and conflict in the Middle East. We
demand that this organ fulfil its responsibility under
the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance
of international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Mimouni (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Madam President,
and the delegation of South Africa on your tireless
efforts in presiding over the Council, especially while
addressing important international developments,
such as those unfolding in the occupied Palestinian
territories and the Middle East.
I would also like to thank the Ambassador of the
Russian Federation for successfully presiding over the
Council last month.
Allow me to also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing on the developments on the ground.
We meet today as the Middle East is undergoing a
delicate and precarious phase. A number of brotherly
countries have been hit by crises and suffer from the
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

presence of terrorist organizations that threaten their
very existence. Regrettably, we must acknowledge that
the situation has deteriorated because the international
community has been unable to adopt an appropriate
approach that would allow for the settlement of those
crises, according to the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. That has led to
greater chaos and confusion and an increased risk of
the collapse of some Arab States.
The Palestinian question remains at the core of the
Islamic and Arab world. In remaining unresolved, it
has led to greater tension and violence in the Middle
East and the wider world. The most recent tragic
developments and the suffering of the Palestinian people
indicate that prospects for a peaceful settlement have
become elusive, as the occupying Power continues to
defy international legitimacy, insists on imposing a fait
accompli, reneges on its commitments and disregards
all agreements with a view to eliminating the goal of
establishing a sovereign Palestinian State.
We express our deep concern about the general
situation of the Palestinian question. In the light of the
continued violations committed by the Israeli occupying
Power, the international community must make greater
efforts to ensure that the United Nations, in particular
the Security Council, shoulders its full responsibility.
The United Nations must honour its legal obligations,
uphold the law and defend international order. It
must act according to the law. It must fulfil its moral
obligations to ensure accountability for those crimes
and provide protection for the Palestinian people.
The settlement activities carried out by Israel in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem
and the occupied Syrian Golan, are attempts to impose a
fait accompli, in flagrant violation of international law,
including resolution 2334 (2016). It is regrettable that
Israel seeks to dictate erroneous terms of reference and
to suggest half solutions, claiming that they are realistic,
even as it seeks only to undermine the legitimate right
of the Palestinian people to self-determination. The
world has shown broad solidarity with the Palestinian
question and condemned certain countries for the
relocation of their embassies to Jerusalem. That is a
hostile and provocative act against the national rights
of the Palestinian people and is in flagrant violation of
international law as well as an aggression against the
international system including the United Nations.

S/PV. 8648

The unarmed Palestinian people are unable to
enjoy their most basic national rights — including the
right to return to their usurped land. We also condemn
any attempt to alter the character of Jerusalem. Algeria
again expresses from this Chamber its principled
position regarding in support of the just question of the
Palestinian people. We hope that the United Nations
will shoulder its historic responsibility and allow the
Palestinian people to decide their own fate. It must
reject any unjust actions targeting the Palestinian
people. It must put an end to the practices and arbitrary
occupations by Israel in Jerusalem, the Gaza Strip and
the West Bank.
Against the backdrop of a complete impasse in the
peace process, which has been obstructed for years,
Algeria calls for intensifying diplomatic efforts in the
Council and, at the level of international and regional
organizations, taking practical steps to defuse tensions
in the region and creating the necessary conditions
to break the current deadlock. We hope that such
discussions will constitute an incentive for the United
Nations to shoulder its responsibility and support
the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people
as they seek to regain their territory and establish an
independent and sovereign State, on the basis of the
4 June 1967 lines, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Ever since Algeria gained its independence, we
have adopted a clear and steadfast position based on
two main principles in our foreign policy. The first is
non-interference in the internal affairs of other States,
which is a core rule of international relations. The second
is support for consensus-based political solutions that
uphold the sovereignty and unity of Arab countries
and meet the aspirations of the Arab people, without
sectarian strife or foreign intervention, regardless of its
manifestations or source. That is why, with regard to
the situation in sisterly Syria, it is important to focus
on the political solution and on national reconciliation
so as to enable all Syrians to return to their homeland
and start reconstruction in the context of preserving
the unity and sovereignty of that fraternal country and
safeguarding it from external intervention, pursuant to
the Charter and international law.
In conclusion, Algeria assures its unconditional
support for all genuine initiatives aimed at achieving
lasting peace and stability in the Middle East. We are
aware that the international community must ensure
unity among the members of the Security Council and
bear its historical and legal responsibility to restore

19-3371451/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

lost justice. Their failure to do so will have an adverse
effect on international and regional peace and security.
We hope that our deliberations will pave the way for
a courageous resolution that will end the current
precarious situation in the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Maldives.
Mr. Nasir (Maldives): I would like to thank South
Africa for organizing today’s important debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine. The Maldives remains deeply concerned
about the situation in the Middle East and views the
question of Palestine as particularly important.
This year has witnessed a further deterioration in
the human rights situation of the Palestinian people. The
limited electricity supply in Gaza has compromised its
water supply, sewage treatment and hospital operations,
and Gaza now has one of the highest unemployment
rates in the world. The Government of Israel, the
occupying Power, continues to place severe restrictions
on the human rights of the people of Palestine, limiting
the movement of people and goods into and out of
the Gaza Strip, as well as accelerating the unlawful
transfer of Israeli citizens to settlements in the occupied
West Bank. The occupation stands in the way of every
measure that would afford the Palestinians a modicum
of dignity. I wish to reiterate my Government’s position
on adopting an international consensus on a two-State
solution, with the establishment of an independent and
sovereign State of Palestine within the pre-1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, where the Palestinian
people may live in peace, dignity and prosperity.
It is deeply troubling that while Israel, the occupying
Power, seeks to further exploit, damage and deplete the
natural resources in the occupied Palestinian territory,
we still find ourselves in this Chamber today expressing
our concerns about how little progress has been made
on ending such actions. The Maldives calls on Israel
to stop its attacks on Palestinian civilians, including
women and children, and to fully implement the
relevant Security Council resolutions on the question
of Palestine. The Maldives also urges the Council to do
more to bring lasting peace to the Palestinian people
and the region.
The ongoing conflict in Syria continues to result
in human rights violations and humanitarian crises.
This multilayered catastrophe in the Middle East has
had dire consequences for international security. The
52/57

28/10/2019

mass exodus of refugees has further exacerbated the
humanitarian crisis facing the Syrian people. Yet the
conflict is locked in a stalemate with no end in sight. My
Government believes that the United Nations and the
international community must do more to reinvigorate
talks to reach a peaceful settlement of the conflict.
The war in Yemen has affected millions of civilians,
with children being the hardest hit. We must do more to
help alleviate the dire situation of the most vulnerable.
Peace and prosperity must be at the heart of the efforts
to resolve the conflict, and peace must be seen as a
prerequisite to development.
The continued presence of conflicts in the region
has bred terrorism and violence, with implications
extending beyond the Middle East to all parts of the
world. The Government of Maldives strongly condemns
terrorist attacks in the region, including those targeting
civilians, shipping routes and, most recently, two
pumping stations on the Saudi Aramco East-West
pipeline in Al-Dawadmi and Afif. These attacks
threaten the security and stability of the region as well
as the global economy. The scourge of terrorism is the
biggest threat to global peace and security. It is a global
problem that requires a global solution. The Maldives
stands ready to assist international efforts to combat
terrorism and counter violent extremism. The Security
Council, whose task is to maintain international peace
and security, must do more to ensure that its influence
and legitimacy are not compromised. It should increase
and further accelerate its efforts to see that its decisions
are enforced, which is essential if global peace and
security is to be maintained. The Maldives reaffirms
its support for the Council, as well as for the SecretaryGeneral, in all their ongoing efforts to bring lasting
peace to the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
the South African presidency of the Security Council
for convening today’s open debate. We sincerely value
South Africa’s principled positions and laudable efforts
in the Council.
I also align myself with the statement to be made
by the representative of the United Arab Emirates on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and
the statement delivered earlier by the representative
of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

To date, the Security Council has adopted almost
2,500 resolutions, some 365 of which are related partly
or entirely to the Palestinian question. Many of them
are exclusively focused on the question of Palestine and
were adopted pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations. However, none of them have been
implemented. Rather, the Israeli regime has continued
to pursue its illegal policies and brutal practices in total
impunity, including by systematically committing all
four core international crimes. For instance, it has waged
more than 15 wars, invaded all of its neighbours without
exception and attacked other countries from the Middle
East to Africa. Israel still occupies territories belonging
to Palestine, Lebanon and Syria and conducts invasions
and aggressions against countries of the region, of
which the latest example is its periodic violation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon
and Syria. It also continues to pursue expansionist
policies by building additional settlements. The most
recent example of that is its Prime Minister’s declared
intention to illegally annex the Jordan Valley. It has
also continued to develop every kind of weapon of mass
destruction and refused to join the relevant treaties. It
has brazenly threatened a country of the region with
nuclear annihilation.
Moreover, Israeli forces continue to brutally kill
innocent Palestinians. In 2018 alone, according to the
World Health Organization, they killed 299 Palestinian
civilians and wounded more than 31,000 others, mostly
during the Great March of Return in Gaza. Another of
Israel’s heartless practices is its illegal and inhumane
blockade of Gaza, which has lasted for more than a
decade. The long dark list of Israel’s brutalities goes on
and on, leaving no doubt that by any measure, it is an
outlaw regime in the most extreme sense.
Unfortunately, the Council has failed to fulfil its
duties with regard to Israel for a reason that is crystal
clear — the unwavering, systematic shielding of Israel
by the United States. The United States recently moved
its embassy to Al-Quds Al-Sharif and recognized
Israel’s sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan.
Both are material breaches of international law. The
United States’ latest gambit — the so-called deal of
the century — is founded on the illusion that it can
buy all causes, aspirations, honour, dignity, property
and territory as well as the inalienable rights of entire
nations. The serious, severe and systematic violation
of international law by the Israeli regime continues to
have serious adverse ramifications for international

S/PV. 8648

instruments and institutions. It gravely erodes the
credibility of the Security Council and the Organization
itself, and the world’s trust and confidence in them. The
other effects of these trends are as devastating as an allout war, if not worse.
In order to preserve international peace and
security, no nation must be left unheard, unnoticed,
unattended, frustrated and in despair. That can result
only in a complete lack of trust and confidence in
international instruments and institutions, thus leading
our world down a path of international disorder. The
Council must be vigilant about the alarming dangerous
trend and live up to its responsibilities to prevent the
crimes and threats of the Israeli regime.
The representative of the League of Arab
States made certain allegations against my country.
Unfortunately, he used the agenda of the Council’s
open debate on Palestine to accuse my country of
intervention. All his claims are a fabrication and are
thus rejected. I therefore do not wish to dignify them
with an answer. However, I would remind him that the
real name of the body of water between Iran and the
Arabian peninsula is the Persian Gulf.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I have
the honour of delivering this statement on behalf of
the States members of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC) in my capacity as Chair of the
OIC Group.
At the outset, I would like to congratulate South
Africa on its successful presidency of the Council this
month. I would also like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his comprehensive briefing this morning.
Today’s discussion highlights the alarming situation
on the ground and the need to act urgently to save the
prospects for peace and the two-State solution. In that
regard, the OIC member States remain committed to
an outcome that enables an independent Palestinian
State based on the 4 June 1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital, according to the relevant
resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map.
We would like to once again reiterate that reaching
a just and comprehensive solution to the conflict will
not only enable Palestine and Israel to live side by side

19-3371453/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in peace and security but also support the stability of
the region. Otherwise, the continuation of that injustice
will be exploited by extremist groups for recruitment
and radicalization, which can only further destabilize
the region.
Therefore, we call on the Council to implement
effective measures, in line with its duties under the
Charter of the United Nations and its own resolutions,
to put an end to this conflict, including by compelling
Israel to halt its illegal policies in Palestine.
The OIC member States particularly deplore
the continued building of new settlements and the
expansion of existing ones, as well as the annexation
and confiscation of land in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. We also draw the
Council’s attention to the resolution adopted by the OIC
in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on 15 September, in
which the OIC member States rejected and condemned
any intention to annex parts of the West Bank. The OIC
resolution considers such actions a dangerous escalation
and a flagrant breach of the United Nations Charter.
Another source of concern is the unlawful effort to
alter the historical status and demographic composition
of occupied East Jerusalem. That includes the illegal
and provocative acts concerning the Christian and
Islamic holy sites in the city, including in particular
Al-Haram Al-Sharif. Such actions threaten the sanctity,
stability and status of those holy sites and may fuel
further violence and extremism in the region.
Similarly, we are worried about the deterioration of
the humanitarian and economic situation in Palestine,
especially in the Gaza Strip, which remains under an
Israeli blockade. As we have heard in every briefing on
this issue, Gaza is suffering from a lack of medicines
and health-care equipment, limited supplies of
electricity and water and high rates of unemployment
and poverty. The harsh living situation has spread
despair among the 2 million people living in Gaza,
leading to what the health teams of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) call an epidemic deterioration
of mental health conditions. In addition, the United
Nations warned in a recent report that an increasingly
fragile Palestinian economy will lead to a higher risk of
violence and instability. Such trends are alarming and
should be a source of grave concern to us all.
54/57

28/10/2019

Given the current challenges, the OIC member
States recommend that the Security Council and the
wider international community prioritize the following.
First, we must create an environment conducive to
peace efforts by reversing negative trends on the ground.
That requires halting any illegal and provocative
measures that undermine the two-State solution, such
as settlement activities, which are highlighted in
United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016). This is fundamental to salvaging the twoState solution and ultimately bringing an end to this
illegal occupation.
We also call for Israel’s full withdrawal from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967,
in accordance with Security Council resolutions.
We further affirm the need for all external parties to
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria
and reiterate our support for the political solution of the
Syrian crisis consistent with resolution 2254 (2015).
Secondly, we need to drive international momentum
to launch credible negotiations on all final-status issues
in the Middle East peace process, in accordance with
the established terms of reference.
Finally, we must urgently avert the further
deterioration of the humanitarian and economic
situation in Palestine and alleviate the humanitarian
needs and suffering of the Palestinian people, including
Palestinian refugees. We encourage Member States
to provide funds or to increase their contributions to
UNRWA, the United Nations Development Programme
and other United Nations entities that are working
diligently to provide education and health care, to
improve the livelihoods of Palestinians and to support
economic recovery and development. In that regard,
the OIC member States reiterate their strong support
for UNRWA, which plays a vital role in supporting
Palestinian refugees and maintaining regional stability,
and for the renewal of its mandate.
In conclusion, we affirm that our goal is to achieve
the long-delayed vision of two States, Palestine and
Israel, living side by side in peace and security. The OIC
member States will continue to support international
efforts to promote a just, comprehensive, lasting and
peaceful solution to end this conflict, which, in our
view, is a vital prerequisite for regional and international
peace and security.
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this important meeting on the increasingly complex
situation in the Middle East in the light of the recent
developments that constitute a challenge to international
peace and security. I would like to commend the able
leadership of your friendly delegation in managing the
work of the Council during the month of October. I
would also like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his
valuable briefing.
Achieving
peace
requires
the
consistent
implementation of the Charter of the United Nations
and its noble purposes, in particular non-interference
in the internal affairs of other States, respect for
good-neighbourly relations, the peaceful settlement
of disputes and the implementation of United Nations
resolutions to preserve the sovereignty, dignity and
stability of countries. All countries must refrain from
any policies that threaten or undermine regional and
international security, whether directly or indirectly,
while working collectively to counter terrorism and
achieve sustainable development.
A just, comprehensive and lasting peace in the
region cannot be achieved without resolving the
Palestinian question and without granting the fraternal
Palestinian people their legitimate right, in line with
that of other peoples, to establish an independent State
within the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem
as its capital. That would be in accordance with the
Arab Peace Initiative, the two-State solution and the
relevant international resolutions. The Kingdom of
Bahrain will spare no effort to ensure the development
and prosperity of the fraternal Palestinian people.
The international community must also shoulder its
responsibilities and compel Israel to implement all
relevant international resolutions.
With regard to the sisterly Syrian Arab Republic, the
Kingdom of Bahrain stresses the need to safeguard the
independence of Syria, while rejecting the occupation
of any part of Syria by any foreign force. We underscore
the need to reach a political solution, in line with the
first Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and the
relevant United Nations resolutions. We reiterate that
the Golan is occupied Syrian Arab territory pursuant to
relevant international resolutions.

S/PV. 8648

Along with other fraternal countries in the Arab
coalition to support the legitimate Government in
Yemen, the Kingdom of Bahrain will continue to make
every effort to establish security and stability in the
sisterly Republic of Yemen. We also express our great
appreciation for the efforts of the sisterly Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia to bring together all national parties and
the legitimate Government in Yemen with a view to
combating the Iran-backed Houthi militias, as well as
all other terrorist groups threatening the security and
stability of the country. The aim is to reach a peaceful
solution to the crisis, in line with the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
the outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference and
resolution 2216 (2015), with a view to ensuring the
unity, territorial integrity and regional neighbourhood
of Yemen.
In July, the Kingdom of Bahrain hosted an
important international military meeting on scaling up
international efforts to promote regional security. This
month, together with the United States and Poland, we
hosted a meeting of the Warsaw process and its working
groups on maritime and aviation security with the aim
of limiting the worst threats to stability and security
in the Arab Gulf region and around the world. That
meeting took place following attacks on maritime routes
in the Arab Gulf and the region by States and terrorist
groups, including attacks on commercial vessels and
oil facilities in the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
which posed a serious threat to the regional and world
economies. That meeting was also part of a wider
international cooperation to protect maritime and air
navigation by identifying effective means to address the
increasing threat levels and ensure the security of the
regional countries and the stability of global economy.
In conclusion, ensuring peace, sustainable
development and prosperity for all peoples of the world
requires all of us to prioritize our supreme interests
and be committed to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations, which was founded to save all peoples
from the scourge of war and ensure the peaceful
resolution of conflicts and the achievement of peace
and security throughout the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): Mr. President, our delegation welcomes the
convening of today’s debate under the South African

19-3371455/57

S/PV.8648

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

presidency, and, especially, under your guidance. We
wish to reiterate that the question of Palestine is an
issue of ongoing importance for Ecuador. In this regard,
we align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries. We are also grateful for
the enlightening briefing delivered by Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process.
On behalf of the Government of Ecuador, I would
like to refer to three fundamental aspects. First, I should
like to reiterate Ecuador’s position regarding settlement
practices and the humanitarian situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory. Despite the mandatory
nature of resolution 2334 (2016), settlement activity
continues, particularly in occupied East Jerusalem,
as well as evictions, demolition of Palestinian-owned
infrastructure and house confiscations — practices
that contradict international law. Ecuador condemns
all acts of violence and terrorism regardless of where
they originate.
We are extremely concerned by the humanitarian
situation, human rights violations and breaches
of international humanitarian law in the occupied
Palestinian territory. We are also concerned about the
continuing economic and financial crisis being faced
by the Palestinian Authority. Unfortunately, those
conditions continue to worsen and deteriorate.
Secondly, we believe it is imperative that the
Council act and adopt all actions aimed at ensuring
the full validity of the fundamental principles of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
for which there have been repeated calls.
Thirdly, we once again call on the international
community to make tangible progress in supporting
progress towards a peaceful, definitive and just political
solution for both parties, based on the coexistence of
two States, Palestine and Israel, living side by side in
peace and security within recognized borders, on the
basis of the pre-1967 borders, pursuant to the consensus
reaffirmed in resolution 2334 (2016). That is the only
way to achieve peace and stability in the Middle East,
thereby returning the Palestinian people’s rights to
them and establishing an independent State of Palestine
that is incorporated into the United Nations as a full
Member State.
We believe that sustainable solutions must be based
on justice, human rights and international law. Preventive
56/57

28/10/2019

diplomacy is a critical tool to dissipate tensions before
they intensify and worsen. We support all international
initiatives aimed at relaunching the peace talks and
negotiations between Israel and Palestine.
Finally, I should like to stress that Ecuador values
the tireless efforts of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
and we reiterate our full support for its mandate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): We wish to thank you,
Mr. President, and your delegation, and congratulate
South Africa on its successful presidency and leadership
of the Council this month.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Republic
of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
We would like to make the following additional
remarks in our national capacity.
Nigeria once again expresses its deep concern
about the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. All efforts being made by the
international community to reduce tensions between
the Israelis and the Palestinians seem to not be
moving in the intended direction of finding a lasting
and comprehensive solution leading to the peaceful
coexistence of the two parties. This fact was manifest at
the Ministerial Committee Meeting of the Non-Aligned
Movement on Palestine convened in Baku, Azerbaijan
to review developments in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, on issues that
regrettably remain unresolved.
The question of Palestine is a lingering issue
affecting international peace and security. Nigeria’s
position on the issue is clear and unambiguous. We
continue to call for a viable, contiguous Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital and based on
the 1967 borders, in accordance with numerous United
Nations and Security Council resolutions. We once
again call on States with influence over the parties
concerned to encourage them to re-engage in dialogue
on the basis of relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid principles, the Quartet road map, the Arab Peace
Initiative and other existing agreements. We reaffirm
our unwavering support for a two-State solution, with
Israel and Palestine existing side by side in peace. The
19-33714

28/10/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

relevance of a two-State solution needs no reiteration in
these debates, as we believe that there is no alternative
to it. All parties and interlocutors should take concerted
measures to create the necessary conditions conducive
to the achievement of a comprehensive and lasting
peace in the Middle East.
In that regard, it is our expectation that this debate
will offer new suggestions on how best to address the
prevailing challenges and gaps for the implementation
of all relevant United Nations and Security Council
resolutions on the matter. To this end, we once again call
on Israel to take concrete steps to freeze all settlementrelated activities in the West Bank and occupied East
Jerusalem as a confidence-building measure. In the
same vein, we call on the State of Palestine to play its role
in building confidence by signalling, through enhanced
efforts, its readiness to return to the negotiating table in
order to forge unity and deal with acts of militancy for
the achievement of a just solution.
My delegation would once again like to reiterate
its call on Israel and Palestine to exercise the utmost
restraint in their actions and utterances. The two
parties should heed the well-meaning appeals endorsed
by the international community to resume negotiations
without further delay. Progress in the direction of a
two-State solution will depend on the resumption of
direct negotiations, demonstrable political will and
commitment to the process. My delegation would
therefore like to call on the international community to
continue to support and encourage Israel and Palestine
to sheathe their swords and embrace the peace process
as a means of resolving the lingering conflicts.
Nigeria reaffirms its support for the rights of the
Palestinian people, including the protection of their
fundamental human rights, particularly their right to
free movement and self-determination.
In conclusion, it is my delegation’s belief that
achieving lasting peace in the Middle East will depend
on the commitment and determination of both Israel
and Palestine to make painful sacrifices. This would
bring about the much-desired peace and justice and

S/PV. 8648

reduce the serious threat to regional and international
peace and security.
The President: The representative of Israel has
asked for the floor to make a second statement. I give
him the floor.
Mr. Bourgel (Israel) (spoke in French): I should
like to offer a brief response to the statement made by
the representative of Iran.
I recall yet again that the Islamic Republic of
Iran is one of the greatest sponsors of international
terrorism. Iran exports its missiles, promotes terrorism
and broadly disseminates its destructive ideology, in
violation of resolutions 1559 (2004), 1701 (2006) and
2216 (2015). Be it in Lebanon, Syria, Iraq, Yemen or
the Gulf, the Iranian regime acts under the same modus
operandi, in full impunity, with a view to destabilizing
the region and exporting its revolution. Moreover,
the Islamic Republic of Iran is seeking to turn Syria
into a platform for launching attacks on Israel. The
deployment of Iranian armed forces to Syrian territory
poses a grave threat to regional and international
security. The Security Council must firmly condemn
Iranian violations and take all useful measures to
end them.
On 1 September, barely a few days after the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, Hizbullah launched several anti-tank
missiles from southern Lebanon at targets in Israeli
territory. Israel has regularly warned the international
community against the efforts of Iran and Hizbullah to
strengthen the latter’s arsenal, in flagrant violation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006). Hizbullah’s
precision-guided missile programme is the most
alarming manifestation of that strategy.
The international community must take all
measures necessary against those who continue to fuel
violence and to promote terrorism with the sole aim of
undermining peace and security.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

19-3371457/57
