S/2019/782

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 October 2019
Original: English

Situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2480 (2019), the Security Council extended the mandate of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) until 30 June 2020 and requested me to report to the Council every three
months on the implementation of the resolution. The present report highlights
progress made in the implementation of the Agreement on P eace and Reconciliation
in Mali and in the development and implementation of a comprehensive politica lly
led strategy to re-establish a State presence, State authority and basic social services,
protect civilians and reduce intercommunal violence in central Mali, as well as in
MINUSMA efforts to support these objectives. It also provides an update on
coordination among MINUSMA, the Malian Defence and Security Forces, the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, the French forces and the European Unio n
missions in Mali. It covers major developments in Mali since my previous report
(S/2019/454), dated 31 May 2019.
Political developments
2.
Preparations for an inclusive national dialogue dominated po litical
developments, following the signing of the agreement of 2 May between the
Government and several opposition parties. The scope of the dialogue, initially
intended to involve consultations with relevant stakeholders on the revision of the
Constitution, was gradually expanded to include major political and institutional
reforms outlined in the Agreement. Consultations on the terms of reference of the
dialogue, its duration and the participants continued within and among political
parties and civil society.
3.
On 25 June, the President of Mali, Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, appointed three
facilitators to lead the preparation and holding of the dialogue: Mediator of the
Republic, Baba Akhib Haïdara; former Prime Minister, Ousmane Issoufi Maïga; and
political activist and former government Minister, Aminata Dramane Traoré. In an
effort to ensure the inclusivity of the process, the facilitators consulted a wide range
of stakeholders, including former Heads of State, former Prime Ministers, political
parties, civil society representatives, cultural associations, women’s and young
people’s associations, labour unions and signatory armed groups, as well as
representatives of the private sector and the media.

19-16006 (E)

031019

*1916006*

S/2019/782

4.
Some opposition parties, including the coalition Front pour la sauvegarde de la
démocratie, led by opposition leader Soumaïla Cissé, expressed reservation s about
the appointment of the facilitators, while others announced that they would not
participate in the inclusive national dialogue. On 27 July, a newly created group of
civil society and political groupings, Awn Ko Mali, criticized the lack of inclusiv ity
in the dialogue process, with some members calling for the greater involvement of
representatives at the local level.
5.
The ruling majority coalition, the Ensemble pour le Mali, called for broad
support for, and participation in, the dialogue, although during the reporting period,
10 political parties left the coalition owing to disagreements regarding the dialogue.
On 6 June, they formed their own alliance, the Action républicaine pour le progrès.
The Coalition des candidats 2018 pour le Mali, composed of five former presidential
candidates who had supported Mr. Keita in the second round of the 2018 elections,
also suspended its participation in the Ensemble pour le Mali, on 19 June, accusing
the Ensemble of failing to address pressing issues in Mali. Both political groupings,
however, confirmed their willingness to participate in the inclusive national dialogue.
6.
My Special Representative continued to work closely with all parties concerned
and use his good offices to address differences among poli tical actors and encourage
their active participation in the dialogue, while promoting the participation of
women’s and young people’s associations. In a meeting with women leaders on
14 June, the Prime Minister of Mali, Boubou Cisse, reaffirmed that women would
play a central role in the dialogue. Mr. Cisse officially launched the inclusive national
dialogue in Bamako on 16 September, upon validation of its terms of reference and
internal procedures. The dialogue will include discussions on the Agreement o n Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, institutional and political reforms, the Loi d ’entente
nationale, the role of traditional and religious authorities, un ions and
non-governmental organizations, and governance and development issues, as well as
a new electoral calendar.
7.
In addition to preparing for the inclusive national dialogue, the Government
intensified its efforts to prevent the escalation of interc ommunal violence and restore
State authority and basic social services in order to address the crisis in central Mali.
On 19 June, Mr. Cisse issued a decree establishing the Cadre politique de gestion de
la crise au Centre du Mali to ensure the strategic and political coordination of efforts
to stabilize the situation. In that connection, on 20 June, Mr. Keita nominated former
President of Mali, Dioncounda Traoré, as his High Representative for the Centre.
8.
From 3 to 7 July, Mr. Cisse visited Bankass, Bandiagara, Douentza and Koro
cercles, Mopti region, where he launched the delivery of emergency food a ssistance,
encouraged and facilitated inclusive intercommunal dialogue and announced the
deployment of additional troops and gendarmes to the area, bringin g the total number
of national defence and security forces deployed to the region to 3,000. From 1 to
5 August, Mr. Cisse returned to central Mali and visited Macina cercle, Ségou region,
to chair the signing ceremony of a cessation of hostilities agreemen t between
representatives of dozos (traditional hunters) and Fulani self-defence groups.
9.
On 27 June, the National Assembly voted to extend the mandate of members of
parliament a second time, from 30 June 2019 to 2 May 2020, owing to delays in the
constitutional review process and the organization of legislative elections. While the
Constitutional Court confirmed the constitutionality of the extension, on 3 July, some
members of the political opposition denounced it as unconstitutional.
10. For the first time since the crisis of 2012, parliamentary delegations undertook
official visits to central and northern Mali, with MINUSMA support, to assess the
level of ownership of the peace process. From 9 to 17 July, delegations comprising
members of parliament from both the ruling majority and opposition political parties
2/20

19-16006

S/2019/782

visited Gao, Kidal, Mopti, Taoudénitand Timbuktu. They engaged with local
authorities, signatory armed groups and civil society.
11. During the visit of the parliamentary delegation to Kidal, on 16 July, the
Secretary-General of the Haut conseil pour l’unité de l’Azawad, Alghabass Ag Intalla,
scheduled a flag-raising ceremony at the Operational Coordination Mechanism camp
in Kidal. The initiative was not welcomed by supporters of the Mouvement national
de libération de l’Azawad, who continued to voice their differences regarding the
status of Kidal. As a result, the ceremony was cancelled, and on 17 July,
demonstrators removed references to the Republic of Mali from the Governor ’s office
signage and burned the flag of Mali, accusing the leadership of the Coordination des
mouvements de l’Azawad of having decided unilaterally to raise the flag without
consulting the population.
12. Also on 17 July, all signatory parties issued communiqués condemni ng the
protesters’ actions and reaffirmed their commitment to the peace process. On 18 July,
the international mediation team also issued a communiqué condemning the
protesters’ actions as a serious attack on the unity of Mali and reminded the
Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad of its obligations related to the return of
State symbols in Kidal. The Government warned the perpetrators that they might be
subject to sanctions.
13. A leadership crisis within the Plateforme between opposing factions from Ga o
and Timbuktu continued to escalate. Both factions sought strategic allegiances with
other compliant and signatory armed groups, which further increased the polarization.
In an effort to de-escalate tensions, my Special Representative and the president of
the Agreement Monitoring Committee remained in close contact with both factions
and other relevant stakeholders.
14. On 22 June, in his first public appearance since his resignation, on 18 April,
former Prime Minister Soumeylou Boubèye Maïga chaired a me eting in Ségou that
was attended by an estimated 1,000 supporters of his party, the Alliance pour la
solidarité au Mali, and reiterated his support for Mr. Keita. On 1 August, a
spokesperson for Mahmoud Dicko, an influential religious leader who had led ma jor
protests against the former Prime Minister’s Government earlier in 2019, launched
the Coordination des mouvements, associations et sympathisants de l’imam
Mahmoud Dicko with the stated aim of uniting all Muslim young people ’s
associations around the principles and values of Islam.

II. Implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali
Political and institutional measures
15. Some progress was achieved concerning the defence and security measures of
the Agreement, the accelerated disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process and the establishment of the northern economic development zone. Overall,
however, the implementation of the Agreement continued to advance at a slow pace.
Following the adoption by the National Assembly of two bills on such a zone in Mali,
Mr. Keita signed them into law on 24 July. The first law lays out the principles for
the creation of development zones in Mali, and the second one establishes the zone,
defining the roles and responsibilities of the five northern interim administrations and
the oversight mechanisms for expenditures. The Government also established a
development fund for the operationalization of the zone.
16. The percentage of civil administrators present at their duty stations in n orthern
and central Mali decreased from 31 to 27 per cent, with 67 per cent of gov ernors,
19-16006

3/20

S/2019/782

53 per cent of prefects and 17 per cent of sub-prefects deployed. The decreased State
presence is mostly due to insecurity.
17. The transfer of funds to local authorities remains a key challenge owing to the
absence of banking facilities and financial services in northern Mali. As at 28 June,
21 per cent of the State budget had been allocated to local authorities, although the
Agreement had defined that 30 per cent of State revenues should have been
transferred to them by December 2018. The Government made efforts to meet its
obligations by allocating $3.5 million to the 21 district -level interim administrations;
however, funds had yet to be disbursed.
Justice and reconciliation measures
18. On 24 July, Mr. Keita promulgated the Loi d’entente nationale. Based on the
outcomes of the Conférence d’entente nationale held in April 2017, the law outlines
a number of measures aimed at fostering reconciliation following t he crisis of 2012.
The measures include the cessation of prosecution, including preliminary
investigations against those who may have committed crimes but have expressed
repentance, the compensation of victims and the reintegration into society of those
who have renounced violence. Its scope excludes war crimes, crimes against
humanity, rape and crimes that are not subject to a statute of limitations.
19. Human rights activists and organizations in Mali maintain that the Loi d ’entente
nationale contains provisions that could lead to impunity for serious human rights
violations and international crimes, such as torture, which risk undermining the
transitional justice process, and deny victims their rights to truth and reparations.
20. MINUSMA continued to provide logistical and technical support to the Truth,
Justice and Reconciliation Commission, which, as at 5 September, had received
14,191 testimonies, of which 6,253 were given by women (44 per cent) and 643 by
children (less than 1 per cent). The public hearings are expected to commence in
December.
21. On 24 July, Mr. Keita promulgated a law extending the jurisdiction of the
Specialized Judicial Unit to Combat Terrorism and Transnational Organized Crime to
war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity, which will provide the basis for
the unit to prosecute perpetrators of large-scale attacks.
22. MINUSMA and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime continued to
provide support to the Specialized Judicial Unit to Combat Terrorism and
Transnational Organized Crime and its Specialized Investigation Brigade, including
mentoring sessions, as well as the provision of investigative equipment to increase
the capacity for criminal analysis. As of July, 458 cases were being investigated by
the Unit, including 200 on terrorism, 45 on transnational organized crime and 231 on
general criminal matters.
23. To reinforce the security of the prisons, the Mission provided support to the
Government, including by procuring and installing security and surveillance
equipment in prisons in the North and the Centre and in Koulikoro, which hold
inmates suspected or convicted of terrorism-related and transnational organized
crime.
Support for the Agreement Monitoring Committee
24. On 17 June, the Agreement Monitoring Committee held its third ministeriallevel consultation, during which participants condemned the violence in central Mali
and reiterated their support for the Government in addressing the situation. They also
urged signatories to work to ensure the return of State symbols and social and
administrative services to Kidal region.
4/20

19-16006

S/2019/782

25. On 15 July, the Agreement Monitoring Committee held its thirty-sixth ordinary
session, during which participants adopted an updated road map for the
implementation of the Agreement. The meeting was also marked by continued discord
within the Plateforme, whose two opposing factions eventually walked out.
26. On 19 August, the signatory parties met for the thirty-seventh session of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee. The Committee took note of the training of 1,006
former combatants of signatory and former splinter groups. It welcomed the adoption
and promulgation of the legislation on the northern economic development zone and
the Loi d’entente nationale. The Government announced that it would establish a
standing secretariat for its tripartite forum with the signatory movements in order to
conduct regular intersession meetings.
27. Notwithstanding the adoption of a law in December 2015 requiring a minimum
quota of 30 per cent representation by women in public office, the lack of
representation of women on the Agreement Monitoring Committee remains a concern.
My Special Representative, along with the international mediation team, continues to
encourage the signatory parties to nominate women to all Agreement monitoring
mechanisms while working closely with the signatory parties on the establishment of
an independent women’s observatory to monitor the implementation of the
Agreement.
28. The listing of an additional five individuals by the Security Council on 10 July
pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017) provoked reactions in the northern regions,
whereas the political actors in Bamako remained silent for the most part. On 12 July,
the Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad publicly contested the listing of one
of its members, Ahmed Ag Albachar, and denied the existence of any ties to terrorist
groups. The listing of the member of parliament for Bourem district, Mohamed Ould
Mataly, sparked protests by young people’s organizations in Gao region. The listing
of Houka Houka Ag Alhousseini, from Timbuktu region, triggered mixed reactions,
with civil society organizations expressing hope that he would be held accountable
for his alleged crimes during the occupation of Timbuktu and some interlocutors
underscoring his instrumental role in resolving intercommunal conflicts in Timbuktu.
Regional developments
29. During the period under review, the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel reportedly carried out sweeping operations along the Mali-Burkina Faso border.
Few calls were made to MINUSMA to provide life-support consumables.
30. On 9 July, the Group of Five for the Sahel (G5 Sahel) and the European Union
held their fifth meeting of Ministers for Foreign Affairs, during which the European
Union pledged an additional €120 million for the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel and €18 million for its police component. On 17 July, MINUSMA, the G5
Sahel and the European Union held a tripartite meeting to gain greater clarity
regarding operations, the disbursement of pledges and logistical issues.
31. On 25 August, at the summit of the Heads of State of the Group of Seven, held
in Biarritz, France, the Group adopted the Biarritz declaration for a Group of Seven
and Africa partnership and the Sahel partnership action plan, calling, inter alia, for
extended military cooperation to fight terrorism in the Sahel and for enhanced efforts
to strengthen governance and promote inclusive, sustainable economic growth in the
region, with a particular focus on women’s entrepreneurship and digital
transformation.
32. The political and security situation in the Sahel and Libya continued to
negatively affect Mali and neighbouring countries, in particular Burkina Faso and the
Niger, and also, increasingly, the West African States of the Gulf of Guinea, with
19-16006

5/20

S/2019/782

reports of violent extremist cells and threats or attacks in Benin, Côte d ’Ivoire, Ghana
and Togo.

III. Stabilization and restoration of State authority in the Centre
33. MINUSMA intensified its engagement with key government stakeholders on the
development of an action plan for the Centre based on the Plan de sécurisation
intégrée des régions du Centre while continuing its efforts to support the
re-establishment of State authority and basic social services in the Centre. In support
of efforts of the authorities in Mali to reduce violence and intercommunal tensions –
a prerequisite for the eventual return of government officials – the Mission also
supported reconciliation efforts, including through the provision of technical and
capacity-building assistance for the establishment of three district and municipal
reconciliation committees in Mopti, Bandiagara and Bankass districts, Mopti region,
and reinforced the regional reconciliation committee in Ségou. As part of its
communication efforts in its work in the Centre, the Mission launched dedicated radio
programmes to raise the awareness of local populations of its work in support of the
Government.
34. Operation Oryx I, launched on 30 March by MINUSMA, continued to provide
a deterrent presence in the Centre. Medium- and long-range patrols performed jointly
by MINUSMA and United Nations police in Bandiagara and Bankass districts, Mopti
region, contributed to a decrease in reported security incidents. Ope ration Oryx II, a
three-week surge operation, reinforced the efforts of Operation Oryx I, placing two
additional companies in Koro district, Mopti region. National defence and security
forces deployed five additional companies to the region, as well as two gendarmerie
companies with MINUSMA police support. In late July and August, Operation Oryx
patrols were blocked by the local population, which protested against the volatile
security situation.
35. A preliminary special human rights investigation by M INUSMA into the
Ogossogou attack of 23 March in Bankass cercle concluded that the attack was
planned, organized and coordinated and could constitute a crime against humanity.
The investigation established that at least 145 civilians of the Fulani community had
been killed through the use of automatic Kalashnikov-type and hunting rifles and
95 per cent of the houses had been burned down. The Specialized Investigation
Brigade concluded its preliminary investigation into the attack on 15 May and opened
a judicial investigation. A total of 10 suspects are in pretrial detention. The Mission
provided technical and logistical support to the investigation and in situ support
following the attack in Sobane Da, Mopti region, of 9 June against Dogon civilians.
36. On 4 September, Malian armed forces allegedly carried out an air strike against
a base of the Dan Nan Ambassagou dozo militia, in Bandiougou village, Bandiagara
cercle, Mopti region. No casualties were reported. On 6 September, Dan Nan
Ambassagou issued a communiqué condemning the attack and called for the
disarmament and cantonment of all armed groups in central Mali.

IV. Major security developments
37. The security situation remained complex in both northern and central Mali.
Attacks by terrorist groups perpetrated predominantly in northern Mali continued to
target national defence and security forces, MINUSMA and international forces with
improvised explosive devices, rocket and mortar attacks and small arms fire.
Confrontations between armed groups and their respective communities led to violent
clashes in Gao, Ménaka and Timbuktu regions.
6/20

19-16006

S/2019/782

38. Tensions persisted between the Coordination des Mouvements de l ’Azawad and
members of the Dawsahak community affiliated with the Mouvement pour le salut de
l’Azawad in Gao and Ménaka regions, including a violent clash in Agarnadamos,
45 km south of Talataye, Gao region, on 24 June, resulting in casualties on both sides.
On 29 June, MINUSMA deployed an integrated investigation team to the site of the
incident. On 29 August, the groups reportedly reached an agreement on an immediate
cessation of hostilities and established several reconciliation mechanisms.
39. Tensions between the Arab Tormouz and Oulad Ich tribes, affiliated with the
Mouvement arabe de l’Azawad-Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad and the
Mouvement arabe de l’Azawad-Plateforme, respectively, regarding control of
strategic checkpoints escalated in Lerneb, Timbuktu region, and resulted in violent
clashes, with multiple casualties. MINUSMA supported reconciliation efforts and the
implementation of a road map agreement signed by representatives of the two
communities, and mediation efforts by the Government of Mauritania led to the
signature of a ceasefire agreement, on 28 July. The Technical Commission on Security
agreed, at its thirty-ninth ordinary session, to act as a guarantor for the agreement
while the joint observation and verification teams are investigating the clashes.
40. The situation in Ménaka region remained unstable. In Ménaka town, insecurity
continued to affect humanitarian actors and civilians. Moreover, tensions among the
various armed groups remained palpable, in particular following the expansion of the
presence of the Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad, to the detriment of the
Plateforme.
41. In central Mali, conflicts across community lines, exacerbated by the presence
of extremist groups, continued to claim many civilian lives and the destruction of
livelihoods during the reporting period, with Bandiagara, Bankass, Douen tza and
Koro cercles, Mopti region, most affected. The visits of the Prime Minister, combined
with a surge in political, security and reconciliation efforts led by the Government,
with support from local and international partners, brought a small reductio n in
violence and appears to have contributed to a decrease in large-scale attacks.
However, the massacre in Sobane Da village on 9 June claimed the lives of more than
35 Dogon civilians, mostly children. Smaller-scale attacks, including retaliatory acts,
continue to be reported on a near daily basis.

A.

Asymmetric and other attacks
42. Extremists carried out 62 asymmetric attacks, with northern Mali recording the
majority thereof (67 per cent, including in Timbuktu (15), Gao (14), Kidal (10) and
Ménaka (3) regions), followed by 31 per cent in Mopti (17) and Ségou (2) regions
and 1 attack in Kayes region. The number of such attacks is similar to the number
recorded in the previous reporting period, in which 59 attacks were perpetrated,
mostly in the northern regions (58 per cent). Although Mopti region recorded the
greatest number of attacks in the period under review, the overall number of attacks
there decreased from that of the previous reporting period. MINUSMA continued to
intensify its efforts to mitigate the impact of asymmetric attacks, including within the
framework of Operations Flow and Flint (see para. 50 below).
43. MINUSMA, national defence and security forces and international forces
continued to be targeted by asymmetric attacks. There were 20 attacks against
MINUSMA – in Kidal (6), Timbuktu (5), Gao (4), Mopti (3) and Ménaka (2) regions –
resulting in the death of 1 contractor and the injury of 25 peacekeepers, 3 civilians
and 4 contractors. In the previous reporting period, there had been 12 attacks against
MINUSMA, resulting in the death of 4 peacekeepers and the injury of 12.

19-16006

7/20

S/2019/782

44. On 26 July, a MINUSMA armoured personnel carrier escorting a logistic convoy
hit an explosive device approximately 78 km south-east of Timbuktu, on the
Bambara-Maoudé axis (Timbuktu region), injuring six peacekeepers. On 16 August,
a MINUSMA contracted vehicle, part of a logistics convoy, hit an explosive device
approximately 35 km east of Indelimane, Ménaka district, on the Ansongo -Ménaka
axis. The incident resulted in the death of one civilian contractor and the injury of
two others. On 20 August, a MINUSMA mine-protected vehicle hit an explosive
device approximately 2 km north-east of MINUSMA camp in Kidal. The Group for
the Support of Islam and Muslims claimed responsibility for the attack, which
wounded seven peacekeepers, one seriously.
45. On 22 July, a suicide vehicle-borne improvised explosive device detonated at
the entrance to the international forces camp in Gao, injuring 30 people, including
2 MINUSMA contractors. It was the only such attack against international forces
during the period under review.
46. During the period under review, there were 32 attacks against the national
defence and security forces, resulting in the death of 42 and the injury of 33, compared
with 35 attacks, resulting in 67 soldiers killed and 51 injured, in the previous reporting
period.
47. Signatory groups were targeted in 10 attacks by extremist elements in Gao (7),
Timbuktu (2) and Kidal (1) regions. Five Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad
and four Plateforme elements were killed, compared with 11 attacks targeting
signatory armed groups in the previous reporting period, during which 43 signatory
armed group members were killed and 17 injured.
48. Central Mali continued to be the area most affected by incidents involving
improvised explosive devices, with 69 per cent of attacks taking place there in the
first half of 2019, compared with 51 per cent in the same period in 2018. Civilians
continued to be the main victims, with 110 in the first half of 2019, compared with
112 civilian casualties reported during the same half of 2018.
49. From 8 July to 17 August, MINUSMA conducted Operation Flow, an
intelligence-gathering operation focused on reducing threats posed by improvised
explosive devices east of Douentza, Mopti region. Since 10 May, Operation Flint has
included 10 missions east of Douentza and maximized the deployment of the
Mission’s 10 explosive ordnance disposal teams, optimizing the protection of the
main road axes of Mali and convoy security.

B.

Defence and security measures of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali
50. Progress was made in the accelerated disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process. As at 9 September, MINUSMA had transported a total o f 1,448
former Operational Coordination Mechanism combatants to national army training
centres. Following the completion of basic military training, elements will undergo
specialized training at the location where their units will ultimately be redeployed.
However, this remains contingent upon the finalization of a comprehensive plan for
the redeployment of reconstituted national defence and security forces.
51. Since 10 June, MINUSMA has transported former members of the Operational
Coordination Mechanism from Gao and Timbuktu to Bamako and supplied rations
and fuel for ground transportation. Upon the arrival of the former combatants in
Bamako, the Government provided transport to the training centres of the Malian
Armed Forces in Ségou and Koulikoro regions, where they received their
matriculation and identification numbers, marking their formal integration into th e

8/20

19-16006

S/2019/782

armed forces and the National Guard and received basic military training, which they
completed on 2 September.
52. Notwithstanding initial concerns raised by the signatory groups about moving
their combatants from Kidal, the parties reached an agreement facilitated by the good
offices of my Special Representative. At the thirty-ninth meeting of the Technical
Commission on Security, on 5 August, participants agreed on the transport of the
remaining Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad and Plateforme elements from
Kidal to Gao. On 17 August, MINUSMA began their onward transportation from Gao
to the south.
53. In total, 668 formers deserters who joined armed groups in 2012 have returned
to the national armed forces and were redeployed to their former uni ts with their rank,
in conformity with the terms of the Agreement.
54. On 25 June, the National Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Commission and the National Council for Security Sector Reform completed the draft
decree for incorporating the combatants of the Operational Coordination Mechanism
into the national defence and security forces. On 3 September, the National Council
for Security Sector Reform adopted an action plan on a strategy for national security
sector reform, as well as the draft decree on the modalities of the allocation of ranks
and command and the reclassification of former combatants of the signatory
movements in the relevant State structures, including the civil service and national
defence and security forces.
55. The Technical Commission on Security met four times during the reporting
period. Sessions were centred on the transport of Operational Coordination
Mechanism combatants, possible amendments to the existing control measures on
convoys and heavy weapons and the results of the investigation regarding Talataye,
Gao region, by the joint observation and verification teams.

C.

Support for Malian defence and security institutions
56. On 29 August, the Mission convened a meeting of the Instance de Coordination
au Mali to strengthen operational coordination and enhance ways to exchange
information and intelligence among national and international forces in Mal i.
Participants presented their long-term strategic plans and agreed to expand the
meeting to include national and international police and other security forces, going
forward.
57. From 24 June to 13 July, the Mission enhanced its efforts to strengthen t he
intelligence-gathering and analysis capabilities of the authorities in Mali through a
first training session for personnel in the Malian Intelligence Analysis and Fusion
Centre. The support provided for the establishment of a database will facilitate
intelligence sharing, including early warning mechanisms regarding threats against
United Nations personnel and Malian security and defence forces, as well as civilians.
58. On 7 September, MINUSMA completed the construction of the national armed
forces camp in Anderamboukane, Ménaka region, with security support from
Operation Barkhane. The camp will enable the national defence forces to redeploy to
this strategic location along the border with the Niger.
59. In keeping with the memorandum of understanding between MINUSMA and the
Government, the Mission provided 10 medical and casualty evacuations to members
of the national armed forces and 16 such evacuations for civilians.

19-16006

9/20

S/2019/782

D.

Small arms, light weapons and explosive threat mitigation
60. As part of its efforts to enhance the national capacity to store weapons safely, in
particular in the central region, from 17 June to 22 August, the Mine Action Service
refurbished a large-capacity armoury for the national gendarmerie in Niono, Ségou
region, and provided training sessions on weapons and ammunition management for
national security forces in Gao and Bamako.

V. Protection of civilians
61. Civilians continued to be targeted directly, as victims of extremist violence and
intercommunal attacks, as well as indirectly, as victims of improvised explosive
devices and banditry. During the reporting period, there were 331 incidents, in which
367 civilians were killed, 221 were injured and 63 were abducted. This constitutes a
slight increase in the level of violence compared with that of the previous reporting
period, during which there were 245 incidents, with 33 3 civilians killed, 175 injured
and 145 abducted. Of these, 37 civilians were killed and 50 were injured in
53 incidents involving improvised explosive devices, marking an increase compared
with the previous period, during which 12 civilians were killed a nd 22 were injured
in 44 incidents.
62. On 25 July, the first meeting of the newly established Regional Security
Committee was convened by the new Governor of Mopti region. The Committee was
created to improve information-sharing and coordination among national defence and
security forces, the United Nations police and MINUSMA force and civilian
components with the aim of helping to restore security and enhance the overall
protective environment for civilians in the central regions.
63. The activities of unidentified armed elements, and their impact on civilians,
remained of concern in Gao region. To address the surge in crime in Ansongo district,
the Governor of Gao proposed a curfew for motorcycles, as well as the creation of a
weapons-free zone in Ansongo town, notwithstanding difficulties of enforcing any
such measure. Within the framework of the recently established Cadre de concertation
sur la sécurité d’Ansongo, local authorities consulted the local population on the
measures to ensure their buy-in.
64. The Mission enhanced its presence in Ansongo district through an increase in
MINUSMA operations and developed an integrated action plan involving civ ilian,
military and police components to improve its engagement with local authorities and
stakeholders, with a particular focus on women.

VI. Human rights situation
65. The human rights situation continued to be of concern. The majority of human
rights-related incidents took place in central Mali, where MINUSMA documented
81 cases of serious human rights violations and abuses, which represents an increase
of 33 per cent compared with the previous reporting period. At least 66 cases were
linked to violence across communal lines. Other cases occurred in the North (7 in
Gao, 6 in Timbuktu and 5 in Ménaka regions), as well as 5 in Kayes and 2 in
Koulikoro regions and 1 case in Bamako.
66. Violations and abuses involved at least 339 victims (262 men, 32 women, 30 boys
and 15 girls). Community self-defence armed groups were responsible for most of the
human rights abuses (64), all in Mopti and Ségou regions, followed by violent

10/20

19-16006

S/2019/782

extremist groups (21) and signatory armed groups (9). The Mission verified one case
of conflict-related sexual violence in Timbuktu region, involving one girl.
67. National defence and security forces were responsible for six cases of human
rights violations, including one case of extrajudicial execution of four men in
Mondoro commune, as well as one case of torture, which led to the death of the
victim, who had been in detention in Gao. State authorities were responsible for three
cases of failure to investigate or prosecute.
68. On 9 June, Sobane Da village, Mopti region, was attacked, reportedly by Fulani
young people, killing 35 civilians, while on 18 June, armed elements allegedly from
the Fulani community attacked Yoro and Gangafani villages, which resulted in 25 and
17 civilians killed, respectively. According to a MINUSMA inves tigation, at least
35 persons from the Dogon community (7 men, 6 women, 11 boys and 11 girls) were
killed, 32 of whom died in buildings that attackers had burned down, and at least
329 persons were displaced. The victims were buried in five mass graves, an d
witnesses identified some assailants as members of the Fulani community from
neighbouring villages. MINUSMA documented instances of hate speech through
social and traditional media, calling for violence in the days following the attack. A
national investigation into the attack is ongoing, and nine individuals were placed in
pretrial detention by the investigating judge of the Specialized Judicial Unit to
Combat Terrorism and Transnational Organized Crime.
69. There was an increase in grave violations against children, from 145 verified
cases in the previous reporting period to 284 cases in the current period, with 182
violations occurring in Mopti region alone, affecting 235 children in all of Mali,
including 10 attacks on schools.
70. My Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict visited Mali from
9 to 13 July. She called upon all relevant parties to fully implement the protocol on
the transfer of children captured in military operations to civilian child protection
actors and urged armed group leaders to release all children from their ranks and end
all grave violations against children. She also encouraged the Government of Mali to
develop a national prevention plan in line with Security Council resolution 2427
(2018). In Mopti, she met with community leaders affected by intercommunal
violence.
71. MINUSMA provided 34 awareness-raising sessions on international human
rights, humanitarian law and the protection of children in armed conf lict to
407 national defence and security forces personnel (including 95 women), 163 civil
society actors (including 41 women), 137 members of the Coordination des
mouvements de l’Azawad (including 26 women), 60 members of the Operational
Coordination Mechanism and 57 staff members of the Government of Mali (including
19 women). The Mission also organized five information sessions on the human rights
due diligence policy on United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces
for government officials, national defence and security leaders and other relevant
partners.

VII. Humanitarian situation
72. From January to June 2019, 168,515 persons were displaced inside Mali,
compared with 75,351 during the same period in 2018, representing an increase of
45 per cent. The greatest number of persons, approximately 80,000, were displaced
in central Mali in the first half of 2019.
73. As at 31 August, there were 26,836 refugees and 987 asylum seekers in Mali,
including 13,517 women and 13,319 men, mostly from Burkina Faso, Mauritania and
19-16006

11/20

S/2019/782

the Niger. Spontaneous and facilitated returns from Mbera camp, in Mauritania,
increased during the period under review, while 139,020 Malian refugees remain in
neighbouring countries.
74. As a result of insecurity, in addition to the resulting constraints on access to
land, livelihoods and markets, 700,000 persons, 60 per cent of whom were located in
Central Mali, were in urgent need of food assistance. In July, the World Food
Programme and partners scaled up assistance to reach 470,000 persons with rations,
but they will require additional funding to maintain such a level of assistance.
75. In total, 1.6 million children were in need of humanitarian assistance. The
majority of the displaced population (52 per cent) is under 18 years of age, and many
are women and girls with specific humanitarian needs. A total of 627 survivors of
gender-based violence received medical and psychosocial support during the
reporting period. Among them, 98 per cent were women, 51 per c ent were under
18 years of age and 28 per cent were victims of sexual violence. The security situation
continued to negatively affect the provision of basic social services. The number of
closed schools increased, from 866 in March to 920 in June, including 598 sc hools
closed in Mopti region alone, affecting up to 277,600 children.
76. Improvised explosive devices remained a serious threat to humanitarian actors
throughout the North and the Centre. On 6 July, the vehicle of a Malian
non-governmental organization hit an explosive device in Goundam district,
Timbuktu region, injuring two personnel.
77. In the light of the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Mali, the humanitarian
response plan was revised upwards in July to $324 million. Some 3.9 million persons
are now estimated to be in need of humanitarian assistance, compared with 3.2 million
in January.

VIII. Capacities of the Mission
Military
78. As at 10 September, 12,647 military personnel had been deployed, 95 per cent
of the authorized strength of 13,289 personnel, including 40 military observers,
494 staff officers and 12,153 contingent personnel. Women accounted for 3.29 per
cent of military personnel.
79. The Canadian helicopter detachment completed its deployment on 31 August.
Until the Romanian helicopter detachment attains initial operating capability, on
15 October, MINUSMA will face a critical shortfall, which will have an impact on its
mobility, flexibility and responsiveness. A contracted helicopter with an integrated
aeromedical evacuation team has been provided for services from Gao. Such a
commercial solution provides a stopgap measure to ensure the continuity of essential
MINUSMA evacuation services.
Police
80. As at 10 September, 1,753 police personnel, or 81.92 per cent of the authorized
strength, had been deployed, including 328 individual police officers, 21.64 per cent
of whom were women, and 1,425 formed police unit personnel, 10.38 per cent of
whom were women.
81. Two formed police units continued to lack armoured personnel carriers. To close
the gaps and enhance the units’ operational mobility, the Secretariat continues to work
with the police-contributing countries.

12/20

19-16006

S/2019/782

Civilian personnel
82. As at 9 September, 88 per cent of all MINUSMA civilian staff had been
deployed, including 91 per cent of international staff, 85 per cent of United Nations
Volunteers and 86 per cent of national staff. Women held 27 per cent of international
posts, 35 per cent of United Nations Volunteer positions and 18 per cent of national
staff posts.
Implementation of the options for adaptation
83. In line with the recommendations for a potential significant adaptation of
MINUSMA, outlined in my previous report, the Mission began to make changes to
its footprint, force and police units, including devising long-term plans for
accommodation and deployments to different field locations. The full implementation
of the adaptation plan will require the urgent designation of land by the Government
of Mali, notably in Mopti and Kidal. The need for a flexible logistics concept that
would allow the force and the United Nations police to be responsive and proactive
remains essential. Ensuring that resources allocated to the Mission are commensurate
with its mandate will be critical.
84. The Mission took further steps to augment its protected mobility, flexibility,
agility and proactive posture in the area of deployment, including through the
extension of Operation Oryx I and the launch of Operation Oryx II (see para. 35
above). The overarching strategy for the adaptation of MINUSMA is focused on
increasing the Mission’s mobility to cope with the dynamic operational environment,
in central Mali in particular, and reducing reaction time. The realignment would result
in a concentrated effort at selected major population centres, the enhancement of
capability through the generation of increased mobility and flexible units and the
transformation of units, such as infantry battalions and the quick reaction force
currently deployed.
85. The handover of the Mission camp in Diabaly to national armed forces is
planned to begin in October 2019, following a phased approach to secure the base and
the surrounding area during the transfer, including a period during which MINUSMA
and national armed forces would be co-located inside the camp before the full
withdrawal of the Mission.
86. During the reporting period, MINUSMA continued to enhance its civilian
presence in the Centre. Preparations for the redeployment of one formed police unit
from Bamako to Mopti region continued, but are contingent upon the availability of
additional space in the camp in the Centre. The camp in Mopti is at maximum capacity
and is unable to accommodate additional units. The Mission also prepared for the
deployment of the 650 personnel from the Côte d’Ivoire infantry battalion to
Timbuktu, which will enhance the flexibility and agility of the force.
87. A preliminary agreement was reached on the transfer of training activities from
the MINUSMA police to the European Union capacity-building mission in Mali, with
an expected handover by July 2020.
Efforts to optimize performance
88. MINUSMA continued its efforts to improve its performance, in line with the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations of
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, as well as with the action plan resulting from
the report of Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled “Improving
security of United Nations peacekeepers: we need to change the way we are doing
business”. A number of measures were implemented in order to enhance the
preparedness of MINUSMA civilian personnel and military and police units,
19-16006

13/20

S/2019/782

including through in-mission and predeployment training sessions on explosive
ordnance disposal operations and in post-blast investigations.
89. To strengthen the operational capabilities of military and police units,
MINUSMA is working with troop and police contributors to address shortfalls and
ensure that all contingent-owned deployed equipment corresponds to signed
memorandums of understanding and is in line with the Mission’s Statement of Unit
Requirements. During the period under review, one troop -contributing country
transferred 11 armoured personnel carriers to its unit in Timbuktu, which improved
its mobility. However, the battalion remains short of 20 armoured personnel carriers.
90. A number of contingents continue to have significant ammunition shortfalls,
which affect their capacity to conduct operations and participate in training. The
Secretariat is working with the concerned troop contributors to meet the MINUSMA specific ammunition requirements.
91. As part of the performance evaluation framework, three military units were
assessed as part of the Force Commander’s evaluations. The evaluations covered
mandate comprehension and support, command and control, training and discipline,
sustainment and health. They also included an assessment of the willingness and
ability of the units to implement assigned tasks related to the protection of civilians.
While the evaluations showed the contingents’ progress, there remain deficiencies in
personal equipment availability and basic soldier skills, such as radio procedures and
ammunition storage.
92. MINUSMA completed the evaluation of all of its formed police uni ts. The
evaluation revealed that units are performing well and in accordance with Mission ’s
requirements, although gaps were identified in two units, related to self -sustainment,
health and training. Performance improvement plans have been put in place for both
units to address the issues.
93. In July, the Mission launched a comprehensive performance assessment system
with an initial context-mapping exercise, resulting in the preliminary identification
of key drivers of change in Mali. Further work will be conducted in September and
October to develop the results framework, building on the context mapping.
Safety and security of United Nations personnel
94. MINUSMA continued its efforts to reinforce the security of its camps, with the
installation of electronic surveillance systems at Kidal and Mopti and the expansion
of its internal communication systems in Aguelhok, Ber, Douentza, Goundam,
Ménaka and Tessalit camps. The effort is being complemented by additional security
measures already implemented at the various camps. The project at the camps is at an
advanced stage and earmarked to be completed by February 2020.
95. MINUSMA also continued to enhance its capabilities for casualty and medical
evacuation, including through the deployment of stand -alone aeromedical evacuation
teams.
Conduct and discipline
96. Two allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse were recorded during the
period under review and are currently being investigated. The Mission continued to
implement its strategy to assist victims and prevent sexual exploitation and abuse,
including enforcement measures, training and outreach activities to inform the local
population and personnel of the zero-tolerance policy of the United Nations.

14/20

19-16006

S/2019/782

Environmental issues
97. MINUSMA continued its efforts to minimize its environmental impact,
including through the submission of its mission-wide environmental action plan in
July, providing environmental performance data and score.
98. In Kidal region, the Mission completed a preliminary environmental assessment
for the Kidal runway project, including a risk assessment and environmental
management plan, and signed a joint implementation arrangement with international
forces regarding the provision of airfield services in northern Mali in July.

IX. Observations
99. The signing of a political agreement between the Government and some political
opposition parties earlier in 2019 was an important step towards easing political
tensions. The launch of the inclusive national dialo gue on 16 September provides all
Malian actors with an important opportunity to reach agreement on pressing matters
and fosters consensus with regard to the upcoming essential reforms that will lay the
groundwork for a more peaceful and stable Mali. The nationwide consultations with
various sectors of society and a bottom-up approach is a vital step, and I am
encouraged by the assurances from the Government that women will be part of the
process. I urge the Government, the political opposition, signatory mo vements and
civil society to sustain the spirit of compromise and collaboration and make rapid
progress in concluding the dialogue process with concrete outcomes to avoid further
delays in the implementation of the Agreement and plunging the country into a nother
institutional crisis. Priority must be given to accelerating and concluding the
constitutional reform process, which is an indispensable step towards allowing other
critical reform processes to unfold, in particular the election of a new parliament and
the redeployment of reconstituted and reformed units of the national defence and
security forces.
100. I welcome the progress made towards the integration of former combatants of
signatory armed groups into the armed forces as part of the accelerated disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former Operational Coordination Mechanism
personnel. More than 1,000 former combatants have completed training and been
integrated into the national armed forces and national guard, in addition to more than
600 deserters. This is an important step. It is now important to maintain the
momentum and to make their redeployment a reality, which will be essential to restore
State authority in northern Mali and to fight terrorism. I call upon all parties to work
together in good faith to devise a comprehensive plan agreed upon by all as part of a
broader national vision of security sector reform. It will require strong leadership and
political will from all sides to leave the past behind and move towards a better fut ure
for all Malians. I regret that several aspects of the implementation of the Agreement,
such as decentralization reform, security sector reform, economic development and
justice and reconciliation measures, have been slowed by the continuing conflict
between and within signatory movements. I reiterate my call upon all parties to
honour their commitments under the Agreement and accelerate the implementation in
line with the updated road map. I urge them to take concrete action to increase the
number of women in the monitoring and implementation mechanisms of the
Agreement and to enhance women’s participation in political processes.
101. Notwithstanding the deployment of interim administrations to northern Mali,
the restoration and extension of effective State authority remains a key challenge, and
the people of northern Mali have yet to see the dividends of the peace agreement
signed by their leaders in 2015. The low deployment rate of State officials not only
adversely affects the delivery of basic social services but also undermines the
19-16006

15/20

S/2019/782

confidence of the local populations in the State. I deplore the recent incident in Kidal
in which protesters burned the national flag of Mali on the occasion of a visit of
parliamentarians. There is an urgent need for those from Kidal who signed the
Agreement to take concrete steps to create an environment that will allow for the
return of the State presence and services to this part of the country. It will require
raising the awareness of the local population of the unity o f the Malian State and,
ultimately, its acceptance. I am encouraged by the visits of members of parliament to
Kidal, which is a symbolic step towards the return of State presence and services. The
legislation for the establishment of the northern economic development zone is now
in place, and I urge all parties and international partners to take the measures
necessary to make the zone a reality that benefits the people who live in northern
Mali.
102. Civilians continue to bear the brunt of the crises in Mali, in particular in the
Centre. They suffer increased incidents of criminality and intercommunity conflict,
which are exploited by violent extremist groups to garner support and recruits. I
welcome the intensified political, security and reconciliation efforts of the Malian
authorities and MINUSMA to stem the deadly violence and protect civilians. I am
encouraged by the establishment of the Cadre politique de gestion de la crise au
Centre du Mali and the visits of Mr. Cisse to the region, which facilitated a number
of local reconciliation agreements. They are important steps, recognizing that long term solutions to stabilize central Mali are political in nature. In order to be
sustainable, they must be accompanied by justice and reconciliation initiatives. I call
upon the Malian authorities to urgently finalize and implement the revision of the
comprehensive politically led strategy to address the situation in the Centre and
allocate the resources necessary to ensure its swift implementation. I reiterate the
importance of bringing perpetrators of serious crimes to justice, which will serve as
an important deterrent against such violence.
103. I strongly condemn the attacks on MINUSMA and the national and international
forces. I am outraged by the incidence of landmines and improvised explosive devices
planted by some of the groups on major roads in northern and central Mali, which has
cost the lives of far too many civilians and security personnel. I was deeply saddened
by the death of 1 MINUSMA contractor and the injury of 25 peacekeepers and
4 contractors since June and remind all that attacks targeting United Nations
peacekeepers may constitute war crimes under international law. I commend the
Mission’s efforts to mitigate the impact of asymmetric attacks and to make Mali safer
for its people. The threat remains high, however. The dire security context also further
compounds the humanitarian crisis, increasing food insecurity and undermining
access to health care and education. I call upon the Government an d international
partners to redouble their efforts to facilitate humanitarian access and provide
assistance, including by mobilizing the funds required for the humanitarian response
plan for Mali.
104. Stabilizing Mali requires addressing cross-border challenges. The Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel remains critical in fighting extremist armed groups.
It must also play a key role in addressing trafficking in persons, illicit goods, weapons
and drugs. The decision of the Security Council to lift geographic restrictions on lifesupport consumables to the Joint Force enables all contingents to benefit from
MINUSMA support. This is important, but not enough. The international community
must also support the Joint Force to become fully operational t hrough sustained and
predictable funding. I welcome the efforts of the Sahel Alliance and the new Group
of Seven and Africa partnership, as well as the Sahel partnership action plan, and I
call upon the international community to advance the implementation of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel and its United Nations support plan. Only a
more coordinated, integrated and comprehensive approach combining security
16/20

19-16006

S/2019/782

measures, humanitarian activities and long-term development efforts can allow for a
shift from delivering emergency relief to reducing the needs of populations and
achieving lasting peace and sustainable development in the region. Stemming and
preventing escalation requires offering people, in particular young people, a hopeful
future, a perspective that goes beyond their daily needs.
105. The future depends on effective political and institutional reforms, which
require the commitment of the entire political class, in particular the political
opposition, and on the political will of the signatory parties to accelerate the
implementation of the Agreement. I call upon opposition political parties in particular
to seize the opportunity and participate in the political dialogue in good faith and in
an effort to advance peace, democracy and the rule of law in Mali.
106. A better future for all Malians also requires the stabilization of the security
situation in the Centre and the return of State authority to the North and the Centre.
It is imperative that the Mission have the resources required to provide support in
these areas. To that end, I call upon the Government to finalize agreements on the
designation of land that would allow the Mission to expand its camp in Mopti to
increase its civilian and uniformed presence in the Centre, and to build a runway in
Kidal to facilitate the implementation of the mandate and the free flow of goods and
services to the region. I also urge troop- and police-contributing countries, as well as
donors providing bilateral support, within the framework of the Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, to provide uniformed
MINUSMA personnel with the equipment and training required to enhance the
protection of civilians while Headquarters continues to work towards providing
troops and police with the specialized equipment and expertise needed in Mali.
107. Lastly, I wish to thank my Special Representative, Mahamat Saleh Annadif, for
his outstanding leadership and dedication, and all MINUSMA personnel, the United
Nations country team and the troop- and police-contributing countries for their
commitment to improving the lives of the Malian people. I also commend the efforts
of the regional organizations, bilateral and multilateral partners and non -governmental
organizations for their continued support to Mali.

19-16006

17/20

S/2019/782

Annex I
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali: military and police strength as at
10 September 2019
Military

Police

Experts on Mission,
staff officers and units
Country

Austria

Men

Women

Total

2

–

2

Bangladesh

1 278

17

1 295

Belgium

33

5

38

Benin

242

18

260

Bhutan

5

Bosnia and
Herzegovina

1

1

2

Burkina Faso

1 650

54

1 704

Individual police officers

Formed police units

Men

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

235

44

279

236

44

280

Women

Total

1

Total police

15

2

17

135

5

140

150

7

157

12

9

21

131

9

140

143

18

161

5

Burundi

1

1

2

Cambodia

265

27

292

Cameroon

2

1

3

12

4

16

12

4

16

Canada

12

13

25

8

4

12

8

4

12

Chad

1 397

26

1 423

17

1

18

17

1

18

China

406

15

421

Côte d’Ivoire

158

3

161

16

13

29

16

5

21

4

3

7
–

–

–

1

Czechia
Denmark
Egypt
El Salvador

2

–

2

1 082

1

1 083

194

17

211

Estonia

3

3

Ethiopia

1

1

Finland

4

4

1

France

25

25

15

Gambia

2

1

3

Germany

350

20

370

Ghana

136

20

156

16

Guatemala

2

Guinea

847

Indonesia

9

Italy

1

Jordan

66

Kenya

11

137

2

1

15

15

137

1

2
15

2

11

9

2

11

863

7

9

16

7

9

16

9

4

1

5

4

1

5

2

1
1

2

2

2

2

2

66

11

11

11

11

2

–

2

2

12

8

1

9

Liberia

106

10

116

Lithuania

35

2

37

18/20

137

9

Latvia

Madagascar

137

19-16006

S/2019/782
Military

Police

Experts on Mission,
staff officers and units
Country

Men

Women

Total

Mauritania

6

Mexico

2

1

3

Nepal

155

2

157

Individual police officers

Formed police units

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total police
Total

Men

Women

Total

6

Netherlands

11

11

9

1

10

9

1

10

Niger

852

12

864

31

9

40

31

9

40

Nigeria

66

17

83

2

5

7

100

44

144

Norway

76

15

91

2

2

2

2

Pakistan

14

1

1

1

1

2

Romania

16

2

18

Senegal

1 245

31

1 276

Sierra Leone

17

4

21

Spain

1
203

Sweden

206

Switzerland

39

137

14

Portugal

Sri Lanka

98

2

22

6

28

2

–

240

3

2

6

2

1

284

31

315

306

37

343

2

2

–

2

5

3

2

5

2

2

203
34

6

Togo

907

30

937

16

1

17

273

21

294

Tunisia

79

3

82

35

1

36

35

1

36

2

2

Turkey

2

Ukraine

6

United Kingdom of
Great Britain and
Northern Ireland

2

United States of
America

7

2

9

12 219

428

12 647

Total

19-16006

1

257

20

277

2

2

7

2

257

71

328

1 277

148

1 425

1 534

219

1 753

19/20

S/2019/782

Map
20/20

Annex II

19-16006
