UiVITED NATIONS

Tl-URTY-THIRD

YEAR
st

MEETING:

NEW

23 OCTOBER

1978

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/209

Adoption

of the agenda

1) . , . . . . . . .

Page
1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I . .
. . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Nations Emergency
Force
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United
(S/12897)
. . . . . . . . . . . . _. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

. . . . , .. . . . . , . . . . , .

qpv.209

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

i
:

2091stMEETING
Held in New York

on Monday,

23 October

President: Mr. Jacques LEPRETTE (France).

Abstaining:
Republics.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.

1978, at 5 pm.
Czechoslovakia,

Union of Soviet Socialist

The draft resolution was adopted by I2 votes to none,
with 2 abstentions. 1
One member (China) did not participate in the voting.
4. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): In connexion with
the resolution just adopted by the Security Council
concerning the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Emergency Force for a period of nine months, the
delegation of the USSR wishes to state the following.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2091)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Emergency Force (S/12897)

5. The question of the presence of armed forces of the
United Nations in the Middle East cannot be considered
separately from the over-all context of the situation in the
region or divorced from the character of the events which
are taking place there and affect it.

The meeting was called to order at 5.50 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

6. As is known, UNEF was established in 1973 in order to
separate the troops of Egypt and Israel, pursuant to
Security Council resolution 338 (1973) which opened the
way to the convening of the Geneva Peace Conference on
the Middle East and called for negotiations to be started
between the parties concerned for the purpose of establishing a just and durable peace in the Middle East, Therefore,
the establishment of the Force should have contributed to
the achievement of precisely that kind of comprehensive
settlement. Any attempt to entrust to it any other kind of
role and to adapt it for the implementation of certain
separate deals would be contrary to the decision of the
Security Council on this question.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Emergency Force (S/l 2897)
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
question inscribed on its agenda which refers to the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Emergency
Force (UNEF) dated 17 October 1978 and contained in
document S/12897. 1 should like to direct the attention of
the members of the Council to the draft resolution
contained in document S/12899.

7. We have recently witnessed the activation of attempts
to replace the comprehensive Middle East settlement by
separate deals at the expense of the vital interests of the
Arab peoples. Efforts are being made to conclude a peace
treaty between IsraeI and Egypt. The participants in the
tripartite talks in Washington do not conceal their intention
of dragging UNEF further into the implementation of those
separate negotiations.

2. During the consultations prior to this meeting, agreement was reached among the members of the Council on
the procedure to be followed, namely that representatives
wishing to speak would do so after the vote on the draft
resolution.
3. I shall now put the draft resolution to the vote.

In favour: Bolivia, Canada, France, Gabon, Germany,
Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius, Nigeria,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Venezuela.

8. The Soviet delegation has displayed its readiness not to
object to the extension of the mandate of the Force on the
clear understanding that this mandatewould not be altered
and that therefore the Force would not be drawn into the
implementation of the possibleseparateagreementthat is
being elaborated now in Washington, In order to confirm

Against: None,

1 Set rcsJlution438 (1978).

A vote was taken by show of hands.

1

and Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soeel,
Comrade Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev:

this understanding, the Soviet delegation would have
preferred the draft resolution to contain provisions to the
effect that any changes in the mandate, functions and
deployment of LJNEF could only be made pursuant to a
decision of the Security Council. Taking into account,
however, the general understanding of members of the
Council and of the Secretary-General to the effect that the
maintenance of this arrangement is beyond any doubt, the
Soviet delegation has not insisted on the inclusion of such
additional wording in the draft resolution. We likewise
confirm the position of the Soviet Union to the effect that,
as in the past, it will not participate in any additional
expenditures for UNEF occasioned by the Agreement
between Egypt and Israel on the Sinai of 4 September
1975.

“We shall continue to conduct a consistent policy rir
the elimination of the dangerous threat of war in #lie
Middle East, especially since that region is in the direct
vicinity of our country and also of other Warsaw Itact
countries.”
13. The Soviet Union considers that objectively the door
to a just settlement of the Middle East problem-that is, hy
way of the Geneva Conference which was created especiallg
for the solution of the cardinal problems of a
comprehensive peaceful settlement in the Middle East-remains open. In order to achieve such a settlement, WC arc
ready to co-operate with the other parties to the Genc~a
Conference, including, of course, the Palestine Liberation
Organization. If the present course of events is nc11
proceeding in the direction of establishing a just and lastirig
peace in the Middle East, the responsibility rests with those
who are striving to replace a radical solution of the Middle
East problem by partial steps and separate deals.

9. The situation in the Middle East remains complex and
potentially dangerous both for the countries of the region
and for the international situation as a whole. Such an
appraisal is also provided in the report of the SecretaryGeneral which has been submitted to the Council in
cormexion with the question under consideration. It is clear
that in the Middle East it is not possible to achieve a lasting
peace until such time as the causes which brought about the
Arab-Israeli conflict and the consequences of Israeli aggression have been eliminated. In order to establish a lasting
peace in the Middle East, it is necessary to effect a just and
comprehensive settlement of the Middle East problem.
Such a settlement must mean that Israel will leave all the
Arab territories occupied by it in 1967, that the Arab
people of Palestine will be able to establish its own national
homeland, its own State, and that the strictest of international guarantees will be given for the security of all
States of this region without exception.

14. Mr. CARP10 CASTlLLO (Venezuela) linterprelalirut
from Spanish): By our favourable vote we have reiteralr’lt
once more the position of the Government of Venezuela UII
the valuable role played by the United Nations Emergenl’>
Force in the maintenance of peace in the Middle East. In
the specific case of the Force in the Egypt-Israel sector, tl~rl
Secretary-General informs us that:
“the situation in the Middle East as a whole continues Iti
be unstable and potentially dangerous and is likely tcr
remain so unless and until a comprehensive settlmcnl
covering all aspects of the Middle East problem can br
reached” [S/12897, para. 361.

10. The consideration of the situation in the Middle East
which has taken place in the United Nations in recent years,
including at the present session of the General Assembly,
and the decisions adopted on the question clearly show that
the overwhelming majority of Member States are adhering
to this kind of approach to the task of the elimination of
the hotbed of tension in the Middle East.

15, In this connexion, my delegation hopes that tlrf
extension which the Council has just agreed to, enablin& the
Force to remain in the area for a further period of Ilk
months, will prove to be a positive factor in the search ~OFa
durable peace in the region and the achievement of a gI~rhj1
solution to the Middle East problem.

11. The Soviet Union has, on a number of occasions,
drawn attention to the fact that separate negotiations and
concessions to the aggressor not only do not bring peace
any closer but, on the contrary, exacerbate the situation in
the Middle East even further. The talks now taking place
concerning a peace treaty between Egypt and Israel are a
contradiction of the task of the establishment of a lasting
peace in this region and of the genuine interests of the Arab
peoples. They are in fact aimed at undermining a just and
comprehensive settIement in the Middle East and replacing
it by partial deals which would make it possible for Israel to
retain the Arab territories it has taken over and prevent the
exercise of the inalienable national rights of the Arab
people of Palestine.

16. We shall continue talking in a vacuum unless s
determination is shown to comply with the resolutions rif
the General Assembly and the Security Council whi:ir
indicate the course to be followed towards the solution r?f
the complex problem of the Middle East. We therefim
address an appeal to the parties involved to con>ply witis
the relevant resolutions, thus allowing for a broad set~I~*.
merit which would promote stability and tranquillity in tl~
region,
17. I should like to express our appreciation to IIt?
Secretary-General for the clear and precise report he lL3i
submitted to us on the activities of the Force, as ~~11 8%tb1
those countries which have contributed contingents and 111
the troops and the officers who are directing the activiticr
of the Force in the area.

12. The Soviet Union is carrying out a systematic policy
aimed at the relaxation of tensions and the application of
that process to all regions of the world and the liquidation
of all hotbeds of tension and military threat. As was
recently stated by the General Secretary of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union

18. We should like to take this opportunity, Mr. Presidm.
to convey to you our appreciation of the efficient and ItGJ
manner in which you have conducted our debates. lt diwa
2

honour to the prestige enjoyed by French diplomacy and to
you personally as its distinguished representative in the
Organization. Although October has not yet ended, you
have had occasion to give proof of your qualities of
diplomatic skill and tact, thanks to which the Council has
reached favourable conclusions in difficult circumstances.
19. We also wish to pay a tribute to Mr. Hulinsky of
Czechoslovakia and express our admiration and apprecia.
tion of his activities last month when he exercised the
functions of President with discretion, intelligence and total
dedication to the cause of peace.
20. Mr. CHOU Nan (China) (interpretation
jkom Clzinese):
In his speechin the generaldebateof the current session
of
the GeneralAssemblyon 28 September,*Mr. HuangHua,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the People’sRepublic of
China and Chairmanof the Chinesedelegation,expounded
in a comprehensiveway the ChineseGovernment’sposition
on the questionof the Middle East,and we arenot goingto
repeat it here. With regardto the United NationsForce,we
have alwaysheld a different position in principle. Consequently, the Chinesedelegationdid not participate in the
voting on the draft resolution contained in document
S/l 2899.
21. Mr. HULINSKTI’(Czechoslovakia)(interpretation fiorn
The Czechoslovakdelegationdid not object to
the extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Emergency Force and its presencein the Egypt-Israel
sector. We have taken into account the conclusionsof the
Secretary-General,to the effect that:

mandatein 1973, the United NationsEmergencyForcehas
been deployed and is carrying out its functions. In an
atmospherein which certain countriesare in fact substantially altering their positionscomparedto those they held
in I973 when, pursuant to resolution 338 (1973), the
Force was established,and are undertakifig actions that
have a direct bearing upon the conditionsunder which the
Force is carrying out its mandate and performing its
functions, we think the Security Councilshouldnot resort,
as in the recent past, to an automatic extension of the
mandate for one year. In the course of the informal
consultationsamongmembersof the Council, the Czechoslovak delegation accordingly supporteda proposalwhich
would reflect the present specific situation and the new
conditions, namely, that the Council, on this occasion,
shouId revert to the practice of renewingthe mandateof
the Force for a shorter period.
24. In circumstanceswhere the possiblerole of United
Nations troops is being discussedin connexion with
separatesettlement deals,we think it is equallyjustified to
stressthe requirement that all membersof the Council
understandthat any changesin the mandate,the functions
or the deployment of the United NationsEmergencyForce
canbe effected only by a decisionof the Council.
25. From the very establishmentof the Force, we understood its purpose to be to contribute to the creation of
favourable conditions for the achievementof an over-all
comprehensivesettlement of the Middle East conflict on
the basisof existing Security Council resolutions.That is
why any attempt to give the Force any other functionsputs
uson the alert.

Russian):

“Despite the present quiet in the Egypt-Israel sector,
the situation in the Middle East asa whole continuesto
be unstable and potentially dangerousand is likely to
remain so unlessand until a comprehensivesettlement
covering all aspectsof the Middle East problem can be
reached.”[S/1289 7, para. 36.1

26. My delegation considersit necessaryonce againto
state that Czechoslovakiawill be unable,for reasonsof
principle, to participate in the financingof any additional
expensesfor the United Nations EmergencyForce arising
from the separateAgreementconcludedbetweenEgypt and
Israelon 4 September1975.

That evaluationcoincideswith the view of my Government,
which has frequently been stated here in the Secu:ity
Council andin other organsof the United Nations.

27. Mr. JAIPAL (India): The United NationsEmergency
Force came into being asa result of a generalcease-firein
the Middle East in 1973 and the needfor a comprehensive
22. In this connexion, I shouldlike to point out that the
peacesettlement through the implementationof Security
ongoing tripartite separatepeacetalks have certainly not
Council
resolution 242 (1967) in all its parts. It is in that
brought any nearer the prospect of a comprehensive
context
that
we voted for the extensionof the mandateof
soiution to all the key problemsof the conflict and thereby..
genuinepeacein the Middle Eastregion,The Czechoslovak UNEF for another nine months.In doingso wesupportthe
Secretary-General’sview, expressedin his report, that the
Socialist Republic has always condemnedall attempts to
situation in the Middle East as a whole continuesto be
achieve a separate settlement at the expense of the
unstableand potentially dangerousandis likely to remain
legitimate interests of the Arab peoples.We have always
so unlessand until a comprehensivesettlementcoveringall
emphasizedthe need for a just and comprehensivesettlement of the Middle East problem, which can be achieved aspectsof the Middle Eastproblemcanbereached.
only with the participation of all the parties concerned,
28. We are aware that the presentnegotiatingsituation is
including the PalestineLiberation Organization.
fluid, in the sensethat new developments
arereportedto be
taking place. It would be prematurein the circumstances
23. The diplomatic initiatives I havejust mentionedmay,
for us to pronounce any judgement.However,we should
be meansof a separateseriesof deals,lead to a changein
like to reiterate that Security Council resolutions
the existing situation in the Egypt-Israel sector-in other
242 (1967) and 338 (1973), aswell asthe relevant General
words, in the sector where, on the basisof its initial
Assembly resolutionson the questionof Palestine,cons&
tute a basisof principle for a comprehensive
and lasting
2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third SesSion,
peace
settlement.
Plenary Meetings, 13th meeting.
3

Middle East is still a powder keg which is always ready to
explode at the slightest spark, SO Iong as an over-all
settlement has not been achieved.

29. We should like to reaffirm certain principles which are
fundamental for the establishment of enduring peace in the
Middle East. They are those concerning the non-acquisition
of territory by force and the vacating of Arab territories
occupied since 1967, the inalienable right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and to a nation-State of its
own, and finally the right of all States in the Middle East to
exist in security and peace within internationally recognized boundaries.

37. Everyone knows that it is easier to light a fire than 1~
put it out. That js why the pursuit of a peaceful settlemc~,t
in the Middle East is a long-term problem because t]ke
situation in the field remains highly complex. The presence
of an emergency force acting as a buffer and committed 10
the resolution of the numerous problems in the field is,
therefore, essential. Accordingly, my delegation voted in
favour of the draft resolution which we have just adopted,
extending the mandate of the Force for a period ol nine
months. However, I should like to emphasize that under 110
circumstances should LJNEF be used as a pernlaeent
peace-keeping force.

30. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): Mr. President, the delegation
of Kuwait would like to pay a sincere tribute to YOU
personally for your efforts, especially throughout this
week-end, to bring about a draft resolution acceptable to
the Council.
31. My delegation would also like to pay another welldeserved tribute to the Secretary-General, to his assistants,
and to the officers and soldiers of the United Nations
Emergency Force for their conscientious performance in
the discharge of their duties and responsibilities. All of us
are indebted to these soldiers and officers who sacrifice
their lives and forgo comfort for the sake of obtaining
peace.

38. My delegation wishes to appeal most emphatically iu
all the parties concerned to rise above their resentments, sa
that they may succeed in the effective implementation af
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
39. In conclusion, I should like to congratulate the
Secretary-General for the excellent report he has submitted
to us and to pay a tribute to all the military staff of UNEF
for the effectiveness and dedication they have demon.
strated in the service of peace.

32. The delegation of Kuwait did not oppose the extension of the mandate of UNEF in Sinai primarily because
this extension is another continuation of the same mandate,
involving the same duties and in the same area as was
defined in Security Council resolution 340 (1973) and as
set out in the Secretary-General’s report of 27 October
1973 on the implementation of that resolution /S/11052/
Rev.11. My Government does not object to this extension
of the mandate of UNEF as long as the mandate remains as
previously defined.

40. Mr. LEONARD (United States of America): First of
all, Mr. President, I would offer you our complin~ents un
your assuming the heavy responsibilities of the presidency
of the Council and express to your predecessor, Ambaj.
sador Hulinskjr of Czechoslovakia, our appreciation of the
manner in which he carried out those duties last month.
41. We have taken an important step today in renewing
the mandate of an international force that has played an
absolutely vital role in peace-keeping in the Middle t%s!
over the years. We should have greatly preferred a reuew!
for one year because of the stability which the Unitid
Nations Emergency Force provides in the area, and ah
because that was the wish of the parties and the rccoiw
mendation of the Secretary-General. However, we hart
accepted a compromise of nine months.

33. We note with satisfaction the confirmation by the
Secretary-General that any change in the situation which
may affect the functioning, the duties or the area of
deployment of UNEF will be reported to the Council. The
extension of the mandate of UNEF for nine months is
acceptable and is supported by my Government, as this
extension provides a compromise between various views
that were expressed in the earlier stage of the Council’s
consultations.

42. I should like to take this occasion to express the
appreciation and gratitude of my own Government, aypreciation and gratitude which I believe is shared by ofhi’r
Governments around the world, for the dedicated saris?
performed by the officers and men of the Force. Their
outstanding contribution to keeping the peace has only
seldomwon the public attention it deserves,
but ncvdw
lessrepresentsa very bright chapter in the over-allhistc!r!
of our peace-keepingforces over the past decades..\I:
Government is confident that UNEF will continue (0
dischargeits responsibilitieswith distinction.

34. We believe, as many other delegations in fact believe,
that the peace-keeping operation of UNEF should not
contribute to the perpetuation of occupation and that that
operation should not assist the aggressor in exacting a
reward for its aggression.
35. Finally, my delegation expects that the SecretaryGeneral will report to the Council on any development that
drastically changes the situation and that the Council will
be able to take the appropriate action accordingly, without
being placed in a position in which its authority may be
undermined.

43. The Soviet representativehas just madeseveralObSer.
vations on the complex problem of the origins of [It?
situation in the Middle East, the motivesand objectivesof
the participants in the Camp David accords and the
tripartite negotiations currently under way in Wasl~iQt~%
and the terms of an ultimate solution to the Middle h
problem. My delegationhas views on thesematters*hich

36. Mr. N’DONG (Gabon) (interpretation j?om French):
St. Thomas Aquinas defined peace as tranquillity of order.
In that sense, peace still seems to be far away in the case of
the Middle East. This means, therefore, that in spite of the
relative calm which prevails in the Egypt-Israel sector, the
4

are sharply different from those either stated or implied by
the representative of the Soviet Union, but I do not
consider it necessary at this point to go further into these
matters and would simply note that our views remain as
they have been set forth repeatedly by our representatives
in this chamber, as well as by President Carter, Secretary
Vance and our other senior officials on many recent
occasions.

his discretion to attain the objectives of a peace-keeping
force decided upon by the Council.

44. I should like, however, to make two specific points.

48. The text adopted this afternoon is a laudableattempt
at a synthesis,sincewhat we were trying to do wasto make
possiblean extension of the mandateof the United Nations
Emergency Force with maximum efficiency and economy;
that is to say, to renewthe mandatefor a prudent period of
time that would not exceed the normaI limits of the
budget, as recommendedby the Secretary-Generalin his
wise report, but at the same time without being too
optimistic about certain developmentsthe failure of which
would make the peace achievedwith suchgreat difficulty
even more precarious.

47. Mr. FUENTES IBAREZ (Bolivia) (interpretation
frum
Spanish): My delegationhasraisedno objection to the draft
resolution submitted by the delegationof Kuwait, to which
we expressour gratitude for its initiative, aswe do to you,
Mr. President, for your patient efforts and skilful conduct
of our work.

45. First, the question has been raised of the relationship
of our decision today in renewing the mandate of the
United Nations Emergency Force in the Sinai to the Camp
David framework agreements and the negotiations currently
under way in Washington, Throughout these negotiations,
the United States has based its efforts to seek a just and
lasting settlement of the Middle East problem on resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). This is explicitly stated
in the framework agreements. These resolutions express the
Security Council’s commitment to work towards a full and
comprehensive settlement in the Middle East. We are
unswervingly dedicated to that objective.

49. The resolution mentionswhat is strictly necessarybut,
in my delegation’sview, this is but a reaffirmation of the
fact that everything else still standsand forms a coherent
unit. First, the Security Council is masterof its procedures
and decisions and is the only body with powers to
interpret, amendor deviate from its resolutions. Secondly,
with regard to the questionof peacein the Middle East, the
text of the new resolution is to be added to the many
resolutionsmentioned in the first preambularparagraph.In
other words, it has the sameorigin and pursuesthe same
goalsasresolutions242 (1967) and 338 (1973), which my
delegation regards as fundamental and essential for the
comprehensivesettlementof the Middle Eastproblem.

46. Secondly, we are in full agreement with the view that
the Secretary-General should keep the Council informed of
significant developments concerning the Emergency Force,
including major changes in its deployment. The SecretaryGeneral, in any event, has always pursued this as a cardinal
element of his administration of the Force. We cannot,
however, agree with the suggestion that the SecretaryGeneral is obliged to seek the specific approval of the
Council for every deployment within the area. That would
amount to amending’ the mandate of the Force and
changing a long-standing practice that has well served the
Council, has well served the Force and has well served the
parties immediately involved. The Charter contemplates,
and experience confirms, the need for the SecretaryGeneral to have and to exercise reasonable latitude in using

In conclusion, 1 wish to thank the United Nations
EmergencyForce for its efficient and devoted service.
50.

i%c meeting rose at 6.30p.m.

5

HOWTO OBTAlNUNITEDNATIONSPL!BI,ICATIONS
United
Nations
publications
may be obtainotl
from hotrkatorc~,u
and tlixtrihutors
throughout
the world. Consult
your bookslore
or wrilcs lo: ltni(t~tl
Nntitrns.
Snlea
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

Les publications
dea Nations
IJnies ttont on vrntc dons 11~s lilwtiriw
dCpositaires
du mondo entier. Infortncg-volts
auprPs tic votrr litwttiw
h : Nations Unies, Section dcs ventes, New York ou (;cwiwt*.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NAClONES

UNlES
(61 IFX tt~cnw.y
ott otlrosw;! .YOUN

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Nacioncs
Unidas e.qtin cm v~xI~~~
en lihtwias
y ~*RRNH distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo. Consult
a H\I lihr(*ro o dirtjtts~
n: Nacionw
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o (;in&ra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: IUS.

l-O0 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)
