United Nations

S/PV.6288

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6288th meeting
Friday, 19 March 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Issoze-Ngondet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Salam
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Shcherbak
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Mugoya
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. DiCarlo

Agenda
Central African region
Impact of illicit arms trafficking on peace and security
Letter dated 15 March 2010 from the Permanent Representative of Gabon to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/143)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-27987 (E)

*1027987*

S/PV.6288

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.

Mr. Sergio de Queiroz Duarte, High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs.

Adoption of the agenda

It is so decided.

The agenda was adopted.
Central African region
Impact of illicit arms trafficking on peace
and security
Letter dated 15 March 2010 from the
Permanent Representative of Gabon to the
United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/2010/143)
The President (spoke in French): I would like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Botswana, the Central
African Republic, Chad, Congo, Costa Rica,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Germany,
Morocco, Republic of Korea, South Africa and
Switzerland, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa, Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Costa to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to

2

I invite Mr. Duarte to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Louis Sylvain-Goma, Secretary
General of the Economic Community of Central
African States; His Excellency Mr. Téte António,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations; and His Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, acting
head of the European Union delegation to the United
Nations.
It is so decided.
I invite the aforementioned representative to take
the seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/143, which contains the text of a
letter dated 15 March 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of Gabon to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General.
I welcome the presence of the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Her Excellency Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro. I
invite the Deputy Secretary-General to take the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: We have long
known that the flow of illicit arms to Africa is largely
made possible by the secrecy that surrounds it. We are
thus grateful to the Gabonese presidency for convening
a debate on this important subject in the Security
Council. The Council has often addressed conventional
weapons issues, most frequently in the context of
specific crises and in the consideration of arms
embargos.
In 1999, the Council placed the issue of small
arms on its agenda and adopted a presidential
statement
(S/PRST/1999/28)
emphasizing
the
importance of regional cooperation in tackling the

10-27987

S/PV.6288

issue. Since then, the Council has repeatedly
recognized the devastating impact of illicit weapons on
international and regional peace and security, social
and economic development, and civilians, women and
children.
The Council has also stressed the need for
measures to discourage arms flows in Central Africa.
In the subregion, local demand continues to be sizable,
especially from many militia and rebel groups. Limited
national and regional capacity, porous borders and the
spillover effects of conflicts in the region have
impeded effective small arms control. As a result,
Central Africa is awash with illicit weapons,
exacerbating intercommunal violence, increasing
cross-border crime and threatening ongoing peace and
national reconciliation processes.
The illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons
is never an isolated phenomenon. Weapons trafficking
in Central Africa has complex links, not only to
conflict, but also to a number of other criminal
activities that undermine our efforts to engender social
justice, foster the rule of law and ultimately achieve
the Millennium Development Goals. The link between
the illicit exploitation and trade of natural resources
and the illicit proliferation in trafficking of arms has
become increasingly apparent. This, in turn, has
become one of the major factors fuelling and
exacerbating conflicts in Central Africa.
The primary responsibility to eradicate this illicit
trade remains with States. Measures taken by national
authorities to promote disarmament and arms control
programmes are commendable; so, too, are collective
efforts through the Economic Community of Central
African States. However, the challenge continues to
loom large. In this regard, allow me to make three
observations.
First, peace and security in Central Africa require
a strong commitment by States in the subregion,
together with State suppliers of weapons, to expand
their individual and collective efforts to eradicate
weapons trafficking.
Secondly, such efforts must include greater
commitments by the States of the subregion to
implement global instruments and to strengthen their
capacity to identify and combat those involved in illicit
brokering activities. These instruments include the
United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms

10-27987

and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, the United
Nations Firearms Protocol, and the International
Tracing Instrument. We also must support the adoption
of an arms trade treaty at the global level and the
implementation of community-based disarmament and
confidence-building projects.
Thirdly, the States of Central Africa should make
the best possible use of United Nations tools and
expertise. The United Nations Office for Disarmament
Affairs, for example, plays an important role in
assisting States in the regulation of conventional
armaments and in promoting disarmament and nonproliferation. The United Nations Regional Centre for
Peace and Disarmament in Africa provides States,
subregional organizations and civil society with
technical advice and capacity-building programmes,
including training, legal assistance and the elaboration
of regional registers and transparency instruments.
The Secretary-General and I welcome the
ministerial decision of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa to mandate the Centre to assist in drafting the
subregion’s first legally binding instrument on the
control of small arms and light weapons, ammunition,
explosives
and
equipment
supporting
their
manufacture. Other urgent priorities include stockpile
management, the security of weapons and ammunition,
and measures to control the import, export, transit and
retransfer of weapons. More must also be done to build
national capacities to mark weapons, keep adequate
records and trace illicit ones, in line with international
and regional standards.
It is well understood that weak regional and
national regulatory and enforcement capacities to
address illicit arms trafficking are associated with the
structural causes of armed violence and conflict.
Therefore, the decisions and actions of the Standing
Advisory Committee are of great significance in
tackling the tools of violence, designing ways to
improve subregional security, and creating the
conditions necessary to sustainable development. The
Secretary-General urges the Security Council and all
Member States to offer whatever assistance is needed
to support States in Central Africa in achieving these
goals.
I once again commend the Government of Gabon
for its leadership in bringing this issue to the Council.

3

S/PV.6288

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for her statement.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Antonio Maria Costa. I now give the
floor to Mr. Costa.
Mr. Costa: In today’s world, conflicts take place
within rather than between nations, and are fought with
light rather than heavy weapons. Arms are acquired on
the illicit market, estimated globally at between $200
and $300 million a year, which is about 20 per cent of
the licit arms trade. Africa, the arms smugglers’ most
profitable market, suffers the largest number of
casualties because of it. I am therefore grateful to the
Government of Gabon for placing this topic on the
Council’s agenda.
Demand for military-grade weapons comes from
three sources: crime groups, combatant militias and
regimes under sanctions. Supply also originates from
various sources: stockpiles of nations undergoing
regime change, defence departments’ clearance sales of
obsolete weapons, and manufacturers unwilling —
perhaps because of corruption — to meet
internationally agreed domestic controls.
Let me begin with demand, which certainly
concerns Africa. First, crime groups derive major
rewards from firearms. A handful of Somali pirates can
hijack oil tankers; poachers with rifles equipped with
night-sights and silencers plunder Africa’s rare species;
cattle raiders steal the livestock of entire villages;
bandits hijack aid shipments; thugs in combat uniform
compel young slaves to mine rare minerals; gangs
assault, rob and kidnap nationals and tourists alike, in
homes and at resorts. As a result, several countries in
Africa tally the highest rates for crime, specifically
murder, in the world.
Secondly, by acquiring military-grade weapons,
combatant militias obtain the trappings and firepower
of a military force in the attempt to gain credibility,
even without a political cause. Double jeopardy is
caused when, most commonly, rebels fund arms
purchases by trafficking drugs and other resources in
exchange.
Thirdly, regimes under sanctions need arms to
perpetuate themselves, irrespective of domestic
opposition and/or pressure from the international
community, including decisions of this Council. Arms
traffickers circumvent the embargos, handsomely

4

rewarded by authorities that do not hesitate to bleed
citizens and natural resources alike to honour
payments.
In these troublesome hands, even small amounts
of arms can undermine the socio-economic progress of
a nation, break the State’s monopoly on the use of
force, and create a tipping point in political or military
stalemates. One need only think of how the drugged-up
kids of the Revolutionary United Front held Sierra
Leone to ransom for a decade, or of the destruction
caused by the marauding Lord’s Resistance Army in
Uganda for years.
In short, illicit arms fuel the violence that
undermines security, development and justice. Of the
34 countries least likely to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals, 22 — two thirds of the total — are
in the midst of or emerging from conflicts located in
regions that are magnets for crime, violence and arms
trafficking.
What about supply? Small arms, unlike drugs and
counterfeits, are a durable product. An attack rifle,
such as the AK-47 or the M-16, can last indefinitely; it
just needs ammunition. As a result, arms trafficking
tends to be an episodic rather than permanent flow, but
with a predictable pattern — from countries with large
stockpiles to a region descending or pushed by
traffickers into crisis. Most of these regions, of course,
are in the third world.
The biggest stocks have been in Eastern Europe
and the former Soviet Union. Indeed, in the 1990s,
these stockpiles supplied almost every conflict,
particularly in Africa, from A to Z — from Angola to
Zimbabwe. A combination of factors has turned
Ukraine, in particular, into a major arms supplier. It has
huge stocks — there are 54 firearms for every
Ukrainian soldier, as against the accepted world ratio
of around 2:1 — and a large surplus of large planes,
including oversized Antonov and Ilyushin models.
With low regulation and high economic insecurity, we
get an environment in which merchants of death can
make millions — as portrayed by Nicolas Cage,
Goodwill Ambassador for the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, in “The Lord of War”.
How can tons of arms, in large cargo planes,
move undetected? The key is corruption at source,
transit and destination. Although arms are smuggled
across borders — for example between the United
States and Mexico — most weapons are just shipped

10-27987

S/PV.6288

through commercial channels, relying on fraudulent
papers and corrupt officials. Corruption at the
source — known as “point of departure diversion” —
enables traffickers to use fake end user certificates for
legal exports. Corruption at the “official” destination
enables a legal shipment to be diverted to a different
location. That is called post-delivery onward diversion.
For example, the tanks, weapons and ammunition on a
Ukrainian ship hijacked by Somali pirates in
September 2008 were intended for South Sudan, not
Kenya, as the papers said.
At the “true” destination — in countries, for
example, in the Sahel and Central, East and West
Africa — weapons are bartered for drugs and natural
resources such as oil, precious stones, metals and
timber. As a result, arms trafficking and organized
crime fuel conflicts, and vice versa.
In conclusion, what can be done to curb illicit
arms trafficking, in particular into Africa? The baseline
is to promote development and security so as to reduce
the demand for arms. To reduce the supply, more must
be done to improve the safekeeping and destruction of
stockpiles, not least within the area of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. How to curtail
the illicit arms trade? There is no need to reinvent the
wheel. The United Nations Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their
Parts and Components and Ammunition, which entered
into force five years ago to supplement the United
Nations Convention against Organized Crime, provides
a very strong legal instrument. I was glad to hear the
statement by the Deputy Secretary-General in that
connection.
The United Nations Protocol requires parties to
adopt legislation to prevent gun diversion and to
criminalize the removal of the markings on guns, keep
records necessary to trace them, prevent the
reactivation of disabled guns, promote cooperative
regimes to monitor gun flows, prevent weapons theft
and build law enforcement capacity across borders.
Yet, there are only 79 parties to the Protocol, which is
half the number of parties to the other two protocols of
the Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, namely, on smuggling of migrants and
trafficking in people. Of course, the Firearms Protocol
has some very notable absences.
To cut the illicit flow of weapons, I urge States to
use the Firearms Protocol to close loopholes in national

10-27987

legislation, tighten up regulations on weapons
transport, develop regional databases on seizures,
promote inter-agency cooperation within national
administrations, profile suspicious shipments and share
information with other countries to verify compliance
with international agreements.
But that is not enough. All crime can best be
combated by following the money trail. Arms dealers
in particular swing between licit and illicit business,
covering their tracks through complex arrangements of
front companies that invest the proceeds from crime. I
urge States to implement article 52 of the United
Nations Convention against Corruption and article 7 of
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, which require parties to know their
customers and reveal the beneficiaries of funds
deposited into high-value accounts.
Arms trafficking is another pandemic. The
therapy is known and the surgical instruments are
available. I hope this meeting will spur Member States
to use these tools to cut the arms flows that fuel
conflicts, undermine States and enrich criminals.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Costa for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Louis Sylvain-Goma,
Secretary General of the Economic Community of
Central African States.
Mr. Sylvain-Goma (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for inviting me to be here. I would
also like to acknowledge the presence of the Deputy
Secretary-General.
At the heart of a continent in which instances of
fratricidal war are the subject of the international
community’s concern, Central Africa has been a major
source of crises for the past 15 years. Of the
10 countries that comprise the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS), seven are in postconflict situations today, while the other three have not
been spared the upheavals of political violence and
runaway criminality. In that regard, the scourge of
small arms and light weapons is a major factor in the
proliferation and chaotic circulation of such weapons.
Because the source of such weapons cannot be
verified, and because they are easy to use and can be
easily transported, as Kofi Annan has said, those
engines of untold suffering are everywhere. They can
be found within families and States and along borders.

5

S/PV.6288

They destabilize family relations, ruin people’s lives,
undermine good-neighbourly relations between States
and drain momentum from regional integration efforts.
That is the dire picture that I wish to share with the
Council of the problem of small arms and light
weapons in our subregion.
In order to illustrate the scope of this
phenomenon, people point to the fact that threats to the
internal and national security of the States of the region
far exceed the capacities of our countries and
Community to eradicate them. Given their scale,
gravity and widespread nature, the crises being
experienced by the subregion have a cumulative effect.
That includes the rise and growth of armed rebellion
and criminal organizations, the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons, drug trafficking, massive
displacements of peoples, the deterioration in
educational and health systems, poverty and
promiscuity.
At the level of global security, Central Africa is
home to six lawless regions, all of which are part of
triangular borders: Chad-Central African RepublicSudan, Chad-Cameroon-Central African Republic,
Cameroon-Equatorial Guinea-Nigeria, Angola-CongoDemocratic Republic of the Congo, Central-African
Republic-Congo-Democratic
Republic
of
the
Congo/Congo River, and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo-Burundi-Rwanda/Great Lakes region. A
closer look reveals that the porous nature of the
borders is conducive to allowing rebel movements to
fall back and regroup. That is a structural element of
the chaotic circulation of small arms and light
weapons. Moreover, such lawless areas remain infested
by nascent rebellion movements and host to entire
roaming armies following the end of a conflict.
The technical characteristics of those weapons
reveal that nearly 80 per cent of them come from either
China or the countries of the former Warsaw Pact.
Traffickers exploit the ease of using and maintaining
such weapons, which means that there are endless
sources of them. There are also numerous stockpiles of
such weapons — of the armies and defence forces of
States in crisis, those who support rebel movements
and
international
arms
dealers.
Recently,
fundamentalist religious movements in the CameroonNigeria-Equatorial Guinea and Chad-Sudan-Central
African Republic triangles have also been the source of
small arms and light weapons.

6

All sectors of society possess these weapons.
Worse yet, that includes women and children. This is
leading to a new social conflict involving the
traditional family structure. That alarming development
has prompted the organs of the Council for Peace and
Security in Central Africa (COPAX) and the
institutions of the international community to take
action to reduce the phenomenon.
With regard to actions taken at the regional level,
the heads of States of Central Africa have, through the
Yaoundé process, turned to the United Nations for
assistance in order to prevent, control and settle
conflicts in the subregion. That led to establishment of
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa, in 1992.
Subsequently, as a result of the Committee’s work, an
historic decision was taken in Yaoundé in July 1999 to
establish the Council for Peace and Security in Central
Africa, which was set up in February 2000, in Malabo,
Equatorial Guinea.
With regard to the matters being debated, the
Protocol on COPAX includes the following issues in its
article 6: combating cross-border crime, international
terrorism, the uncontrolled proliferation and illicit
trafficking of arms, ammunition, explosives and all
other related materials. Since then, at the instigation of
the former Organization of African Unity, the
Economic Community of Central African States has
been acting with a double view: responsible support to
international community initiatives, and taking
subregional initiatives.
With regard to supporting initiatives of the
international community, the Central African States
adopted, as part of Africa’s contribution to the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, the Bamako Declaration of
2000. They established, in 2003, the programme on
Central Africa’s priority activities to implement the
United Nations Programme.
Concerning subregional initiatives, I will note
that, on the basis of that Programme, the ECCAS
secretariat, with the support of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in
Central Africa, held a seminar in Bangui, in August
2002, on raising awareness of the implementation of
the United Nations Programme in the ECCAS region.

10-27987

S/PV.6288

Then, from 12 to 14 May 2003, the implementation
seminar was organized in Brazzaville.

Community of Central African States in the Gulf of
Guinea.

The results of that seminar led to adoption of a
body of recommendations that the States have
committed themselves to implement. I shall refer to
eight of them: establishing in each State a national
commission on small arms and light weapons;
collecting and openly destroying small arms and light
weapons used by rebels and other armed groups;
strengthening and harmonizing national legislation and
procedures on small arms and light weapons;
enhancing the capacity of national security institutions
to control small arms and light weapons; promoting
traceability by creating registers and databanks;
promoting the role of civil society in combating the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons;
implementing a regional policy of cross-border
cooperation to combat proliferation of small arms and
light weapons; and lastly, establishing an entity on
small arms and light weapons within the secretariat of
the Economic Community of Central African States.

As the Council is aware, for many years the
triangle of Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea and Nigeria
has been the target of many acts of maritime piracy
that have led to fears of the phenomenon of “Somaliization” of this zone, which is strategic to the global
supply of energy and to international trade. During
joint patrols at sea and along the coast, hundreds of
arms and considerable quantities of ivory, drugs and
the proceeds of illegal fishing and other illicit products
have been seized.

At the level of the global collective security
strategy of the Council for Peace and Security in
Central Africa, actions have been taken to address
threats in the lawless areas I noted earlier, starting with
the cooperation agreement on police that was signed in
April 1999 in Yaoundé among member States of the
Committee of Police Chiefs of Central Africa. To
complete that system, the 2007 Sao Tome and Principe
initiative mobilized the Economic Community of
Central African States to create a legal instrument for
the community to combat the proliferation of and illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons, which will be
adopted in the near future.
That approach, which aligns legal instruments
with an operational approach, sees the secretariat of the
Economic Community of Central African States in the
central role in controlling the circulation of small arms
and light weapons in the subregion, along with the
United Nations and the African Union, of course. The
approach not only fosters harmonization and
strengthening of regulations and institutions, but also
insures the promotion of exchange of information for
greater effectiveness of the actors in the field.
Here it is appropriate to emphasize the
encouraging results attained, in barely six months, in a
test of the implementation of the strategy to secure the
vital interests of the member States of the Economic

10-27987

Moreover, in most States in post-conflict
situations, national disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration
(DDR)
programmes
have
been
implemented as part of strategies to emerge from
conflict. Reducing the circulation of small arms and
light weapons and controlling acquisitions and existing
stockpiles have thus become a major part of the
process to collect arms and to demobilize and
reintegrate ex-combatants. But the DDR process is still
far from satisfying our expectations, as it has not yet
addressed the matter of criminal organizations, which
are becoming more and more organized.
It is important to emphasize that after the
conflicts in Angola, Burundi, the Republic of the
Congo, the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, it has not been
possible to recover all of the arms used in those
conflicts. Taking all those countries together, one may
estimate — and this is only an estimate — that about
7 million small arms and light weapons, including
those manufactured and acquired, have been in
circulation in Central Africa over the past 15 years.
Only 45 per cent of them have come under effective
monitoring or have been destroyed.
That means that a majority of the arms remain
hidden for various reasons, including the possibility of
a return to confrontations; illicit trafficking for
commercial purposes; armed banditry, which often
involves rape, hijacking, poaching, drug trafficking,
pillaging of minerals and forest resources in the Congo
Basin, crimes of passion and maritime piracy. I could
continue. They are also used for poaching for the
wildlife trade and in illegal fishing activities, where
explosives are often used.
That is why disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes and programmes to combat

7

S/PV.6288

small arms and light weapons, usually carried out with
the aid of the United Nations Development Programme
and the European Union, are now closely linked to the
problem of security sector reform and involve
cooperation among State and non-State actors at the
local and subregional levels. The policy of reforming
the security sectors of Central African States requires
their security and defence forces to commit to strict
control of the weapons they own. Furthermore, under
the aegis of the African Union Border Programme, a
ECCAS border programme was adopted in May 2009.
The third pillar of this programme seeks to ensure
cross-border security and the fight against the
trafficking of small arms and light weapons, which are
a
factor
undermining
neighbourly
relations
destabilizing economic development.
After a period of latency, during which the
subregion was profoundly affected by its numerous
conflicts, ECCAS, relaunched in 1999, now has as its
primary mandate the task of re-establishing stability,
peace and security. To that end, the goal of combating
and eliminating the proliferation and uncontrolled
circulation of small arms and light weapons is now
ensconced on our agenda.
Looking to the future, the community’s efforts in
this area will be focused on finalizing the legal
instrument and its adoption by member States; boosting
the active participation of national commissions on
small arms and light weapons; implementing the border
programme, especially in the area of cross-border
security; drawing up and implementing a police
cooperation mechanism to address the issue of the six
lawless zones; operationalizing the Gulf of Guinea
securitization strategy in coordination with the
Economic Community of West African States and, of
course, with our international partners; implementing
the policy of security sector reform in order to ensure
that State armaments are traceable; providing support
of all types to ensure the success of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes at rates of
around 90 per cent by 2015; and strengthening civil
society organizations with regard to information,
awareness-raising and social networking. In order to
achieve this ambitious project, our community is
appealing to our international partners for their
valuable assistance.
In conclusion, I should like to emphasize that
ECCAS believes that combating the proliferation and
illicit trafficking of small arms and light weapons is

8

part and parcel of the comprehensive collective
security strategy of the subregion. In that regard, we
need to examine the chain linking the production and
import of such weapons through to their use for
criminal ends. Gaining the capacity to trace and control
small arms and light weapons is thus an important part
of our approach. Furthermore, a policy of crisis
prevention, management and settlement, along with
subregional and international police cooperation, will
furnish the basic means of dealing with these problems.
We therefore need to deploy all our human ingenuity
by working to prevent problems early in the chain and
through concrete action on the ground on the legal,
political and technological levels.
If, however, we abandon the social and economic
dimension, which fuels asymmetrical conflicts, all such
efforts will be in vain. That is why our subregion
believes that combating small arms and light weapons
is one of the major pillars of the Millennium
Development Goals.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached among Council
members, I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes, in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are requested to
circulate their texts in writing and deliver a condensed
version when speaking in the Chamber. I now give the
floor to the members of the Security Council.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I, too, would like to
welcome Deputy Secretary-General Asha-Rose Migiro
and Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, as well
as Mr. Louis Sylvain-Goma, Secretary-General of the
Economic Community of Central African States.
We appreciate your initiative, Mr. President, in
organizing this thematic debate on the impact of illicit
arms trafficking on peace and security in Central
Africa. Your concept paper has proved valuable in
facilitating discussion on this topical issue.
Illicit arms trafficking has a profound impact on
peace and security in Africa in general, and in Central
Africa in particular. It undermines good governance
and disrupts trade, tourism and investment. It
jeopardizes economic development and generally puts
democracy and development at risk. Illicit small arms
also heighten inter-State conflicts and put the nationState system itself under attack. With armed guerrilla

10-27987

S/PV.6288

groups proliferating and often dividing into warring
factions, internal instabilities increasingly tend to
evolve into larger regional wars. Cross-border support
for insurgent movements is also on the rise. Largescale wars are ongoing in some parts of Africa,
resulting in millions of internally displaced persons.
The role of natural resources in fuelling conflicts in the
region can never be overemphasized. Fighters on all
sides benefit from mineral wealth, while arms
merchants are only too happy to keep the fighters
supplied as long as they partake of that wealth.
I should like to suggest five areas where efforts
should be directed in tackling illicit arms trafficking in
Central Africa and other parts of the continent.
First, there is a need to strengthen national and
subregional mechanisms to combat the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons. The experience of the
West African subregion provides an important lesson in
this regard. To consolidate peacebuilding and
reconciliation in the subregion, the heads of State and
Government of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) decided to transform the
moratorium on the importation, exportation and
manufacture of light weapons into a legally binding
instrument, known as the ECOWAS Convention on
Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition
and Other Related Materials. The Convention seeks to
control, regulate and prohibit the transfer, manufacture
and possession of small arms and light weapons. The
subregion has been able to develop a plan of action, the
ECOWAS Small Arms Control Programme, and also
encourage the establishment of national focal points.
Secondly, in order to prevent weapons from
ending up in the hands of those prohibited from
receiving them, we believe that Governments must
adhere to regional and international arms embargoes.
They must start to sanction violators, as contraveners
of arms embargoes have been able to act with
impunity. The United Nations should redouble its
efforts to closely monitor compliance, supervise
enforcement and suggest persuasive measures to
enhance compliance.
Thirdly, to end the impunity under which arms
brokers operate, States should adopt an international
arms trade treaty, which would provide common
international standards regarding the practices of arms
brokers. There is currently no uniform practice, with
the result that arms brokers can change locations to

10-27987

avoid prosecution under one country’s laws by doing
business in and through other, less regulated countries.
Such a treaty would ensure that middlemen cannot
move weapons from conflict to areas free of conflict
for fear of prosecution.
Furthermore, on the issue of standards, an
international treaty that provides criteria on exports is
needed in order to prevent arms from getting into the
hands of abusers of human rights and international
humanitarian law. International standards that
determine eligibility requirements for arms exports
would prevent arms from entering the illegal market
and from falling into the hands of those likely to divert
or use them for nefarious purposes.
Lastly, national Governments, especially those of
arms-exporting States, must strengthen and use
monitoring mechanisms in order to prevent legal sales
from being diverted into the parallel market. End-use
monitoring ensures that exported weapons are used
properly and that exploiters follow all laws, policies,
regulations and procedures, thus verifying that a
foreign Government or the authorized foreign recipient
of defence articles is using and controlling them in
accordance with the terms and conditions of a transfer.
Because many countries have non-existent or weak
end-use monitoring provisions, international standards
that require end-use monitoring are the most systematic
and complete basis. Onboard pre-shipment and postshipment points are required. In addition, a common
international end-used certificate that cannot be easily
forged or duplicated must be developed.
Finally, I would like to thank Gabon for the draft
presidential statement, and affirm our support for its
adoption at the end of this debate.
Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): I would like to start by
welcoming the participation of Deputy SecretaryGeneral Asha-Rose Migiro, and to thank her for her
statement. I also thank Mr. Antonio Maria Costa and
Mr. Louis Sylvain-Goma for their statements.
The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
has had a devastating impact on peace and security in
Africa,
and
Uganda
therefore
thanks
you,
Mr. President, for organizing a debate on that
important matter. We now know that the proliferation
and illicit trafficking of small arms and light weapons
are not the direct causes of conflict, but rather
significant factors that fuel and sustain conflicts
between and within States. Not only do they make

9

S/PV.6288

those conflicts more lethal, but they also make efforts
and the peaceful resolution of conflicts more difficult.
The greatest impact of all is on human security and the
socio-economic development of States.
Africa, like other parts of the world, has
continued to receive and recycle arsenals of arms to
devastating effect. In some parts of Africa, such as
Central Africa, the Great Lakes region and the Horn of
Africa in particular, we have seen how the easy
availability of small arms and light weapons has been a
major destabilizing factor. Several of the conflicts in
those areas are fought principally with small arms,
whose low cost, ease of use and maintenance make
them very popular. Such weapons also fuel crime and
violence, displace civilians and undermine their rights.
In the Central and East African regions, small arms and
light weapons constitute a serious threat to peace,
reconciliation, safety, security and sustainable
development.
Small arms have also had an impact on lowintensity conflicts, such as those between communities
in the border areas. In the pastoral communities
bordering Kenya and the Sudan, as well as those
bordering Kenya and Somalia, in the border areas of
northern and eastern Uganda, and also in parts of the
Kenyan border, cattle-rustling has had a long history
due to aspects of the pastoral nomadic culture. The
proliferation of small arms, particularly automatic and
semi-automatic weapons, has all of a sudden made
traditional cattle-raiding more deadly than ever before.
The illegal trade in natural resources in Central
Africa has also heightened the illicit trade in small
arms. Those new dynamics are a serious threat to
peace, stability and the socio-economic development of
the entire subregion. Illicit arms trafficking has also
increased the incidences of armed violence,
particularly in the urban centres in the region. It is now
evident, too, that small arms and light weapons also
play a role in facilitating and fuelling other illegal
cross-border activities, such as drug trafficking and the
trade in endangered species. Regional cooperation and
coordination are therefore necessary so that
programmes, activities or initiatives linked to that
challenge are regional in scope and utilize regional
institutions.
African Governments have initiated various
mechanisms aimed at addressing the problem of
proliferation and the abuse of such weapons. One such

10

initiative is the Nairobi Declaration on the Problem of
the Proliferation of Illicit Small Arms and Light
Weapons in the Great Lakes Region and the Horn of
Africa. The signatories to the Declaration include
Kenya, Somalia, the Sudan, Ethiopia, Burundi,
Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Uganda, Tanzania and Djibouti. Those countries are
tasked with ensuring that they take appropriate national
measures aimed at addressing the problem of small
arms and light weapons. The Declaration reflects the
cross-border dynamic of conflict, instability and small
arms proliferation and provides for an agenda for
action and an implementation plan.
As part of its efforts to fight the illicit
proliferation of arms and light weapons, Uganda has
established a national focal point on small arms and
light weapons under the Ministry of Internal Affairs to
coordinate, combat and control the proliferation of
firearms. A national firearm marking exercise is under
way in the country, beginning with those firearms
under the police and the army. Uganda also continues
to implement collection and disposal measures and,
since 2008, has disposed of more than 4,700 pieces of
recovered illicit arms and light weapons. Currently, a
countrywide firearms stocktaking exercise is being
conducted within the police and armed forces to
determine surplus stocks and serviceable and
commissioned small arms and light weapons for final
disposal.
Significant progress has been made in the Great
Lakes region to strengthen controls on small arms and
light weapons. It is encouraging to note that all
countries have now established national focal points
and are at different levels of implementing the action
plan. To date, over 200,000 illicit small arms and light
weapons have been destroyed in the subregion.
Now, the challenge is how Governments in the
region can maintain the existing momentum. The
efforts undertaken to improve cross-border cooperation
and the enhancement of reinforcement capacity must
be built on. The legal protocols on small arms control
must be signed, ratified and implemented.
Furthermore, the initiatives taken to improve weapons
collection and stockpile management, ensure the
effective demobilization and reintegration of former
combatants, raise awareness in communities of the
dangers of small arms, and, above all, reduce the
demand for weapons need to be intensified.

10-27987

S/PV.6288

One major challenge is how best to coordinate the
various national initiatives among countries with
different levels of resources, legal systems and
institutional and technical capacity. Another major
challenge to regional efforts has been the lack of
resources.
Finally, in a region with porous borders and with
people still living in conditions of poverty, efforts to
reduce small arms and light weapons by States on their
own are likely to have little or no impact. We wish to
underscore once again the importance of a regional
approach and focus in addressing this problem and the
need for increased support of the international
community in order to give greater assurance of human
security and socio-economic development to States
within Africa. Uganda therefore commends the
countries in Central Africa for pursuing this regional
approach.
Mr.
Apakan
(Turkey):
The
excessive
accumulation and uncontrolled spread of small arms
and light weapons pose a complex set of risks and
threats to the security of States and their citizens. This
is particularly the case in Central Africa. We therefore
welcome the initiative taken by Gabonese presidency
to have an open discussion on this issue today.
I also thank Deputy Secretary-General Asha-Rose
Migiro and Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, as well as
Mr. Louis Sylvain-Goma, for their comprehensive and
insightful presentations.
It is estimated that 90 per cent of civilian
casualties in modern conflicts around the world are
caused by small arms. The Great Lakes region of
Africa has been the most tragic example of that. In
1994, more than 800,000 people were murdered in
Rwanda, mostly with small arms, including machetes.
An estimated 300,000 civilians have also lost their
lives the same way in Burundi. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the death toll used to average
2,600 per day. The instances of tribal and ethnic
violence in Southern Sudan, which seem to be on the
rise, and general lack of security in the triangle
between Chad, the Central African Republic and
Southern Sudan are also fuelled by the overabundance
of small arms and light weapons.
The availability of small arms and light weapons
also results in protracted armed conflicts, which are
among the greatest obstacles to human development
and a major cause of mass poverty, as such conflicts

10-27987

decimate economies and dislocate societies. For
instance, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo the
civil war has resulted in 4 million deaths that can be
attributed to malnutrition and disease.
In addition, the proliferation of these weapons
makes the peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts of
the international community in various parts of Central
Africa not only more difficult, but also highly
dangerous. There is also a well documented
relationship between the illicit trade in small arms and
terrorism and other acts of organized crime.
It is of course the responsibility of every State to
protect its citizens from the danger posed by the illicit
trafficking and unauthorized use of arms and weapons.
However, the transboundary nature and the magnitude
of the threat warrants strong cooperation and
coordination among States, as well as a
multidimensional approach that deals with the problem
at the local, national, regional and international levels
simultaneously. In this context, we welcome regional
initiatives that address this problem, such as the
establishment of a subregional register of small arms in
Central Africa.
Furthermore, not all States have the necessary
capabilities to deal with this problem. Therefore,
capacity-building emerges as an important component
of the struggle in this field. In Central Africa in
particular, we should expand foreign aid programmes
that seek to eradicate the illicit arms trade in the
subregion and do our utmost to help strengthen the
capacities of States and indigenous organizations, such
as the Economic Community of Central African States.
In addition to bilateral aid programmes, United Nations
offices also have an essential role to play in the
coordination
and implementation
of relevant
programmes, together with local authorities.
Turkey favours a comprehensive approach in
dealing with this problem and thus remains committed
to the effective implementation and further
strengthening of the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects. We also support the elaboration of more
effective international norms and standards. Within this
framework, we support the conclusion of an arms trade
treaty, which should halt unregulated and uncontrolled
trade in conventional arms worldwide and establish
common standards for their global trade.

11

S/PV.6288

Moreover, reinforcing border and customs
controls, as well as controls on brokering, licensed
production and end use of small arms and light
weapons, is indispensable for the prevention of illicit
arms trade. Upholding existing arms embargoes and
export bans, improving the security and management
of stockpiles of arms and ammunition, and further
promoting disarmament within the context of
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes would also contribute to these efforts.
Finally, transparency and information-sharing
would certainly help promote consistency in the
implementation of agreed multilateral standards. We
therefore attach importance to the fulfilment by United
Nations Member States of their reporting requirements
within the United Nations on their small arms
activities.
In conclusion, illicit arms trafficking continues to
pose a significant threat to international peace and
security, which can be tackled only through our
collective efforts. The Central African region, in
particular, presents a prime example of this grim
reality. I hope and believe that our meeting today and
the draft presidential statement, which we fully
support, will re-energize our endeavours in the right
direction. For its part, Turkey is certainly committed to
contributing to all relevant efforts.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): We applaud the initiative of
Gabon to convene this debate on the issue of illicit
arms trafficking in the Central African region. We
welcome the presence of Deputy Secretary-General
Migiro, Mr. Costa and Mr. Duarte. We also welcome
the Secretary General of the Economic Community of
Central African States and thank him for his statement.
The countries in the Central African region are
not producers but importers of small arms and light
weapons. Large numbers of small arms are imported
illicitly and frequently traded for revenue from the
natural resources of the region. Due to weak control
systems, some of the illicit arms fall into the hands of
anti-Government forces and non-State actors.
According to the Small Arms Survey, only a small
portion of small arms are in the custody of State
security institutions. The abundant supply of small
arms and light weapons aggravates not only conflicts,
but also acts of violence and criminal activities.
The problems caused by small arms and light
weapons in the Central African region are not limited

12

to issues of social instability; they undermine human
rights, protection of women and children and socioeconomic development. They pose a central challenge
to human security, as my colleague from Uganda
noted, and may even become a threat to peace and
security in Africa.
Japan therefore strongly supports various efforts
being undertaken at the national, subregional, regional
and global levels to address the problem of illicit small
arms trafficking. At the national level, it is important to
implement the United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and
the International Instrument to Enable States to
Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner,
Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons. We hope that an
action-oriented outcome document will be adopted at
the forthcoming Fourth Biennial Meeting of States to
Consider the Implementation of the Programme of
Action, which is to take place in June this year.
We urge Member States to make efforts to submit
national reports on the measures taken to implement
the Programme of Action. It is absolutely essential for
the States concerned to take responsibility for
registering, controlling and managing small arms and
light weapons and ammunition and to establish
measurable goals as part of their national development
plans.
At the regional and subregional levels, we
encourage countries in the Central African region to
expedite their efforts to establish a binding instrument
on small arms and light weapons and ammunition,
following the examples of other regions in Africa. It is
particularly important to strengthen the management of
national borders on the Gulf of Guinea as a common
problem of the region. The Economic Community of
Central African States may be a good forum for
exchange of information and best practice with other
regional organizations to extend and mobilize support
for capacity-building.
At the global level, we need to the implement the
13 recommendations made by the Secretary-General in
2008 (see S/2008/258). They are all relevant to the
Central African region. For instance, the SecretaryGeneral recommended that plans for small arms and
light weapons be integrated into peacebuilding and
poverty reduction strategies, as a matter of priority. We
also support Recommendation 9, on destruction of

10-27987

S/PV.6288

surplus ammunition stockpiles, and we are actively
supporting projects in that area.

problem of small arms and light weapons that we are
addressing today is naturally closely linked to that.

Arms embargoes are necessary under certain
conditions, and compliance is important to have the
intended impact. Sanction monitoring groups,
peacekeeping operation missions, relevant countries
and regional organizations should cooperate closely.
We look forward to the report by the Secretary-General
to be issued this year.

The illicit manufacture and distribution of small
arms and light weapons and of ammunition is one of
the major threats to international peace and security.
Millions of people have been their victims since 1945.
Clearly, it is in this area that, if any progress is to be
made, the issues of disarmament would be dealt with
most fruitfully when it comes to security for all human
beings.

In order to address the problem of small arms and
light weapons in the Central African region, we need,
first and foremost, priority actions on the part of the
countries themselves. Such efforts should be matched
by partnership and external support. There are various
cooperative frameworks in the region. We wish for
intensified efforts to strengthen collaboration and to
adopt a comprehensive approach.

Central Africa, sorely tried by conflicts for many
years and victim of unstable land and sea borders, is
particularly exposed. The example of the Lord’s
Resistance Army, composed of several hundred rebels,
reveals the ability of armed groups to despoil entire
regions and sow terror and desolation.

Japan places high priority on assistance to solve
the problem of small arms and light weapons. In the
last nine years we have provided $500 million in
support of that. In the Central African region, where
the problem of small arms is a major concern, we are
engaged in projects in countries such as the Republic
of the Congo, the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to assist in the
collection, destruction, stockpile management and
control of small arms; in disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration; and in capacity-building.

Apart from the impact on the physical safety of
the people of Central Africa, small arms and light
weapons have a long-term negative impact on the
economic and social development of a region already
beset by numerous development challenges. The
trafficking in small arms and light weapons also
contributes to prolonging conflicts. Illicit deliveries of
arms in unstable areas are detrimental to efforts to
achieve a negotiated settlement of conflicts and thus
make peace difficult to achieve. They also impede the
efforts of the Security Council and regional
organizations in Central Africa.

Japan is unique in the world in having a very
clear policy not to export arms, particularly to
countries involved in conflict or likely to become
involved. We are committed to play a leading role in
the fight against the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. To that end, every year since 1995 — and,
since 2005, joined by Colombia and South Africa as
sponsors — Japan has submitted to the General
Assembly a draft resolution on small arms and light
weapons. We are pleased at the increasing support it
has gained.

The struggle against the illegal distribution of
small arms and light weapons is an unequal combat.
There is indeed a considerable disproportion between
the several hundred thousand dollars that are sufficient
to arm a rebel group and the human and financial costs
for States and the international community of
peacekeeping and disarmament operations or further
initiatives for security sector reform. Those are the
instruments available to us to end a crisis. Thus it is of
capital importance that the problem of the distribution
of small arms and light weapons be attacked at its root.

I wish to conclude by registering Japan’s
continued support for the global fight against illicit
arms trafficking.

To fight the trafficking, it is necessary to
mobilize States of origin and transit of these arms. That
means enhanced surveillance of manufacturers and
brokers and of air and maritime companies that are
knowingly involved in the flow of illegal arms.

Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I wish, of
course, to thank the delegation of Gabon for having
organized this discussion. A few days ago, when
President Ali Bongo came to New York, he outlined his
detailed plan for the prevention of conflicts. The

10-27987

In order to prevent the circulation of such
weapons from fuelling conflict, the Security Council
has set up sanctions and embargo regimes, the

13

S/PV.6288

implementation of which is of capital importance. We
urge all States to cooperate with the sanctions
committees to ensure their follow-up.
The international community has also established
legal tools to buttress the action of Central African
States, and we must encourage their full
implementation. I refer, inter alia, to the United
Nations Programme of Action on Small Arms and the
international disarmament conventions. We also lend
our full support to the initiative of the Economic
Community of Central African States for the
establishment of a register of small arms and light
weapons on a regional basis.
The future arms trade treaty, which we very much
hope for and for which my country is sparing no effort,
will also be an essential tool in stopping the
destabilizing flood of arms. France counts on the
support of its partners in the upcoming deadlines and in
view of the conference in 2012 to draw up the treaty.
Initiatives to prevent conflicts and to maintain
and keep peace also contribute to reducing the illicit
traffic in small arms and light weapons. Disarmament,
demobilization and resettlement programmes, for
example, make it possible to reduce the number of
arms in circulation. Supporting security sector reform
helps strengthen the abilities of States to combat arms
trafficking.
May I conclude by recalling that, in the fight
against the dissemination of small arms and light
weapons, my country has played its role. Since 2006
France has launched a series of regional initiatives in
the framework of the Wassenaar Arrangement, the
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
and the European Union to prevent arms trafficking by
private air companies. Regular reports submitted by
European
Union
member
States
regarding
implementation of the United Nations Programme on
Small Arms provide an interesting experience with
regard to actions that the Economic Community of
Central African States intends to undertake at the
institutional level within the framework of its
subregional initiative. Finally, within the framework of
European Union and Africa, we contribute, together
with our European partners, to enhancing the capacities
of African States to combat that trafficking by
supporting the African training centre.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to join my colleagues in welcoming

14

Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro and to thank Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa and Mr. Louis Sylvain-Goma for their valuable
presentations. I would also like to express my gratitude
and appreciation to the delegation of Gabon for
organizing this important debate on the impact of illicit
arms tracking on peace and security, a subject well
within the competence of this Council, which is
mandated to maintain international peace and security.
It is natural that we focus on the region of Central
Africa, one of the areas most affected by the scourge of
small arms.
Small arms are the most commonly used weapons
in civil conflict, in acts of terrorism and in ordinary
and organized crimes, so much so that they have been
described as weapons of mass destruction because of
the huge number of casualties they cause, especially
among women and children. Unlike for chemical,
biological and nuclear weapons, however, there is so
far no international non-proliferation regime for small
and light weapons.
Statistics indicate that more than 100 States
Members of the United Nations possess about 1,000
arms factories that produce about 8 million pieces of
weapons annually. The number of small arms in
circulation is estimated to be about 700 million, which
translates to one weapon for each 10 individuals in the
world.
These weapons are a universal threat to humanity.
They cause suffering and destruction in many regions,
especially in Central Africa, which has witnessed so
many wars that they have been described as a “world
war” because of the huge number of casualties they
have caused directly or indirectly. That region and its
society continue to suffer the consequences, be it to
economic development or at the humanitarian level,
which hinder progress and delay the achievement of
the Millennium Development Goals.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
Bamako Declaration on an African Common Position
on the Illicit Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking
of Small Arms and Light Weapons, as well as the
Nairobi Declaration on the Problem of the Proliferation
of Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons in the Great
Lakes Region and the Horn of Africa.
The problem of small arms cannot be handled
merely through efforts to monitor them because it is an
integral part of a wider context where conflicts

10-27987

S/PV.6288

intersect with issues of security, violence, organized
crime, human rights and development.
We are a few months away from the Fourth
Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects in
June. In this respect, Lebanon commends the efforts of
the United Nations to contain the spread of small and
light weapons and believes that they should be
accompanied by efforts to address the root causes of
crises and conflicts and to build effective institutions,
as well as to eradicate hunger, poverty and illiteracy,
which are principal causes of wars and conflicts in
Africa.
Efforts to stop the spread of weapons should also
be accompanied by encouragement of armed groups to
abandon their weapons, to reintegrate their members,
especially children, into society and to provide
incentives and means to do so. In this regard, we
commend the work of the many non-governmental
organizations to achieve those goals.
Lebanon long suffered from the spread of these
weapons and the ensuing destruction, especially in the
years between 1975 and 1990. Therefore, we call for
strengthening international cooperation to establish
controls and ensure effective oversight and monitoring
of the production of these weapons and their legitimate
possession, storage, export and import.
Lebanon also calls for continued work to achieve
common ground and an international consensus on a
binding international instrument in this regard.
Lebanon believes that this does not infringe the
inherent right of States to individual or collective selfdefence in the event of aggression against a Member of
the United Nations, as stipulated in Article 51 of the
Charter, or the right of peoples to resist occupation and
to achieve self-determination.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to express our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
and to the delegation of Gabon for organizing today’s
debate on this important issue. I would also like to
thank Deputy Secretary-General Migiro for her
comments and presence today, and Mr. Costa and His
Excellency Mr. Sylvain-Goma for their remarks.
Every year thousands of conventional arms worth
millions of dollars flood illegally into every conflict

10-27987

zone in Africa, despite Security Council arms
embargos. These ongoing weapons flows mean many
thousands of deaths, millions of displaced persons and
refugees, and billions of dollars spent on humanitarian
assistance and emergency relief aid. The numbers are
heartbreaking. United Nations-generated data suggests
that conflicts fuelled by the illicit arms trade have left
an estimated 14 million refugees homeless worldwide
and 26 million people internally displaced.
The instability and insecurity born of these
conflicts are massive obstacles to development. We all
understand that Africa is harmed disproportionately by
these trends. Of the 20 countries that experience the
lowest levels of human development, all but one of
them are in Africa and more than half of these
countries have been shaken by significant levels of
violence since 1990.
One stark example is the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, where the transfer of arms into the eastern
part of the country fuels a terrible conflict and
threatens stability in the Great Lakes region. Indeed, a
vicious cycle of underdevelopment and insecurity in
Central Africa and elsewhere stokes conflict and illicit
arms flows, and that in turn can thwart well-intentioned
Governments and international actors working for
progress.
To stem this tide of illicit arms, we must not only
strictly observe and enforce United Nations arms
sanctions regimes; we must also rigorously implement
other international or regional instruments, as well as
national export controls on arms flows to embargoed
regions in Africa. Moreover, we should consider which
controls are appropriate for arms transfers to conflict
zones not subject to Security Council sanctions.
The United States is particularly proud of our
extensive and rigorous system of export controls. We
engage and assist other States, both bilaterally and
through multilateral organizations and regimes, to raise
their standards and to prohibit the transfer of
capabilities to rogue States, terrorist groups and groups
seeking to unsettle regions.
Conventional arms transfers are a crucial national
security concern for the United States. We have always
supported effective action based on the highest
standards of responsibility to control the international
transfer of arms. Indeed, we face questions of both law
and responsibility here. Legal but reckless international
transfers often fuel the illicit arms trade. For this

15

S/PV.6288

reason, the United States voted in the General
Assembly last fall to support a strong and robust arms
trade treaty.
We will actively support arms trade treaty
negotiations so long as the United Nations Conference
on the Arms Trade Treaty takes its decisions by
consensus. This is necessary to ensure that all countries
can be held to standards that will improve the global
standard, to ensure the widest possible support for the
treaty and to avoid loopholes that may be exploited by
those wishing to export arms irresponsibly.
My Government is also dedicated to combating
the illicit trafficking of small arms and light weapons
through support for destroying stockpiles of surplus,
poorly secured or otherwise at-risk weapons and
munitions. Since 2001, the United States has funded
the destruction of more than 1.3 million small arms and
light weapons, more than 50,000 tons of ordnance and
nearly 32,000 man-portable air defence systems in over
38 countries around the world, including six of the
11 States members of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa.
The illicit arms trade hurts African countries
disproportionately, but this issue should be a source of
global concern. Illicit small arms can intensify and
spread regional conflicts and the linkages among arms
trafficking, narcotrafficking, terrorism and organized
crime are very real. In the most basic sense, traffickers
are traffickers. Narcotics traffickers, for instance, may
very well use their established routes and networks to
traffic in weapons or humans, should the situation
present itself.
Given the stakes here, my Government is
particularly pleased to be participating this June in the
Fourth Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects. We join Chairperson-designate Ambassador
Macedo in noting that the Meeting will be crucial to
helping lay the foundation for a successful Review
Conference in 2012.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We are
very grateful to you, Sir, and your delegation for
having convened this timely open debate on illicit arms
trafficking and its impact on peace and security in
Central Africa. We welcome this opportunity for the

16

Security Council to consider the pernicious effects of
that criminal activity, which have been described in
detail this morning by the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Costa and Mr. Sylvain-Goma.
My delegation will support the presidential
statement to be adopted at the outcome of this meeting.
Illicit arms trafficking is undoubtedly among the
most serious threats to peace and security in the current
international context. On the one hand, it helps to
strengthen organized crime and the illicit traffic in
drugs, undermining political, social and economic
stability in our countries. It also hampers peacebuilding
in situations of institutional fragility. On the other
hand, it is an obstacle to development and fosters the
serious and systematic violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law.
As we have stated in past debates of the Council
on this issue, given the increasingly obvious link
between drug trafficking and others manifestations of
organized crime — such as illicit arms trafficking,
money-laundering and terrorism — Governments and
the international community must design strategies that
enable them to address the specifics of any serious
crime and to identify the common and convergent
elements of such crimes in order to adopt a
comprehensive approach. In this way, it will be
possible to strengthen the rule of law and to clamp
down on the culture of illegality and impunity
throughout the world.
Of particular concern to Mexico, given the
pernicious effects of arms trafficking, is the harm it
causes to the civilian population. The price we pay for
our inability to eradicate this scourge is measured in
the human lives lost to it every day. It has been
calculated that hundreds of thousands of people are
killed every year by firearms, the majority of which are
purchased on the black market. Thus, the effective
implementation of resolution 1894 (2009) is of special
importance.
It has been noted that Central Africa is among the
regions that have suffered most from the destructive
effects of the illicit traffic in weapons and ammunition
and the irresponsible trade in weapons, in particular
small arms and light weapons. The subregion has been
shaken in recent years by protracted conflicts that have
weakened the States of the region and, on occasion,
impeded reconciliation and peacebuilding processes.
Sadly, the subregion has seen the conflation of

10-27987

S/PV.6288

practically all the pernicious effects of such activities,
and weapons have circulated from conflict to conflict,
regardless of borders or jurisdictions.
The complex nature of the problem highlights the
importance of international cooperation to combat this
global threat. Arms produced in one region of the
world are sold illegally in another. It is of fundamental
importance to recognize that the measures we adopt to
counter the illicit traffic in small arms and light
weapons and ammunition must be designed on the
basis of shared responsibility involving States,
international and regional bodies, and arms
manufacturers, purchasers and users.
Over the past 10 years, the United Nations has
devoted great effort and many resources to addressing
the phenomenon under discussion. However, judging
by the extreme availability of these weapons on illegal
transnational black markets and in sorely affected areas
such as Central Africa, we continue to face major
challenges. Mexico believes that the United Nations
must play a more active role in the debate on how to
combat the scourge, not merely through its technical
forums, but also by promoting high-level commitment
to countering it.
In that regard, we now possess the mechanisms
and instruments necessary to respond politically and
legally to the challenges at hand. One such mechanism
is the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. The Fourth
Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the Programme of Action will be
chaired by Mexico in June this year. It will provide a
new opportunity to adopt specific measures to enable
us to advance in preventing and combating illicit arms
trafficking. We invite States and other actors in our
endeavours in this area.
In the legal sphere, we have global and regional
instruments, such as the Inter-American Convention
Against the Illicit Manufacture of and Trafficking in
Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives, and Other Related
Materials. In a more general context, we must stress
the importance of the Palermo Protocol against the
Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
their Parts and Components and Ammunition, to which
there are now 79 States parties, as we have been
informed today. We call on those States that have not

10-27987

yet done so to ratify or accede promptly to that
important instrument.
We also welcome the progress made towards
negotiating a possible arms trade treaty. We commend
the efforts being made in Central Africa to establish a
binding legal instrument for monitoring small arms and
light weapons, ammunition and any material that could
be used in their manufacture. We trust that these efforts
will soon bear fruit. In that regard, we support the
proposal to draft a subregional list of arms traffickers,
which will make it possible in the future to initiate
investigations and bring the perpetrators of such illegal
activities to justice.
It is particularly important to consider the ways in
which the Security Council can contribute, within its
sphere of competencies, to the quest for betterdesigned and coordinated responses against this
scourge. Thus, the Council, working closely with the
General Assembly, the Peacebuilding Commission and
other relevant United Nations bodies, must establish
specific mandates for peace and peacebuilding
missions. We therefore stress the importance of
enhancing cooperation between the peace missions and
integrated offices in the region — such as the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic and Chad, the United
Nations Integrated Office in Burundi and the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central
African Republic — and neighbouring countries in
undertaking joint work on implementing disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes for excombatants of armed non-State groups and on security
and justice sector reform processes.
Cooperation and information exchanges between
the Security Council and regional and subregional
bodies must also be strengthened. In that regard, it
would be very useful to establish mechanisms for
ongoing dialogue between the Council and the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa.
It is particularly important that the African Union
and the Economic Community of Central African
States promote among their members the proper
implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. They should also put in place
concrete measures to monitor borders or weapons-

17

S/PV.6288

crossing points and to investigate suspected embargo
violations in States under sanctions.
The year 2010 offers an opportunity to make
qualitative and quantitative progress in preventing and
combating the illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons. All of us — countries, organizations and civil
society — will have a chance to join efforts and take
part in important multilateral events, including the
Biennial Meeting on Small Arms and Light Weapons,
which has already been mentioned, as well as the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly on transnational
organized crime. We cannot waste those opportunities.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to express my deep appreciation to
the Gabonese presidency for convening this debate. I
would also like to welcome Deputy Secretary-General
Asha-Rose Migiro, Mr. Antonio Maria Costa,
Mr. Sergio de Queiroz Duarte and His Excellency
Mr. Louis Sylvain-Goma.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made later on by the representative of the
European Union.
Bosnia and Herzegovina believes that the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons poses a
real and tangible threat to the security and
humanitarian situation and the social and economic
development of the Central African region. We are also
deeply concerned about the impact that the illicit trade
in small arms has on human rights, as small arms are
being used by armed groups against civilian
populations, in particular in terrible practices of child
recruitment and gender-based violence. Furthermore,
the illicit trade in small arms also represents one of the
major obstacles to United Nations international troops
who are seeking to establish or maintain peace and
security. It can seriously undermine peacebuilding
efforts, poverty reduction strategies and human
security frameworks.
We therefore believe that particular attention by
the Security Council is essential in order to end those
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law and to provide an environment
conducive to the effective implementation of the
relevant
United
Nations
peacekeeping
and
peacebuilding mandates.
Bosnia and Herzegovina underlines the
importance of the full implementation by the States of

18

the region of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which was
adopted on 20 July 2001 by the United Nations
Conference. Furthermore, we believe that the adoption
of the Code of Conduct for the Defence and Security
Forces in Central Africa will be another practical step
in confidence-building in the region. We therefore
encourage Member States to act in that direction.
We would also like to call on Member States to
make further efforts to elaborate a binding legal
instrument and to develop modalities for its
implementation, in order to ensure the monitoring of
small arms and light weapons in the subregion.
Improving national transparency and oversight
over light weapons through further harmonization and
tightening of national legal frameworks regulating
small arms and light weapons, including domestic laws
on gun purchasing and ownership, require
Governments to increase cooperation and informationsharing.
Adequate customs policies and strengthening
national border controls to reduce illegal activities and
to combat cross-border trafficking in small arms and
light weapons is another area where regional
cooperation is needed. The recent finalization and
installation, in the United Nations Regional Centre for
Peace and Disarmament in Africa, of software for
regulating small arms and light weapons brokering in
Central Africa is a good example of a concrete
contribution to advancing regional networking and the
monitoring of small arms flows.
Bosnia and Herzegovina would also like to stress
the importance of cooperation among Governments of
the Central African region aimed at the establishment
of a register within the Economic Community of
Central African States. Such a regional inventory could
also supplement global efforts to expand the United
Nations Register on Conventional Arms to include all
light weapons and small arms transfers.
In that context, we would like to stress the
importance of providing the necessary financial and
technical assistance for the implementation of all
activities related to the issue of fighting illicit arms
trafficking in the Central African region. Creating a
favourable security climate is one of the crucial
prerequisites for the countries of the region to achieve
the Millennium Development Goals and ensure

10-27987

S/PV.6288

stability, self-sustainability and social and economic
development.
The preliminary draft of the legal instrument
presented at the twenty-ninth Ministerial Meeting of
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa, held in
N’djamena, is a significant step. Once adopted, that
legal instrument for the control of small arms and light
weapons, ammunition and any equipment that could be
used in their manufacture in Central Africa will address
the crucial issues to which I have referred and provide
a proper regional framework for tracking and securing
the trade in small arms and light weapons in the region.
We very much hope that upcoming Ministerial
Meeting of the Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa, to be held in
Kinshasa from 26 to 30 April, will result in concrete
actions aimed at strengthening cooperation at the
regional and international levels, thereby contributing
to arms control and disarmament in Central Africa and
to the achievement of lasting peace and stability in that
region.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank the delegation of Gabon for its initiative
to convene this open debate on the impact of illicit
arms trafficking on peace and security in the Central
African region. I would also like to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Migiro for her statement, as well as
Mr. Costa, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, and Mr. Sylvain-Goma,
Secretary General of the Economic Community of
Central African States, for their briefings.
As indicated in the concept paper prepared by the
Mission of Gabon for this debate (S/2010/143, annex),
the proliferation of and illicit trafficking in small arms
and light weapons is a destabilizing element that
affects the security and humanitarian situation and the
economic and social development of the Central
African region. We are pleased to note that, keenly
aware of the adverse impact of illicit arms trafficking
on regional stability, peace and development, countries
of the Central African region are taking active steps to
respond to that scourge and have achieved some
results.
However, the negative impact of illicit arms
trafficking continues to be pronounced in the region. It
cannot be neglected in any way. In that connection, I
would like to emphasize three points.

10-27987

First, we support Central African States in
continuing their active efforts to combat illicit
trafficking in arms. On the basis of the United Nations
Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light
Weapons and in line with its particular situation, each
State may wish to draw up a complete set of rules and
regulations on the production, possession, transfer and
stockpile of small arms and ensure their effective
enforcement. Countries of the region should also
strengthen coordination and cooperation to effectively
monitor the trade in small arms and light weapons and
to combat illicit transactions. Regional and subregional
organizations should play a greater role in coordination
regional cooperation in that regard.
Secondly, we call for greater attention by the
international community to the illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons in the Central African
region. Support for Central African countries in
effectively combating the illicit traffic in small arms
and light weapons will have a beneficial effect on
reducing conflict in that region. Of course, in the long
run the fundamental way to eliminate conflict is to help
Central African countries develop economically,
eradicate poverty and achieve sustainable development
so as to root out the breeding ground for illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons.
Thirdly, China believes that the Security Council
should actively and steadily continue its work in this
regard. In recent years, the Security Council has held
many open debates and adopted presidential statements
on the question of small arms and light weapons. In its
consideration of questions on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict; women, peace and security;
and children and armed conflict, the Council has also
stressed the importance of small arms and light
weapons. In our view, the Council should coordinate its
work in this field with that of other relevant bodies.
The Council must also continue to strengthen its
cooperation
with
regional
and
subregional
organizations, such as the African Union and the
Economic Community of Central African States, in
advancing peace processes in Central Africa with a
view to creating an environment conducive to
combating the illicit traffic in small arms and light
weapons.
China has always been opposed to the illicit
manufacture of and traffic in small arms and light
weapons. We sympathize with the people of Central

19

S/PV.6288

Africa, who have suffered immensely as a result of the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. We are
willing to work together with the international
community towards an early and appropriate solution
of this problem. We also wish to thank the Gabonese
delegation for having drafted the concept paper
(S/2010/143) and support the adoption by the Council
of the draft presidential statement on the impact of
illicit arms trafficking on peace and security in the
Central African region.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I congratulate Gabon on
organizing this open debate. We also thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for her remarks and her presence
among us today. We appreciate the contributions made
by Mr. Antonio Maria Costa and by Mr. Louis SylvainGoma.
The issue before the Council today is timely and
appropriate. The consequences of arms trafficking and
its threats to peace and security are troubling, as
highlighted in the concept paper (S/2010/143) prepared
for this debate. The international community should
spare no effort in tackling such a challenge. As
mentioned by Mr. Costa, the instruments to curtail the
illicit arms trade are available. What is needed is their
universalization and effective implementation.
Several important initiatives to address this
problem have recently been adopted in different parts
of Africa, including by national Governments, and in
particular in Central Africa. In that region, the illegal
trade of arms is a source of particular concern, given
that some conflicts are still under way and given the
severe impact on civilians, especially children and
women.
However, the problem of arms trafficking is not
exclusive to Central Africa. It concerns all of us. The
review next June of the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects will provide an excellent opportunity to
engage all Member States in strengthening this key
United Nations programme.
Brazil has strongly supported the Register of
Conventional Arms since its creation by resolution
46/36 L of 1991, and has regularly provided
information on the Register’s seven categories.
Brazil also supports a legally binding instrument
that would allow States to identify and trace illicit

20

small arms and light weapons in a timely and reliable
manner. We have already incorporated the
recommendations of the International Tracing
Instrument, adopted in the context of the United
Nations Programme of Action, into our national
legislation. We believe that the United Nations
Programme of Action should be expanded to also cover
ammunition and explosives.
An arms trade treaty would also go a long way
towards regulating the trade and curbing the illicit
traffic in arms. We are actively involved in the
negotiations and urge all countries to fully engage in
the preparations for the 2012 United Nations
Conference on an Arms Trade Treaty. In our view, the
arms trade treaty must include objective and
non-discriminatory normative criteria, which should be
taken into account when authorizing arms exports.
These criteria should be based on a balance of
responsibility among exporting, importing and transit
countries. It should also provide an explicit prohibition
on shipments of arms without the authorization of the
competent organs of the Government of the country of
transit or destination.
In addition to the multilateral response to the
problem of arms trafficking, regions affected should
also strive to create stronger regulatory frameworks.
We are pleased with the initiative of the Central
African region to negotiate a legally binding
instrument to monitor the trade of small arms and light
weapons. The Economic Community of Central
African States can provide important support to this
initiative and mobilize in so doing the experience of
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and the Southern African Development
Community. Such an initiative is a step in the right
direction that should also be supported by the
international community as a whole.
The fight against the scourge of illicit trafficking
of arms will also require addressing the demand side of
the problem in all its dimensions, changing the culture
of violence, improving the humanitarian situation and
promoting democracy and development in the
continent are the surest way to successful and
sustainable results.
Finally, let me express my delegation’s support
for the draft presidential statement to be adopted by the
Council.

10-27987

S/PV.6288

Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Deputy Secretary-General Migiro;
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; Mr. Sergio
de Queiroz Duarte, High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs; and Mr. Louis Sylvain-Goma for
their substantive briefings.

the draft legally binding instrument on the control of
small arms and light weapons in Central Africa, their
ammunitions and all equipments that might be used in
their manufacture. We believe that the adoption of that
instrument would enable the countries of the subregion
to further strengthen their efforts to combat the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons.

The Russian Federation has consistently
supported enhancing the role of the United Nations in
coordinating the efforts of the international community
to address the problems of the illicit traffic in arms, in
particular small arms and light weapons. Today’s
meeting highlights the Security Council’s interest in
supporting the efforts of Member States to develop
overall approaches to combating the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons throughout the world. Of
course, priority in this context should be given to those
regions where the problem of illicit arms trafficking is
particular acute.

Efforts to address the issue of attempts to
illegally supply of small arms and light weapons to
conflict zones, in particular in Africa, and to eradicate
the threat that such supplies pose to the stability of
post-conflict countries are seriously hindered by the
absence of a unified approach by the international
community to counteract the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons. We believe that all efforts to
address that scourge should be based on the relevant
United Nations Programme of Action. We are
convinced that it continues to be effective, and we
should realize its full potential.

My delegation thanks the Gabonese delegation
for organizing today’s debate, since the illicit arms
trade is a major destabilizing factor for Central Africa.
First of all, this concerns those countries in the
subregion where there are ongoing threats to peace and
stability. That situation appears to be further
deteriorating because of the actions of armed groups
using well-oiled channels for obtaining small arms and
light weapons. This was mentioned in the briefings of
our colleagues.

In that context, we look forward to the successful
holding of the Fourth Biennial Meeting of States to
Consider the Implementation of the Programme of
Action in June. We also consider it important for all
States, in particular those of Central Africa, to
implement the International Instrument to Enable
States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable
Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons.

Russia has always supported robust measures in
any circumstance in which weapons are supplied to
illegal armed groups. The Security Council’s arms
embargos are, of course, a major tool in eradicating
illegal supplies of weapons to conflict zones. To ensure
the full effectiveness of such prohibitions, they must be
steadfastly respected by all States. We express our
support for individual and collective measures by
countries of the region to combat the illicit trafficking
in small arms and light weapons.
The Russian Federation has always stressed the
importance of mobilizing activities in this area, not
only at the international level, but also nationally and
regionally.
In that regard, we welcome the implementation of
the Sao Tome Initiative by the Central African States
and the consideration, in the context of the ministerial
meeting of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa of

10-27987

The Russian delegation appeals to the countries
of Central Africa region to continue to pay close
attention to the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. Clearly, if that problem is not resolved, it
will be impossible to achieve the full settlement of
ongoing conflicts or to guarantee security, stability and
sustainable development.
In conclusion, I would like to say that the Russian
Federation supports the draft presidential statement on
this issue, prepared by the delegation of Gabon.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me join others
in thanking you, Mr. President, and the Gabonese
presidency of the Council for organizing this very
important debate on a key topic that has particular
relevance for the region of Central Africa. We are
grateful for the interest shown in this matter by the
Deputy Secretary-General. We appreciate the presence
of the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs.
We listened with great interest to what the Secretary
General of the Economic Community of Central
African States had to say.

21

S/PV.6288

However, let me also say a special word of thanks
to Executive Director Costa. Since we joined the
Council a year ago, we have had many occasions to
listen to his presentations. For obvious reasons, we
know his work well and I must say that what he told us
today was once again a model of precision, clarity and
frankness.

also decided to support it financially, from an Austrian
point of view. We look forward to the adoption of the
legally binding instrument.

We align ourselves fully with the statement to be
made by the representative of the European Union, but
let me also add the following points.

Furthermore, we support other important regional
initiatives by African States aimed at fighting illicit
arms brokering, such as the establishment of a register
of arms dealers. We welcome the draft presidential
statement to be adopted today and the fact that it
acknowledges those two important Central African
initiatives.

Small arms and light weapons are commonly
termed the real weapons of mass destruction, as they
are responsible for an exceedingly high toll of human
lives on a regular basis. According to the statistics that
we have seen, they cause the deaths of more than
500,000 people annually — approximately 1,400
people per day. The vast majority of the victims are
civilians.

In that context, let me comment on the invaluable
support provided by the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs, in particular the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa,
in promoting and implementing those and other
initiatives. The efforts of the Regional Centre aimed at
preventing the illicit proliferation of small arms and
light weapons deserve our full support.

As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon stated on an
earlier occasion, small arms facilitate a vast spectrum
of human rights violations, such as rape and other
forms of sexual violence, torture and the forced
recruitment of children by armed groups or forces. In
resolution 1894 (2009) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, the Council noted that the excessive
accumulation and destabilizing effect of small arms
and light weapons pose a considerable impediment to
the provision of humanitarian assistance and have the
potential to exacerbate and prolong conflicts, endanger
civilians, and undermine security and the confidence
required for a return to peace and stability.

The illicit flow of such weapons is a problem that
goes beyond Central Africa and affects the whole
continent. In 2007, my country co-organized an
international conference in Ouagadougou, Burkina
Faso, on peace and security in West Africa. The
outcome document of the conference also envisioned
the possibility of a pan-African convention on the
control of small arms and light weapons — a vision
that we continue to support wholeheartedly.

Today’s draft presidential statement also
underlines the fact that the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons fuels armed conflict and thereby has
various harmful effects on the civilian population,
including gender-based violence and the recruitment of
child soldiers. As others have already said today, it is
very clear that such challenges require a firm response
at the national, regional and global levels.
For that very reason, we see the importance of the
initiative of the Economic Community of Central
African States to draw up a legally binding instrument
on the control of small arms and light weapons, their
ammunitions and all equipments that might be used in
their manufacture. Mr. Sylvain-Goma gave us a
detailed presentation on the various activities of the
Community, but we very much believe that this core
initiative deserves support. For that reason, we have

22

We are pleased that the European Union Africa
Strategy comprises a segment on small arms and light
weapons and that the first pan-African project in the
fight against those weapons has recently been
launched, with the support of the African Union. It is
clear that such challenges as the fight against the illicit
trafficking of those weapons require a firm
internationally coordinated response. We need the
cooperation of States and international and
non-governmental organizations, which is also
acknowledged in the draft presidential statement.
At the global level, Austria strongly supports the
ongoing process towards an arms trade treaty, a legally
binding international agreement establishing a set of
basic rules to regulate the international transfer of
conventional arms, including small arms and light
weapons. Pending the adoption of such a global legal
instrument, the United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects

10-27987

S/PV.6288

remains the only global forum and global instrument to
prevent the illicit trade in such weapons.
Convinced of the need for African States to be
actively involved and to participate in the upcoming
Fourth Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action, which, as others have already mentioned, will
take place in New York in June under the chairmanship
of Mexico, we have teamed up with the United Nations
Development Programme to provide support for
African delegations to participate in that Meeting.
The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
is closely interrelated with transnational organized
crimes, such as the illicit trafficking of drugs or the
illicit exploration of natural resources. This debate,
therefore, is in line with the Council’s efforts to tackle
transnational threats to peace and security in a
comprehensive manner. In that regard, we welcome the
Council’s call on Member States to accede to the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its protocols, and we commend
the assistance of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime in implementing those legal instruments.
In conclusion, Austria remains committed to
assisting African States, in particular those of Central
Africa, in building the capacities to counter and,
eventually, to prevent the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons and the respective ammunition. We call
on all Member States to support their efforts in that
regard.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank you, Mr. President, for initiating today’s debate.
This is an issue of serious concern to the United
Kingdom. Like others, I should like to thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for her introduction today
and Mr. Costa and Mr. Sylvain-Goma for their
contributions, and also to welcome the attendance of
High Representative Duarte at today’s debate.
The draft presidential statement before us
addresses three key issues: action by the Central
African subregion, the arms trade itself, and action by
the international community in response. I should like
to address these three issues.
First, I shall address subregional action. The
United Kingdom believes that information-sharing and
transparency help to tackle this illicit trade.
Transparent systems are less vulnerable to

10-27987

manipulation by groups that view rigorous export
controls as an obstacle to their self-serving goals.
Closing gaps and addressing weaknesses in licensing
procedures, end-use monitoring practices and other
controls are essential measures for preventing
diversion. It is easier to spot and correct diversions in
transparent systems than in systems that are more
opaque.
The establishment of a subregional register of
small arms by the Central African States should be an
effective step in our overall efforts to combat this illicit
trade and should promote regional confidence-building,
stability and security.
Secondly, with regard to the arms trade more
generally, we acknowledge the right of States to legally
trade in conventional arms for self-defence. However,
we must ensure that robust transparency and control
measures are in place to avoid arms being diverted to
those who could use them to commit human rights
violations and undermine peace and security.
To this end, the United Kingdom has played a
leading role in developing a legally binding arms trade
treaty that would set standards for the arms trade,
ensuring respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law while respecting a State’s inherent
right to self-defence.
Furthermore, arms embargoes imposed by this
Council in the Central African region require the active
cooperation of the Central African countries
themselves to ensure their effective implementation. If
those embargoes are to be effective in their purpose
and deliver the improvements to the political and
security environments that they have been introduced
to achieve, any possible violations must be promptly
reported.
Thirdly, the United Nations has a role. United
Nations missions in the subregion are involved in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration work.
Good practice in this area includes measures to prevent
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons and
to manage effectively the legitimate stockpiles of
weapons held by States.
The United Kingdom Government is playing its
part. We are providing funding to non-governmental
organizations that are developing initiatives and
mechanisms for enhancing controls and regulations on
small arms and light weapons and arms transfers,

23

S/PV.6288

reducing conflict and promoting more effective and
accountable security provision. We are also supporting
non-governmental
organizations
that
provide
independent policy research and analysis on small arms
and armed violence issues, for example in Burundi.
Through our support to the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) Crisis Prevention
and Recovery Thematic Trust Fund, the United
Kingdom has assisted efforts to control and curtail the
supply of arms to conflict zones and fragile settings
through civilian arms collection, surplus destruction
and stockpile management, as well as enhancements to
transfer and export controls. We have also supported
UNDP’s armed violence reduction work, which aims to
inhibit the demand for arms and target the root causes
of armed violence and community insecurity, for
example by supporting armed violence prevention and
community security programmes.
Every day, people are affected by the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons and their
ammunitions. In the hands of criminal gangs or armed
groups, as the Austrian Ambassador has just said,
hundreds of thousands of people worldwide are injured
and killed by them every year. Such violence destroys
livelihoods, displaces entire communities and hampers
social and economic development. The impact on
peace, reconstruction, stability, security, human rights
and sustainable development has been especially
damaging in Central Africa. The draft presidential
statement before us points the way for addressing this
scourge and we strongly support the measures it
contains.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Gabon.
At the outset, I should like to express my
gratitude to the Deputy Secretary-General, who wished
to participate in this debate, and to thank her for her
important statement, which recalled the ongoing efforts
of the United Nations to better organize the fight
against illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons.
I also welcome the presence of Mr. Louis
Sylvain-Goma, Secretary General of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), and
thank him for his rich contribution to this debate, in
which, as members will have noted, he underscored the
scale of this problem in Central Africa, the

24

susceptibility of the subregion owing to its numerous
areas of lawlessness, as well as the cooperation
initiatives being carried out by ECCAS member States
with a view to better combating trafficking.
We further welcome the participation in this
debate of representatives of other regional
organizations, in particular the African Union and the
European Union. Finally, I should like to thank various
speakers for the kind words they expressed to the
Gabonese delegation, and above all for their positive
assessment of the topic and timeliness of this debate.
It is evident from all the statements we have
heard that, from a broad perspective, the issue of illicit
arms trafficking is new neither for the Security
Council, nor for the United Nations in general. It will
be recalled that the Council first considered this matter
at a ministerial meeting held on 24 September 1999 at
which
it
issued
a
presidential
statement
(S/PRST/1999/28). In 2001, the Council once again
considered this topic to assess its role in the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects of July 2001. That meeting
also led to a presidential statement (S/PRST/2001/21).
The representative of China correctly referred in his
remarks to other meetings of the Council on this topic
and others related to it. Since 2002, the SecretaryGeneral has published no less then five reports on this
matter. All these efforts of the Council and the
Secretary-General were able to identify the measures to
be taken at the international level to tackle the
challenge of illicit arms trafficking.
In taking the initiative to organize this debate
during our presidency, Gabon seeks to further engage
the Security Council to take account of changes
relating to illicit arms trafficking in the subregion and
to consider innovative measures aimed at better
combating and eliminating this scourge. Our hope is to
see this debate trigger consideration in greater depth of
ways to strengthen the implementation of the measures
contained in the July 2001 Programme of Action and
the International Instrument to Enable States to
Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner,
Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons, as well as the
various relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
As several speakers have stressed, the
proliferation of weapons, in particular small arms and
light weapons, has become one of the main concerns of

10-27987

S/PV.6288

the international community because of the multiple
negative consequences arising from this phenomenon.
Indeed, the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
is a factor that destabilizes States in terms of security,
humanitarian considerations and development. These
weapons are also used as means for violating human
rights, including in times of peace.

submitting to the Council today for adoption, reflects
our commitment to combating the illicit arms traffic.

Because of the various crises and conflicts
throughout the world exacerbated by the illicit flow of
small arms and light weapons, the United Nations
organized, in New York in July 2001, the first
Conference devoted to this question, which led to the
adoption of the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.

Mr. António (spoke in French): I would like to
begin by commending the Gabonese presidency of the
Security Council and to express, Sir, through you, our
deep gratitude to the Republic of Gabon for its
initiative to organize a debate on a subject of the
utmost importance for the African continent. This
initiative is part and parcel of the valuable service that
your country has always rendered to Africa whenever
our continent has been threatened or the peace of an
African country jeopardized. The most recent visit to
New York of President Ali Bongo Ondimba, who
defended the highest causes of our continent and of
peace in the world, only supports my words.

The Secretary General of the Economic
Community of Central African States, Mr. Louis
Silvain-Goma, has rightly pointed out that Central
Africa, which is one of the regions most affected by
this phenomenon, has adopted measures to implement
that programme. The countries of Central Africa also
decided in May 2007 in Sao Tome and Principe to
establish a legally binding instrument to control small
arms and light weapons, their ammunitions and all
equipments that might be used in their manufacture.
The next ministerial meeting of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa, which will take place in
April in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
will be devoted to consideration of that draft. With
other countries of the subregion, Gabon is committed
to enhancing national and subregional measures to
combat the illicit traffic in small arms and light
weapons and to strengthening confidence-building
measures adopted within the context of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Question in Central Africa. Similarly, we are
determined to enhance the transparency in weapons,
including through the establishment of a subregional
register of national stockpiles of small arms and light
weapons.
Globally, Gabon is in favour of the drafting and
adoption of an arms trade treaty establishing common
standards in this area. Such a treaty would enhance
existing international instruments against the illicit
arms traffic. The draft presidential statement that has
been negotiated, and which my delegation is

10-27987

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I call on Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer
of the African Union.

I would like to thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for her briefing this morning, Mr. Costa for his
presence, and Mr. Duarte, who plays an extremely
important role in disarmament in Central Africa.
We all agree on the paradox that the African
continent produces few weapons but is beset by the
scourge of the illicit arms traffic, the consequences of
which range from massive violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law due to violence to
the phenomenon of child soldiers and the traffic in
small arms and light weapons, as well as to an almost
endless list of such phenomena as terrorist networks
and piracy in certain areas of the continent. Today, we
heard from the Secretary General of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) of a
new phenomenon — the role played by fundamentalist
religious circles in the illicit traffic in small arms and
light weapons in Central Africa.
Aware of all these threats, African countries have
taken national, subregional and continental measures.
What has the African Union done? As certain previous
speakers have emphasized, the first African Union
conference on this issue — the Ministerial Conference
on the Illicit Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking
of Small Arms and Light Weapons in Africa, held in
Bamako, Mali, in 2000 — adopted the African
Common Position on small arms and light weapons.
The Ministerial Conference recognized that the

25

S/PV.6288

proliferation of small arms and light weapons
undermines
good
governance
and
economic
development in Africa.
The Bamako Conference recommended that
certain measures be taken, inter alia, the development
and implementation of national programmes for
responsible management of light weapons, the
voluntary surrender of small arms and light weapons,
the reintegration of demobilized people, the
harmonization of legislation and the reinforcement of
subregional cooperation. The Conference also launched
an appeal for an international partnership to combat the
proliferation and illegal traffic in small arms and light
weapons. We are delighted that certain delegations,
such as that of Austria, have emphasized the
cooperation that the African Union has developed with
many partners, including the European Union and the
United Nations.
On the basis of the outcome of the Bamako
Conference, the African Union has adopted other
measures to curb illicit trafficking in small arms and
light weapons. At the seventy-fourth session of the
Executive Board, held in Lusaka in 2001 in advance of
the adoption of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, measures were
taken enabling Africa’s active participation in the
United Nation Conference held in 2001, at which the
continent defended a long-term international
partnership. Furthermore, in Windhoek, Namibia, the
African Union adopted the Common African Position
for the United Nations Conference of 2005. The
Windhoek conference requested the African Union
Commission to develop a binding legal instrument to
prevent, combat and eradicate illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons. In 2006, the Executive
Council of the African Union adopted a global political
framework on post-conflict reconstruction and
development, identifying mines and light weapons as
challenges to post-conflict reconstruction peacebuilding. The African Union continues its endeavours
to meet its obligations in developing peacebuilding, to
which the Secretary General of ECCAS referred today.
It is clear that the adoption of good strategies and
action plans are not the main point. The main point is
their implementation. As far as Central Africa is
concerned, as we heard the Secretary General of
ECCAS say today, the region has adopted mechanisms
that should be supported, such as the Council for Peace

26

and Security in Central Africa. The capacities of
ECCAS itself should be strengthened, as should the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
All these strategies must continue to be developed. It is
also important for the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security in Central Africa to
enjoy the means necessary to continue to play an active
role in tune with the needs of the region. We welcome
the opening of a United Nations bureau in Central
Africa, trusting that its mission will essentially to
buttress subregional capacities.
To conclude, we believe that the issue of the
illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons must be
holistically analyzed in Central Africa. We think of the
illicit exploitation of natural resources. For several
years in that region, we have seen the illegal
exploitation of natural resources. It is therefore high
time that the phenomenon of the illicit exploitation of
natural resources be fought with the same vigour with
which we combat the illicit circulation of small arms
and light weapons.
The African Union will spare no effort to
implement all measures to make peace a daily reality
for all the sons and daughters of Africa, a dream that is
shared by countless men and women around the world
and that we must hand down to future generations. We
believe that the presidential statement to be adopted
today will contribute to that goal.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Antonio for his statement. I now give the floor to
the representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): My delegation joins
other delegations in congratulating you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March 2010. Botswana
attaches great importance to combating the illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons, and in this
connection we welcome your initiative, Sir, to hold this
open debate on the impact of illicit arms trafficking on
peace and security in the Central African region. Let
me also commend you for inviting representatives of
regional organizations, all of whom, we believe, are
crucial stakeholders in the subject matter of today’s
debate.
The illicit trade and trafficking in small arms and
light weapons is a major threat to peace and security in
Africa. The impact of illicit arms trafficking on peace
and security in the Central African region is

10-27987

S/PV.6288

particularly severe. Besides peace and security, other
specific issues that arise from the problem of illicit
arms trafficking are cross-border crimes, armed
violence, and harassment of travellers, tourists and
investors, both local and foreign.
My delegation aligns itself with the draft
presidential statement on this subject, and we fully
support
its
adoption
later
today
and
its
recommendations. We also associate ourselves with the
statement just delivered by the Permanent Observer of
the African Union on this subject.
We agree that peace, safety and stability are
essential preconditions for the achievement of
sustainable development. This means that addressing
the illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons,
which fuels armed violence and instability, will go a
long way in promoting an environment conducive to
development.
Clearly, the presence of arms that are
unaccounted for not only contributes to heightened
crime levels, but also provides an opportunity to
undermine efforts to expand infrastructure and to
deliver services throughout the length and breadth of
national territory. It is therefore important that the
international community step up efforts to prevent,
combat and eradicate the illicit trafficking of small
arms and light weapons, a challenge that has the
potential to undermine a country’s development
prospects and the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals by the target date of 2015.
Furthermore, arms that are unaccounted for impede the
process of regional and Africa-wide economic
integration and the people-to-people interaction that we
all aspire to in that part of the world.
Botswana views the curbing of arms trafficking
as a practical step towards attaining international peace
and security, including in the Central African region.
Such efforts deserve the full support of the
international community, including through extending
financial and other resources to countries in the region
and strengthening the capacity of the subregional
economic body, the Economic Community of Central
African States, in the coordination of agreed measures.
Efforts by the subregion to implement
confidence-building
measures
and
establish
mechanisms for the promotion of peace and security
deserve the support of the international community.
Botswana notes with appreciation the important role of

10-27987

the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa with regard to
supporting the measure that I have just mentioned. We
also welcome the proposed legally binding instrument
on monitoring small arms and light weapons,
ammunition and manufacturing equipment, which will
be on the agenda of the thirtieth ministerial meeting of
the Standing Advisory Committee, which is to be held
in Kinshasa from 26 to 30 April 2010. Botswana urges
the international community to lend its full support to
this process and to also support the implementation of
such a legal instrument once it is in place.
Botswana is committed to the full implementation
of measures mandated by regional and international
legal instruments, in particular the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, the Bamako Declaration on an African
Common Position on the Illicit Proliferation,
Circulation and Trafficking of Small Arms and Light
Weapons, and — in my subregion — the Protocol on
the Control of Firearms, Ammunition and Other
Related Materials in the Southern African
Development Community Region.
We are pleased, Sir, that you have convened this
open debate at a time when we are preparing for the
fourth Biennial Meeting of States on Small Arms, to be
held from 14 to 18 June 2010. This debate should serve
to enrich our understanding of the issues in Central
Africa in particular, which is one of the hardest-hit
regions as far as the problem of small arms and light
weapons trafficking is concerned, so that we will be
better prepared to make meaningful contributions to
the deliberations of that Meeting.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
Botswana’s commitment to the realization of peace and
security in Africa as a prerequisite to development,
dignified human existence, effective governance and
the pursuit of prosperity. We cannot overemphasize the
need for cooperation at the regional, bilateral and
international levels in order to facilitate the successful
implementation of our commitments under the various
agreements. Botswana also supports the use of
innovative measures and initiatives to deal with
specific aspects of arms trafficking and the mitigation
of its impact.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chad.

27

S/PV.6288

Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
first of all like to greet all the eminent speakers who
made statements before me. I would also like to
congratulate my brother from Central Africa,
Ambassador Emanuel Issoze-Ngondet of the Gabonese
Republic. He has not only shown competence and
efficiency in presiding over the Council and thus
brought honour to the States of the subregion, but also
demonstrated his concern for the fate of our entire
subregion by including on the Council’s programme of
work the serious issue of the impact of arms trafficking
on peace and security in Central Africa. I would also
like to thank, of course, Council members for having
agreed to this proposal.
Illicit arms trafficking in our Central African
subregion poses a permanent threat to the consolidation
of the rule of law, democracy and economic and social
development. Our capacity to ensure good governance,
which is imperative, and a secure environment
conducive to lasting economic and social development
has been sorely tried by the illicit circulation in the
subregion of arms of all calibre. This enriches
traffickers who are frequently invisible and users of all
sorts, from petty criminals to adventurers posing as
revolutionaries and defenders of human rights to seize
power, as well as road blockers and other highway
bandits.
Obviously, peaceful citizens — men, women and
children — are their primary victims. Our States,
fragile and with limited human and other resources,
find it difficult to combat these outlaws and to maintain
order and security in order to meet our peoples’
legitimate aspirations to more peace and security. The
first thing that the international community must do is
to help us by bolstering our material and human
resources to combat illicit arms trafficking and its
impact on peace and security in our subregion. We
need help in revising and harmonizing our national
legislation to international provisions, in establishing
an arms database and checklist, and in national
capacity-building to manage stockpiles and combat
cross-border crime.
Chad welcomes the quality of the work that has
been done in promoting peace and implementing our
security policies under the auspices of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa, the twenty-ninth
ministerial meeting of which was held in N’djamena. I
wish to emphasize that we have placed on the agenda

28

of our forthcoming meeting in Kinshasa consideration
of preliminary drafts of a legal instrument for the
monitoring in Central Africa of small arms and light
weapons, ammunition and any material used in their
manufacture, and of an implementation plan for that
instrument.
I would also emphasize that, in the context of
subregional cooperation, in particular within the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), we have established instruments for crisis
prevention and management to that have proved to be
very effective in helping us to implement our peace
and security policies. The statement of the Secretary
General on that issue was very edifying.
The security situation in the region is well
known. Successive civil wars, having undermined our
young States and our security services responsible for
enforcing regulations on the monitoring and movement
of arms, have fuelled crime and the activities of arms
traffickers in our subregion. Porous borders are
difficult to monitor and allow illicit arms traffickers
and users to move easily from one country to another.
The lack of security arising from that situation is a
major challenge that each of our States must meet, but
one that we can also fight together with joint patrols
involving two or several countries that share the same
border. Such an effort must be complemented by
relevant intelligence allowing us to identify and punish
traffickers.
When States are responsible for illicit trafficking,
firm and effective international sanctions are
imperative. Moreover, if we are to obtain their
cooperation, which is also necessary to that effort, our
people must be made aware of the gravity of the
situation so that we can collect illegally held arms.
With respect to Chad, the circulation of light
weapons can be explained with reference to the
repeated wars and disturbances that have shaken our
country since its independence. Armed groups,
supported from outside the country, have introduced
weapons into the various regions and provided them to
road blockers, poachers and other traffickers in the
Sahel and the Sudanese border. In addressing this
situation, and despite the vast area involved, the
Government has carried out regular operations to
recover those weapons, which are a source of
insecurity and violence. In December 2008, we set up a

10-27987

S/PV.6288

national disarmament commission that has recovered
more than 10,000 weapons of various calibres.
We look to the future with optimism as political
life of our country has considerably improved. We have
normalized our relations with the Sudan, opening the
way to improved bilateral cooperation to enhance
security on our common borders. We also rely on the
support of the international community in carrying out
our disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme so that ex-combatants from armed groups,
particularly child soldiers, may legally enter public and
private life. In that regard, we wish especially to thank
the international community for having decided, at a
time when we particularly needed it, to deploy the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad to make the eastern region of our
country more secure, as far as possible, in particular by
strengthening our capacities through the deployment of
the Détachement intégré de sécurité. We trust that we
shall be able to go it alone in the future, but we rely on
other sources of support from the international
community to complement our human and other
resources.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset, on behalf of the Kingdom of
Morocco, to congratulate you warmly, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
You represent Gabon, a friendly and brotherly country
with which Morocco has historic warm, deep-rooted
and special relations at all levels. I also take this
opportunity to congratulate you on your decision to
have the Council debate the important subject of the
impact of small arms and light weapons on security
and stability in Central Africa, a region close to our
hearts.
I also thank Ms. Megiro, Mr. Costa, Mr. Duarte
and Mr. Sylvain-Goma for their important
contributions.
The control of illicit arms trafficking is essential
to maintaining international peace and security. The
international community must therefore strive to
reinforce the existing international regime on
combating the proliferation and illicit trafficking of
small arms. This legal framework but must be
complemented by comprehensive and binding
international instruments. In that context, my country

10-27987

believes that all regional and subregional policies to
address this problem would benefit from having a
robust international legal system to tackle the illegal
trade in these destructive weapons and to mark them in
order to ensure that the can be rapidly traced.
Of course, the establishment of such a legal
regime took a major step forward in 2001 with the
adoption of the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, and
in 2005 with the adoption of the International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a
Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons. The regime should now be enlarged
and consolidated to encompass illegal brokerage and to
limit effectively and efficiently the scale of the
uncontrolled circulation of those arms and its impact
on international and regional peace and security. Until
that regime is strengthened, Morocco believes that the
implementation of those instruments makes a crucial
contribution to limiting the disastrous effects of the
illicit traffic in small arms. Those efforts at the
international level will no doubt have a positive impact
on Africa overall, and on Central Africa in particular.
In that connection, despite its failure in 2006, the
Review Conference served to emphasize the broad
prevailing consensus on the importance and relevance
of the Programme of Action, which has made it an
essential point of reference for international action to
regulate the circulation of light weapons. Moreover,
based on that result, in 2008 the Biennial Meeting of
States to Consider the Implementation of the
Programme of Action was able to adopt a regional
approach to the implementation of the Programme. The
Conference also called for the convening of regional
meetings to harmonize efforts to implement the
Programme of Action, and acknowledged the
importance of international cooperation and assistance
for the effective implementation of that instrument. In
that context, the June 2010 Biennial Meeting will be an
important international gathering to consider the best
ways to implement the Programme of Action.
The efforts of the countries of Central Africa
should be recognized and supported. In that spirit, my
country encourages the initiatives undertaken by the
countries of the Central Africa to strengthen
confidence-building measures and to develop a binding
legal instrument and modalities for the control of these
weapons at the subregional level, with the support of

29

S/PV.6288

the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.

Moreover, the development in the context of the
Economic Community of Central African States of an
instrument similar to the Bamako, Nairobi and
Economic Community of West African States
conventions, declarations and protocols — aimed at
setting up a legal and institutional framework to call
upon the member States of the Central African
subregion to harmonize their positions and pool their
efforts to combat the traffic in light weapons — could
be a useful avenue to pursue.

Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking your delegation,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate. I would also
like to express my gratitude for the statements by
Deputy Secretary-General Migiro; Mr. Costa,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime; and Mr. Sylvain-Goma, Secretary
General of the Economic Community of Central
African States. I would also like to welcome the
presence of Ambassador Duarte, High Representative
of the Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs.

To that end, of course, it is necessary to
strengthen the capacity of that subregional body to
clearly identify the specific problems and needs of
each member country. Moreover, it is necessary for the
international community to provide meaningful
support, including heightened assistance and
cooperation, to the countries of the region that request
it in order to allow them to confront the challenges
posed by the illicit traffic in light weapons.
It was altogether logical for Morocco to join,
from the outset, in the efforts of various countries that
led to the adoption, in June 2006, of the Geneva
Declaration on Armed Violence and Development. That
initiative, whose relevance has been recognized by a
growing number of countries, was perfectly in line
with the efforts of the United Nations. In that regard,
strengthening the international partnership to allow
donor
countries,
development
agencies
and
disarmament bodies to integrate the issue of armed
violence into their programmes of action would make it
possible to orient existing strategies towards an
innovative and harmonized approach that is tailored to
each situation and geared around targeted goals to
address and prevent the underlying causes of armed
conflict and to mobilize and channel the necessary
development resources.
Addressing the problem of light weapons, whose
worrying impact also touches upon the serious global
threats posed by terrorism and transnational organized
crime, is of crucial importance today and underscores
the urgent need for the international community to
provide a global response. There is no doubt that this
type of debate in the Council contributes to
strengthening the efforts of the international
community in this area. We commend Gabon for its
initiative to organize it.

30

Costa Rica welcomes your delegation’s initiative,
Mr. President, to once again put the issue of illicit arms
trafficking before the Security Council. We have
reiterated before that the proliferation and illicit traffic
in small arms has a negative impact on the security of
people, exacerbates tensions, sparks conflicts, and
often poses a genuine threat to international peace and
security. One need not refer to the great number of
injuries and deaths they produce, or to the costs
required to address them, to conclude that the
proliferation of and illicit traffic in small arms are
problems that require the urgent and careful attention
of the international community.
Costa Rica believes that the Organization has an
inescapable duty to produce instruments to limit on the
manufacture and trade in weapons. However, until it
does, the issue of illicit arms trafficking should be the
focus of the Council’s attention, in particular with
regard to specific situations such as those in Central
Africa, a region that is acutely suffering from the
damaging effects of the proliferation of small arms.
My delegation respectfully urges the members of
the Council to support the initiative of the countries of
that region to establish a legally binding instrument to
monitor small arms and light weapons and their
ammunitions at the subregional level. We also urge the
ministerial meeting of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa to draft instruments that ensure transparency in
the manufacture, trade and traffic in weapons,
contribute to the implementation of national weaponsmarking programmes, and launch a monitoring and
registration mechanism for existing weapons at the
subregional level.

10-27987

S/PV.6288

We believe it important to offer international
support for any initiative that promotes an exchange of
best practices among the countries of the region and
ensures the full implementation of appropriate national
legislation on these issues. In that connection, it is
important to recall that the countries of the region must
abide by their obligations under Council resolutions on
arms embargoes. Greater interaction with the Council’s
sanctions committees and their experts’ groups would
contribute to the implementation of embargos and
make it possible to meet the challenges posed by their
implementation.
Costa Rica believes it necessary for the countries
of the region to contribute actively to the effectiveness
of the measures adopted by the Security Council. They
should provide the required information on measures
adopted to implement arms embargoes. In that regard,
we find it especially worrisome that there is a lack of
reports on the implementation of the arms embargo
against the Democratic Republic of the Congo —
information that is required under resolutions 1857
(2008) and 1896 (2009).
We also wish to reiterate the crucial
responsibility of arms manufacturers to abide by
weapons notification and transfer requirements
imposed by the Security Council. They should also
take every possible step to ensure that such weapons do
not fall into the hands of criminals or are used for
illegal purposes.
Costa Rica urges the international community to
focus anew on the issue of the proliferation of small
arms in Central Africa, by means of resources and
equipment and programmes for capacity-building and
institutional support. We believe that the donors who
support security sector reform programmes and
training for security forces should incorporate the
effective management of stockpiles of arms and
weapons into their programmes. Again, in those
countries on which the Council has imposed an arms
embargo, good stockpile management must be required
for the transfer of arms and the provision of assistance
by security forces.
Costa Rica believes it is important to include the
subject of small arms in the mandates and reports of
political peacebuilding and peacekeeping missions.
This would give a positive signal that the Security
Council is aware of its responsibility in such a serious
matter. We also believe it necessary for the Council to

10-27987

continue buttressing disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration activities, including destruction of arms,
and reinvigorating sanctions follow-up measures
connected to arms embargoes.
I will end by repeating that Costa Rica believes
that the international community must adopt and
implement measures to combat the illicit trade in
weapons and must, essentially, strengthen substantially
the regulation of any arms trade. The bodies of the
United Nations must contribute to the achievement of
that necessary goal.
Although undeniable progress has been made
over the last decade, for example by adopting the
Action Plan to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All its
Aspects, we believe that even more progress must be
made through the adoption of legally binding
instruments. My country has therefore supported and
contributed to the consideration of a treaty on arms
trading within the framework of the General Assembly.
The absence of measures ensuring mandatory
compliance with Security Council measures has led to
norms that have not gone beyond mere repetition of
principles, and that has proved to be of very little use.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the European Union.
Mr. Serrano (spoke in French): I would first like
to thank you, Mr. President, for inviting the European
Union to this important debate. I would also like to
thank all those who have spoken, particularly the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Migiro, Executive
Director Costa and the Secretary-General of the
Economic Community of Central African States,
Mr. Sylvain-Goma. Their statements help us better
understand the scope of the problem.
The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and members
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro, and Serbia, as well as Ukraine, Armenia
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
The European Union (EU) is strongly committed
to efforts to combat the stockpiling, uncontrolled
spread and illegal trade of conventional arms. Besides
the fact that they can fuel terrorism and organized
crime, small arms and light weapons play a decisive
role both in destabilizing and weakening States and

31

S/PV.6288

their social and political structures, and in triggering
and spreading conflicts. They are a security problem
for us all, and a major obstacle to the development of
the affected countries.
That is why in 2005 the heads of State and
Government of the European Union adopted a strategy
to counter the illicit accumulation of and trafficking in
small arms and light weapons and their ammunition.
The strategy promotes a comprehensive approach and
seeks to mobilize all the instruments that the European
Union has at its disposal to tackle both supply and
demand in the small arms and light weapons trade.
Almost €500 million has been allocated to small arms
and light weapons programmes since 1992.
In order to deal with the problems created by the
illicit trade in and excessive stockpiling of small arms
and light weapons, we continue to view the United
Nations Programme of Action on Small Arms as the
most appropriate multilateral instrument. The European
Union is currently designing a programme that will
support implementation of the Programme at the
regional level by organizing regional seminars. Three
of those will cover Africa and one will deal with
Central Africa. The Union will support implementation
by the countries of the Great Lakes region of United
Nations technical guidelines for managing the
stockpiling of conventional munitions.
The European Union strategy on small arms and
light weapons has a universal scope, but it identifies
Africa as the continent most affected. The adoption of
the EU-Africa strategy, particularly the Peace and
Security Strategic Partnership — one area of which is
dedicated to small arms and light weapons — has made
possible a major strengthening of our cooperation at
both the continental and subregional levels,
complementing the efforts under way at the national
level. The first pan-African cooperation programme to
combat small arms and light weapons has just been
launched in cooperation with the African Union, the
subregions and the Police Chiefs Regional Cooperation
Offices. The aim of this project is, on the one hand, to
strengthen the regional police offices’ capacity to
conduct the fight against arms trafficking in a
coordinated way and, on the other, to raise awareness
among national authorities and civil society so that
they can intensify their efforts.
The European Union also supports the African
Union’s formulation of a small arms and light weapons

32

strategy that will include guidelines for African Union
action in this area. I would also like to recall here the
initiative the European Union is currently developing
to combat air transport of small arms and light
weapons. That project, which identifies Africa as a
priority region, seeks to develop software and good
practices to enhance checks on airlines suspected of
such trafficking.
The Central African region has not been spared,
unfortunately, by the proliferation and traffic in small
arms and light weapons. In this regard, the European
Union supports the request of United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security in Central Africa to
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) to draft a legal instrument on the control of
small arms and light weapons and to produce an action
plan and a code of conduct for security and defence
forces in Central Africa.
The European Union firmly intends to support
every commitment made in this regard. As
Mr. Sylvain-Goma said this morning, the European
Union already supports the ECCAS efforts to deal with
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons, and
we support the efforts of Central African countries to
implement, at the national level, the Brazzaville
Programme of Priority Activities, which is part of the
United Nations Programme of Action.
The European Union is convinced that only a
global approach to the problem of the proliferation of
conventional arms can have a tangible impact on
security. That is why we need to deal with the source of
the problem by regulating international trade in
conventional weapons through an arms trade treaty.
The European Union is firmly convinced that a legally
binding global instrument, in line with States’
responsibilities under international law on this subject
and establishing common international norms for the
import, export and transfer of conventional weapons,
will go a long way to combating the proliferation of
such weapons, which is neither desirable nor
responsible.
The Union is ready to work with all United
Nations Member States to negotiate the terms of this
international instrument within the framework of the
negotiation process established by the General
Assembly resolution adopted in 2009 (resolution
64/48). That process should take into account specific
regional
and
national
characteristics
without

10-27987

S/PV.6288

compromising the quality of the future treaty. In that
regard, in 2009 the European Union encouraged
discussion on a regional level through a series of
regional workshops, two of which were held in Africa.
We plan to repeat that initiative with regional debates
on the political and technical aspects of a future arms
trade treaty.
The European Union would like to take this
opportunity to reaffirm its full commitment in the fight
against traffic in conventional weapons, particularly on

the African continent. In our conviction that the
implementation of the EU-African Strategy can
contribute to this goal, the Union is committed to
pursuing its efforts to promote the implementation of a
genuine architecture of peace and security in Africa.
The President (spoke in French): There are still a
number of speakers remaining on my list. I therefore
intend, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 3.30 this
afternoon.
The meeting was suspended at 1.30 p.m.

10-27987

33
