S/PV.7332

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7332nd meeting

Wednesday, 10 December 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mangaral .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Chad)

Members:

Argentina .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Oyarzábal
Ms. King
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Li Yongsheng
Mr. Stehelin
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Gasana
Ms. Mulvein
Mr. Pressman

Agenda
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Report of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (S/2014/546)
Report of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (S/2014/556)

14-68221 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1468221*

S/PV.7332 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 10/12/2014

Letter dated 19 November 2014 from the President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/826)
Letter dated 19 November 2014 from the President of the International Tribunal
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991, addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/827)
Letter dated 19 November 2014 from the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/829)

2/33

14-68221

10/12/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7332

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Report of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (S/2014/546)
Report of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (S/2014/556)
Letter dated 19 November 2014 from the
President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed
to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/826)
Letter dated 19 November 2014 from the
President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991, addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2014/827)
Letter dated 19 November 2014 from the
President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2014/829)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Judge Theodor

Meron, President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and President of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals; Judge Vagn Joensen, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda; Mr. Serge
Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia; and Mr. Hassan
Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and Prosecutor of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to documents S/2014/546 and S/2014/556, respectively
containing the report of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda and the report of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
I wish to draw the attention of members to
documents S/2014/827 and S/2014/829, respectively
containing a letter dated 19 November 2014 from the
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and a letter dated 19 November 2014, from
the President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda addressed to the President of the Security
Council.
I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2014/826, which contains a
letter dated 19 November 2014 from the President of
the International Residual Mechanism for International
Criminal Tribunals, addressed to the President of the
security Council.
I now give the floor to Judge Meron.
Judge Meron: It is an honour to once again appear
before the Council in two capacities — as President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and as President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. I hope
that my remarks today will serve to elucidate certain
key points set forth in the recent reports submitted on
behalf of these two institutions.
However, before I turn to these points, I should
like to congratulate Ambassador Cherif of Chad on his
country’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. I also wish to express again my appreciation
for the efforts of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, and particularly to Chile for

14-682213/33

S/PV.7332 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 10/12/2014

its leadership of the Group. I continue to be extremely
grateful for the extensive support that the Office of
Legal Affairs and the Legal Counsel provide to the
ICTY and the Mechanism.
I will first turn to the ICTY. I am pleased to
report that the Tribunal continues to make progress in
completing its last trials and appeals. Indeed, we have
already delivered two appeal judgements in 2014, and
expect to deliver another — in the large, multi-accused
Popović et al. case — by the end of January 2015.
Accordingly, we enter 2015 with only four trials
and five appeal cases remaining. By the end of next
year, only two cases — specifically, one trial and one
appeal — should remain outstanding.
As our November report (S/2014/827, annex I)
makes plain, and as Council members have been aware
for several years, despite the significant progress we
have made in finishing cases the Tribunal will not be
able to complete all of its judicial work by the end of
this month. Numerous unforeseen and sometimes
challenging circumstances — including the late arrests
of the last ICTY indictees, the disqualification of a
judge, the health conditions of a number of our accused,
and the size and complexity of certain multi-accused
cases — have prevented us from meeting the Security
Council’s target date for the completion of our judicial
work by the end of 2014.
Although the majority of our remaining cases
are progressing in line with previous forecasts, our
November report also explains that certain trial and
appeal judgements will be later than forecast by the
Tribunal in May. The fact that such delays occur is
disappointing to me and my fellow judges. Importantly,
however, these recent changes to our judgement
schedule are not expected to impact the anticipated date
of the Tribunal’s closure in 2017.
I would further note, as I have before, that the
judicial process is inherently dynamic and mutable;
it is a process that takes place against a background
of great legal and logistical complexity, and may be
affected by any matter of unforeseen developments,
such as the discovery of mass graves with possible
forensic significance. In this context, forecasts for
the completion of the Tribunal’s judicial work are
inevitably subject to revision. I can assure the Council
that the Judges and staff of the Tribunal nevertheless
remain focused on doing all they can to avoid or reduce
delays. The Tribunal also remains fully committed
to transparency; when we know about changes to
4/33

forecasts for a case schedule, we always communicate
that information in our reports.
There are two specific issues to which I wish to
draw the attention of the Council. The first involves
the health condition of several of our detainees, which
has impacted two of our trials and which is a matter of
great concern to the Tribunal and to me personally. As
detailed in the November report, the trial of Mr. Goran
Hadžić has been temporarily adjourned since 20 October
for reasons relating to Mr. Hadžić’s health. In addition,
the trial of Mr. Ratko Mladić has been reduced to four
sitting-days per week, following medical advice. At
this time, the Hadžić Chamber does not believe the
adjournment will impact on the scheduled judgement
delivery date. By contrast, the changes in the sitting
schedule of the Mladić Chamber, along with the recent
decision to reopen the Prosecution case, mean that the
judgement in that trial is delayed until March 2017 or
later. Finally, Mr. Vojislav Šešelj — whose trial was
delayed by the disqualification of a judge in 2013 — has
been granted provisional release by the Trial Chamber
considering his case, a course of action the Chamber
deemed appropriate in light of developments concerning
Mr. Šešelj’s health.
Due to the age of our detainees, health-related issues
are an unavoidable concern and raise humanitarian
questions. Although the Tribunal makes every effort to
ensure appropriate medical care, developments related
to the health of detainees can sometimes fall outside
our control and, as I am sure the Council understands,
can cause delays to the Tribunal’s work.
The second matter I would like to address is
staff recruitment and retention. This issue, which
is discussed in my November report, also has the
potential to adversely affect our judgement delivery
schedule. As the members of the Council are aware,
the Tribunal is significantly reducing in size over
this budget biennium, and by the end of next year is
expected to have drastically cut its staffing levels.
This downsizing is inevitable, but also gives rise to
challenges when it comes to maintaining appropriate
staffing levels. Despite staff members’ dedication to
their cases and duties, many of them are searching for
other employment, and where offers cannot be deferred
they are leaving the Tribunal, depriving us of valuable
institutional and case-specific knowledge. Unable to
deploy the most effective staff retention strategies, such
as the incentive bonuses unfortunately rejected by the
General Assembly, the Tribunal is attempting to retain

14-68221

10/12/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7332

and, where necessary, replace staff members in the
most efficient manner possible. The three principals of
the Tribunal are most grateful to the Office for Human
Resources Management for measures taken to support
the Tribunal in this respect.
By design, my reports to the Council on the
Tribunal focus almost exclusively on procedural issues
and requests for assistance in completing our work.
I very much hope, however, that the nature of these
briefings will not lead any of us to forget the bigger
picture and the tremendously significant role that the
ICTY has played, and continues to play, both in setting
global standards for international criminal law and
justice and in helping to strengthen the rule of law
at the local level. Indeed, just last month I travelled
for several days in Bosnia and Herzegovina, meeting
with representatives of diverse communities there
and paying my respects at sites where terrible crimes
had been found to have taken place. Our discussions
underscored that the ICTY has made, and continues to
make, an invaluable contribution to the restoration of
the rule of law in the former Yugoslavia.
Given the importance of the Tribunal’s work, I
would urge the Council to approve the full extensions
of judges’ terms requested in my letters of 1 October
and 25 November. The precedents set by the Tribunal
and by its accounting for all of the 161 individuals it
has indicted have been instrumental in inaugurating
a new era of accountability. It is essential that the
international community continue to support us in
this endeavour. One of the best ways to do that is by
granting the extensions needed to complete our few
remaining cases.
I will now turn to the Mechanism. In creating
the Mechanism, the Security Council not only tasked
the new institution with a responsibility for certain
essential functions of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the ICTY. The Council
also, in essence, challenged the Mechanism to serve
as an example of best practices and to learn from the
experience of other international tribunals in order to
operate in the most lean and efficient manner possible,
while respecting relevant procedural safeguards. I am
pleased to confirm that, by almost any measure, the
Mechanism is meeting all of these important aims.
The Mechanism continues to make steady progress
in carrying out its judicial work. Later this month, in
fact next week, in line with previous forecasts, I will be

travelling to Arusha to deliver the Mechanism’s very
first appeal judgement. Mechanism judges in Arusha
and The Hague have also been busy deciding a wide
variety of motions, involving issues such as variations
to confidentiality protections and cooperation with
national jurisdictions.
The Mechanism stands ready to adjudicate any
appeals from the four trials ongoing at the ICTY. At
the same time, different sections of the Mechanism are
preparing rosters to allow rapid staff recruitment, and
are undertaking other measures to ensure readiness in
case any of the three remaining ICTR fugitive indictees
whose cases have not been referred to Rwanda are
arrested.
As set forth in my written report, responsibility
for a wide variety of functions — including witness
protection, the enforcement of sentences, the
monitoring of referred cases and the preservation of
archives — has been transferred or is being transferred
to the Mechanism. Concurrently, the Mechanism
is increasingly assuming direct responsibility for
administrative functions, such as human resources.
The Mechanism continues to engage with Rwanda
and the States of the former Yugoslavia, as well as with
our host States — Tanzania and the Netherlands. A host
State agreement has already been signed with Tanzania,
while a text with the Netherlands has been initialled.
In Arusha, we are moving towards commencing
construction of the new premises authorized by the
General Assembly, and we are continuing discussions
with the Netherlands concerning the future facility
of the Mechanism. Relying on outside funding, we
are also launching limited programmes aimed at
knowledge-sharing with Tanzanian law schools and
members of the Tanzanian judiciary.
Two key challenges continue to face the
Mechanism. The first is the outstanding arrest warrants
for the remaining ICTR indictees who have yet to be
apprehended, including three who are expected to be
tried by the Mechanism. It is imperative that these
fugitives be apprehended. Just as the accounting for
all ICTY indictees struck an important blow against
impunity, so too a full accounting of ICTR indictees will
provide confirmation of the international community’s
commitment to justice and accountability. Accordingly,
I urge the Council to renew its call to all Member
States to cooperate with efforts to arrest the remaining
fugitives indicted by the ICTR.

14-682215/33

S/PV.7332 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 10/12/2014

A second challenge facing the Mechanism is posed
by the persons acquitted by the ICTR and the release of
individuals who have completed sentences imposed by
the ICTR. The Mechanism will assume responsibility for
all such individuals released in Tanzania, on 1 January
2015, having already assumed other relocation-related
functions. I consider the question of resettlement to
be a crucial matter of humanitarian concern for the
international community. These individuals, having
been exonerated or served the sentences imposed by
the ICTR, deserve the opportunity to be resettled and
to rebuild their lives. The total number of the acquitted
and released individuals is very small; just a few States
stepping forward to give them shelter could address the
problem.
These challenges to the Mechanism are real. They
should not, however, obscure the real progress achieved
in launching both branches of the Mechanism and
smoothly transitioning responsibilities according to
the timelines mandated by the Security Council. The
principals and staff of the Mechanism and of the ICTR
and the ICTY should be applauded for their efforts in
making all of this possible.
Despite the challenges that both the ICTY and
the Mechanism face, which I have highlighted in my
briefing today, the world is unquestionably a better
place because of them. That is not simply because of
their adjudication of specific cases, but also because of
the long shadow international courts cast, promoting
more lawful behaviour by States and individuals. With
the support and encouragement of the States Members
of the United Nations, the ICTY, the Mechanism
and other international tribunals have served, and
continue to serve, as the concrete manifestation of a
commitment to ending impunity and as a testament to
the international community’s dedication to creating a
world where the rule of law is supreme.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Judge
Meron for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Judge Joensen.
Judge Joensen: I would like to begin by extending
my congratulations to the representative of Chad, which
is presiding over the Security Council in December, as
well as the representatives of Angola, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Spain and Venezuela on their nations’ election
to the Security Council for the term beginning in
January 2015. I wish them all the best for a successful
tour of duty.

6/33

I would also like to express the gratitude of the entire
Tribunal to the representatives of Argentina, Australia,
Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea and Rwanda for
their nations’ service to the Security Council as they
near the completion of their terms, and thank all of
the Governments represented on the Council for the
support they have provided as we near the completion
of our mandate and the closure of the Tribunal.
Please allow me this opportunity to also commend
and renew my sincere appreciation to the Legal Counsel,
Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares; the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Legal Affairs, Mr. Stephen Mathias; and
the staff of the Office of the Legal Counsel for their
continued efforts to act as a liaison between the Tribunal
and the Security Council and for all of the support they
have provided to the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) in organizing its twentieth-anniversary
commemoration event here in New York, which will
take place later today.
It remains an immense honour for me to provide the
members of the Security Council with an update on the
progress made towards the completion of our mandate,
especially as we mark the twentieth anniversary of
the establishment of the ICTR by the Council. In that
regard, I am happy to report that the Appeals Chamber
rendered one judgement in the Bizimungu appeal in
June and three additional judgements concerning four
persons in September in the Karemera & Ngirumpatse,
Nizeyimana and Nzabonimana cases. As of today,
appellate proceedings have now been concluded with
respect to 55 persons.
That means that the ICTR Appeals Chamber has
now completed all of its work with the exception of
one case, the Nyiramasuhuko et al. or “Butare” case
concerning six persons. Last week the Presiding
Judge in that case, Judge Pocar, informed the parties
that the appeals were scheduled to be heard in April
2015. As previously reported, the scope and complexity
of the appeals in the Butare case, combined with the
continued departures of experienced staff and the need
to rule on voluminous pre-appeal litigation prior to
the oral hearings, has led to the scheduling of those
hearings later than previously planned. Nonetheless,
the projection that the appeal judgement will not be
delivered before August 2015 remains unchanged. I
commend the judges and staff working on the Butare
appeal for the tremendous work they are doing to
complete this very large, complex appeal.

14-68221

10/12/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7332

In the light of the current projected timeline for
the completion of the Butare appeal, and considering
the current Judges’ involvement in cases before the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), I have recently submitted a request to the
Secretary-General for the extension of the terms of
office of the ICTR judges. These extensions take into
account the most recent projections in all of the cases
and, as such, I have requested extensions until July or
December 2015, or until the completion of the cases to
which each individual judge is assigned, if sooner.
President Meron has simultaneously made a request
for the extension of the terms of office of several ICTY
judges in line with the same projections. It is my
sincere hope that we will have Member States’ support
for these extensions, as they are crucial to the ability of
both Tribunals to complete their remaining work, and,
for the ICTR, to our ability to continue towards closure
in 2015, in line with current projections.
Considering the significant work that the Appeals
Chamber has completed since my previous report and
considering their commitment to finalizing our sole
remaining appeals case without delay, I feel that it is
important for me and for the Council to acknowledge
and commend all of the Judges and staff of the Tribunal
in The Hague and in Arusha, who work under extremely
tight deadlines to ensure that we meet our completion
strategy goals. I would also like to particularly thank
and commend President Meron for his leadership of
the ICTR Appeals Chamber, as well as Prosecutor
Jallow and Registrar Majola for their leadership of the
other organs of the Tribunal, all of which have been
instrumental to our completion strategy.
As I have done in the past, I would now like to briefly
update the Council on the progress being made with
respect to the issue of reparations for the victims of the
1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda, during which
Hutu and others who opposed the genocide were also
killed. I am pleased to announce that the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) has completed and
submitted a draft assessment study to the Government
of Rwanda. The assessment study identifies options for
reparations for victims and survivors and describes in
concrete and operational terms how those options can
be developed and implemented in Rwanda as well as
how these programmes may be funded. The final report
of the study should be issued in the coming months;
once it is issued it will be transmitted to the relevant
stakeholders, and follow-up activities will be planned.

I would like to take this opportunity to once again
thank the Government of Finland for its generous
contribution, without which the assessment study would
not have been able to be conducted, and to commend the
Government of Rwanda and the IOM for their efforts to
ensure that this project continues to move forward.
I now return to the very troubling issue of relocating
the acquitted and convicted released persons still
residing in Arusha. I am pleased to inform the Council
today that there have been some developments since the
last time I briefed members on this issue. There has
been a decrease in the number of acquitted persons
from nine to eight, resulting from the acceptance of the
relocation request that the Registrar had submitted to the
Kingdom of Belgium in July 2014 on behalf of General
Augustin Ndindiliyimana. On 10 September 2014, the
Kingdom of Belgium informed the ICTR that General
Ndindiliyimana’s application for a family reunification
visa had been approved. Having satisfied certain
requirements, General Ndindiliyimana ultimately left
the United Republic of Tanzania in September 2014 and
is now resettled in Belgium. The ICTR is grateful to the
Kingdom of Belgium for that assistance.
The issue of relocation, however, remains a
daunting one and has been brought to the Council’s
attention on numerous occasions. It is an issue that I
firmly believe represents a serious challenge to the
credibility of the enforcement of international criminal
justice. Despite numerous Security Council resolutions
calling upon Member States to assist the ICTR in
relocating these individuals, apart from the support
the ICTR recently received from Belgium regarding
General Ndindiliyimana, for which we are extremely
grateful, for a number of years all efforts made by
the ICTR to relocate the remaining individuals have
proved unsuccessful. The Mechanism for International
Criminal Tribunals will assume responsibility for
the relocation and care of the acquitted and released
persons in Arusha from 1 January 2015, and, as such, we
once again call for urgent assistance from the Security
Council to find a sustainable solution to this issue.
I next turn to the transition to the Mechanism. I
am proud to report that the Mechanism’s reliance on
the ICTR for administrative and other services has
been significantly reduced and that it continues to
assume responsibilities pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1966 (2010) and in line with the transitional
arrangements. The monitoring of all ICTR cases referred
to national jurisdictions is fully the responsibility of

14-682217/33

S/PV.7332 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 10/12/2014

the Mechanism; however, the ICTR continues to assist
the Mechanism by providing an interim monitor, as
required.
With respect to the Tribunal’s archives, the ICTR
continues to cooperate to ensure that records are
prepared in a manner that will facilitate their effective
management after being transferred to the Mechanism.
I am happy to report that, as of 4 December, the Tribunal
had transferred to the Mechanism more than 1,100
linear metres of records, comprising more than 50 per
cent of physical records anticipated for transfer. Judicial
records relating to the Butare case have been separated
for transfer following the appeal judgement, while all
other records have been transferred, or are scheduled
for transfer, before the Tribunal closes. Despite vast
challenges presented by the volume and nature of the
records and the downsizing of human resources, the
Tribunal remains hopeful that the preparation and
transfer of its records will be completed on time.
As I address the Council today, almost one
month after the Tribunal commemorated its twentieth
anniversary and one day after the anniversary of the
General Assembly’s signing of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, it
is hard not to fully appreciate the gravity of the decision
that the Council made two decades ago to establish the
ICTR — a decision that, together with the establishment
of the ICTY the previous year, would forever alter the
landscape of international criminal law. To pay homage
to those who lost their lives during those 100 dark days
in 1994 and to once again remind the international
community of what happens when cries for help go
unanswered, the Tribunal held events to commemorate
the twentieth anniversary of its creation.
On 6 and 7 November, representatives from various
international and domestic courts, civil society members
and academics came from across the globe to attend the
International Symposium on the Legacy of the ICTR
in Arusha, Tanzania, which focused on the ICTR’s
accomplishments and lessons learnt during its twodecade fight against impunity. During the Symposium,
panels of experts in the field of international law and
court administration discussed the ICTR’s significant
contributions to international criminal justice, as well
as the outreach and capacity-building programmes that
it created throughout its existence.
On 8 November, exactly 20 years after the adoption
of resolution 955 (1994), which created the Tribunal,
an event was held in Arusha to mark the occasion and
8/33

to launch the new ICTR website. A similar event will
be held today at 1.15 p.m. in the Economic and Social
Council Chamber. We look forward to welcoming
Council representatives and many other guests from the
international community here in New York.
It is, as always, a distinct honour to address the
Council. On behalf of the Tribunal, I wish to express
our gratitude for the support that the Governments
represented here have shown us throughout the past
two decades. As we make arrangements for closure,
the continued assistance of those Governments remains
crucial to our efforts to ensure that the Tribunal closes
its doors with its mandate completed and its legacy
secured.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Judge Joensen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Brammertz.
Mr. Brammertz: I thank Council members for
this opportunity to address them on the Office of the
Prosecutor’s progress towards the completion of our
mandate.
In this reporting period, we completed our work
in the trial of Radovan Karadžić, having submitted
our final trial brief and presented our closing oral
arguments. Over the course of the trial, more than
550 witnesses testified and over 10,000 exhibits were
submitted, totaling 165,000 pages of transcripts and
documentary evidence. It is an immense record of
the crimes and of those responsible for them. The
judgement, as has been mentioned, is expected next
fall. The Office of the Prosecutor remains grateful to
all victims and witnesses who participated in the trial
and contributed to ensuring justice and accountability
for those horrific crimes. Without their courage, that
trial, like all others, would not have been possible.
There are now only two remaining courtroom
trials, Mladić and Hadžić. In both, the defence is
currently presenting its evidence. Appeals proceedings
are ongoing in five cases. During the reporting period,
the multi-accused Prlić et al. case was a major focus
for the Appeals Division of my Office. Convicted at
trial, the six accused have submitted 168 grounds of
appeal, for which the Appeals Division in the Office
of the Prosecutor is preparing responses, in addition to
preparing the Prosecution’s four grounds of appeal.
However, as events during the reporting period
have demonstrated, the ultimate conclusion of trials and

14-68221

10/12/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7332

appeals is beyond our control. In Hadžić, the Prosecution
closed its case in October 2013. Unfortunately, time
saved in the Prosecution case has since been lost, as the
proceedings are now further delayed by newly-arisen
concerns regarding Hadžić’s health. The issuance of
the trial judgement in the Šešelj case has been delayed
again, as the replacement judge has indicated he will
require an additional year to prepare for deliberations.
The Office of the Prosecutor understands and shares
the frustration of many that the trial judgement has not
yet been issued. knowing that the last witness testified
in July 2010 and the trial closed in March 2012.
The Trial Chamber took the initiative to
provisionally release Šešelj under limited conditions.
His disregard of the Tribunal’s orders and insults to
victim communities made it necessary for my Office to
ask the Trial Chamber to revoke his provisional release.
That motion is currently pending. The intensity of the
reactions to Šešelj’s release and his revival of rhetoric
from two decades ago remind us that reconciliation
remains fragile. It should encourage us to redouble our
efforts to ensure accountability for serious violations
of international humanitarian law and to firmly stand
against all forms of revisionism.
Day-to-day cooperation between the Tribunal and
the countries of the former Yugoslavia continues to
meet our expectations. We thank national authorities for
their cooperation and fully expect it to continue in the
next reporting period. In relation to national war crimes
prosecutions, however, my written report (S/2014/827,
annex I) notes that further improvements are needed.
Regional cooperation agreements have been signed, but
have not yet been widely put into practice. Fugitives
continue to avoid accountability by finding safe haven
across borders. While cases continue against low-level
perpetrators, there needs to be a greater focus on cases
against senior- and mid-level suspects. We recognize,
however, that in recent days prosecutors in Serbia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina successfully carried out a
joint cross-border arrest operation in preparation for
prosecutions in both States. That is a very positive
development that demonstrates how much more can
be achieved through effective cooperation. We urge
prosecutorial authorities in the region to build on that
important success.
During the reporting period, I undertook two
missions to Bosnia and Herzegovina to discuss national
war crimes prosecutions with the Chief Prosecutor
and other officials. Five so-called category II cases

remain unresolved. Cases continue to be broken up
into individual indictments, and some of the previous
undertakings to correct these issues remain unfulfilled.
More generally, the Steering Board of the National War
Crimes Strategy and the State-level judiciary reported
their concerns that the work of the Prosecutor’s Office
is not moving in a positive direction. They fear that
quality is being sacrificed to increase the quantity
of indictments. They also believe that far more
indictments should charge crimes against humanity.
Nonetheless, while the list of challenges is long, good
management and leadership in the Prosecutor’s Office
can put matters back on the right track to build upon
past achievements.
We will continue to support accountability efforts
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and other States in the
former Yugoslavia through the transfer of information
and evidence to national prosecutors, as the Security
Council has directed. Our liaison prosecutors project
remains an important component of our support
and serves as a precedent for cooperation between
international and national prosecutors.
During my missions to the region the many victims
I met with reminded us that prosecutions are not the
only issue that deserves attention. Reparations for
victims of the conflict have not yet been fully and
fairly addressed. While the discovery of the mass grave
in Tomašica last year was an important success in the
search for missing persons, many families throughout
the region still do not know the fate of their loved
ones. Efforts to search for missing persons must be
maintained and intensified.
At this time last year, I reported that the relationship
of trust between the Tribunal and the public was under
strain. Unfortunately, among victims and the Tribunal’s
supporters many do not believe that the situation has
improved. They point to cases that have been delayed
time and again. Many express their view that not
enough information is provided to explain what they
see as controversial decisions. Critical reflection is
still needed at the Tribunal. And, as in national courts
around the world, at international tribunals there
should be no tension between judicial independence
and efficient case management.
The Tribunal’s legacy, however, should not be
measured by the past few years alone. There have
been many important achievements in ensuring
accountability for crimes committed during the
conflicts in the former Yugoslavia. As members

14-682219/33

S/PV.7332 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 10/12/2014

know, we are currently prosecuting some of the most
important cases in the Tribunal’s history. In just a few
years, the Tribunal will complete all its outstanding
work and close its doors. Only then can its legacy be
fully assessed.

point also underscored by the representative of the
Secretary-General at the commemoration event, the
Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs and United
Nations Legal Counsel, Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares, in
his closing statement at the Colloquium.

In conclusion, finalizing our work in accordance
with the completion strategy continues to be the primary
objective of my Office. We remain fully focused
on completing our remaining work as efficiently
as possible, and we will continue to implement our
downsizing in line with the completion of trials and
appeals, while supporting our staff as they transition
to new careers.

We detect today an increased willingness of local
jurisdictions to prosecute international crimes. That
is a welcome development, as progress in the struggle
against impunity requires a very strong partnership
between international and local justice mechanisms.
At the same time, we need to be conscious of the
magnitude of the challenges that task represents for
local jurisdictions. The experience of the ICTR Office
of the Prosecutor in working closely with Rwanda to
create the necessary enabling environment for the
eventually successful transfer of cases to Rwanda for
trial illustrates both the challenges that countries face
as they pick up the baton in this fight, and possible
solutions that national jurisdiction can adopt.

The President: I thank Mr. Brammertz for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jallow.
Mr. Jallow: I would like to join President Meron
and President Joensen in congratulating you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and to wish you all the best in that respect.
I am also pleased to report once again to the Council
on the work of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals over the past six months.
The current report (S/2014/546) follows on the
heels of a series of events organized by the ICTR in
commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of its
establishment. In that context, my Office hosted
the 7th Colloquium Of International Prosecutors
on 4 and 5 November, with the participation of the
prosecutors from the various international and hybrid
courts and tribunals and prosecutors from some
20 national jurisdictions, as well as representatives of
regional courts, academic institutions and civil society
organizations. With the imminent closure of the ad
hoc tribunals, the theme of the Colloquium — “Local
Prosecution of International Crimes, Challenges and
Prospects” — was not fortuitous; it was dictated by
the transition before which international criminal
justice stands today. It was part of the efforts of
the international prosecutors to share lessons and
good practices of the past two decades with national
prosecutors and to create a forum for consultation
between prosecutors dealing with genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes at the national level.
The theme of the Colloquium recognized the transition
from primacy to the principle of complementarity. A

10/33

While my Office continues to engage national
authorities, particularly in East Africa and the wider
Great Lakes region, in the sharing of good practices
and lessons learned in a variety of areas, we have to
contend with the challenges of limited resources and
manpower as the ICTR, on the one hand, continues
to downsize and, on the other, in the face of the much
smaller resource base of the Mechanism of the Office
of the Prosecutor. The international community must
therefore continue to play a leading role in ensuring
that national jurisdictions have the requisite human and
material resources to engage in those challenging tasks,
and that States and international organizations support
national efforts in the acquisition of the skills, training
and expertise and the creation of the legal and political
framework necessary to enable local jurisdictions to
discharge their responsibility.
The prosecutors and other participants at the
Colloquium unanimously adopted a resolution
emphasizing the importance of accountability for
international crimes to enhancing justice, peace,
security and the well-being of the world. The resolution
also outlines the role that States, individually and
collectively, as well as the international community as
a whole, can play to give concrete effect to the primary
responsibility of States.
Regarding the work of the Office of the Prosecutor
of the ICTR, I am happy to report that much of the
workload has been concluded in the past six months. As

14-68221

10/12/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7332

the President indicated, the Appeals Chamber delivered
final judgements in several cases: the Bizimungu
case, concerning the former Chief of Staff of the
Rwandan Army; the Karemera and Ngirumpatse case,
concerning the former President and Vice-President
respectively of the ruling political party in Rwanda
at the time, the National Revolutionary Movement
for Development; the Nzabonimana case, concerning
a former Minister of Youth; and the Nizeyimana
case,concerning a former captain in the Rwandan
Army. Their convictions for genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity — including mass rape
—, were affirmed on appeal. The judgement in the
case of Karemera and Ngirumpatse, as in the Akayesu
case, today stands as a major jurisprudential landmark
in ensuring accountability for sexual and genderbased violence in situations of conflict. We seize the
opportunity to commend both the Trial Chambers and
the Appeals Chamber of the ICTR for reaching those
important decisions.
The Butare case, the only ICTR case still
outstanding on appeal, with six accused, has now
been rescheduled for hearing. Consequently, the ICTR
Appeals Division has concluded a staff retention
exercise and has now identified an appropriate level
of staff to be retained beyond 31 December to see the
Butare appeal through to its end. The retained staff will
remain engaged in that case and will also continue to
assist the Mechanism. The rest of the staff of the Office
of the Prosecutor of the ICTR, representing some 46 per
cent of the total office staff strength, have now been
given notices of separation from the ICTR, effective
31 December. I take this opportunity to thank all the
separating staff for their service to the Office of the
Prosecutor, the ICTR and, indeed, the cause of justice
and accountability.
In the months ahead of closure, the Office of
the Prosecutor of the ICTR will focus on the Butare
case, the archiving of the remaining records and the
completion of its legacy and best practices projects,
including the writing of the genocide narrative,
documenting the experience in the referral of cases to
national jurisdictions, and preparing the final report of
the Office of the Prosecutor.
Turning now to the Mechanism, I am pleased to
report that it continues to take over functions from the
Office of the Prosecutor of both the ICTR and the ICTY,
as mandated by its statute, with a full complement of
staff now at both the Arusha and The Hague branches.

Recently, in addition to the Special Assistant to the
Prosecutor, a P-4 investigator has also been recruited
for the Kigali sub-office of the Arusha branch as part
of the tracking team, in order to intensify efforts to
track fugitives, including the three earmarked for trial
by the Mechanism. Work on the case files of the three
fugitives continues in order to ensure trial readiness in
the event of an arrest.
A vigorous diplomatic and outreach initiative is
also being pursued by the Mechanism, in collaboration
with INTERPOL, the Rwandan National Public
Prosecution Authority and the United States War
Crimes Rewards Program under the State Department’s
Office for Global Criminal Justice. In July, together
with those other organizations, we launched in Kigali
a renewed campaign to track those fugitives, with
the aim of disseminating information about them,
encouraging broader public reporting of their activities
and movements, and offering incentives for their arrest.
The arrest and trial of these fugitives remains
the greatest challenge and utmost priority for the
Mechanism and the global community alike. In that
regard, we very much welcome the recent statement of
support by the Council on the occasion of the ICTR’s
twentieth anniversary commemoration calling on all
States to cooperate in the arrest of the fugitives.
The hearing in the Ngirabatware case, as the
President indicated, has been concluded and we expect
the judgement in the course of this month.
Due to delays in the rendering of the ICTY
trial judgement in the Vojislav Šešelj case, further
recruitment for that particular trial team has been put
on hold in the Office of the Prosecutor at The Hague
branch. But we will commence next year to fill ad hoc
posts to handle potential appeals in the case of Radovan
Karadžić, and possibly that of Goran Hadžić.
In September of this year, I visited Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia, where I held
meetings with senior State officials, representatives of
international organizations, diplomats and prosecutors
to discuss the transition of functions from the ICTY
to the Mechanism, as well as cooperation between the
States concerned and the Mechanism. In that regard, I
signed memorandums of understanding with the War
Crimes Prosecutor and the Chief Prosecutors in all three
States setting out the framework for continued mutual
assistance and cooperation with them. I concluded my
visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina by paying my respects

14-6822111/33

S/PV.7332 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 10/12/2014

to Bosnian Muslim, Croat and Serb victims of the war
at three memorial sites.
My Office will continue to be actively engaged with
the countries in the former Yugoslavia to assist them
to meet the international community’s expectations
to prosecute the numerous persons at all levels who
are responsible for the crimes committed in those
territories. Last week, I participated in a meeting of
prosecutors from the three countries at Palić, Serbia,
hosted by the War Crimes Prosecutor of Serbia,
which aimed at finding ways of intensifying regional
cooperation among their offices and other parties. I am
greatly encouraged by the level of cooperation among
the region’s prosecutors. I congratulate the Chief
Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the War
Crimes Prosecutor of Serbia for their recent successful
joint operation that resulted in the arrest of 14 persons
for war crimes based partly on information provided
by the Mechanism Office of the Prosecutor. I urge
the international community to continue to strongly
support the efforts of the prosecutors.
The Mechanism continues to attend to its other
responsibilities, such as the servicing of requests for
assistance, the archiving of evidence and records,
the monitoring of the cases transferred to national
jurisdictions, the promulgation of policies and
guidelines for the effective and efficient discharge
of our mandate, and the transition of functions to
the Mechanism. During the period under review,
my Office in the Mechanism serviced a total of 178
requests for assistance — a very considerable increase
in the workload of the Office — from 13 countries and
international organizations, and made 17 submissions
before the Chamber in relation to variation of witness
protective measures for the purpose of national
proceedings. I also continue to receive regular reports
from the monitors of the cases transferred to Rwanda
and France, which continue to be managed satisfactorily
in the respective national jurisdictions.
Finally, I wish to thank the members of the Council,
the Secretary-General and the Secretariat for their
constant support to the ICTR throughout its 20 years of
existence. They have done a great deal to bring justice,
peace and reconciliation to the people of Rwanda.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Jallow
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.

12/33

Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to thank the Presidents and the
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunals
for the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda, and the
Residual Mechanism, for their comprehensive briefings
to the Council on the implementation of the completion
strategy of the two ad hoc Tribunals for the period from
May to November 2014. We are honoured to have them
present here today.
Their reports reveal that, despite the overall
difficulties created by the lack of personnel resulting
from the closure process, both Tribunals have made
significant progress. It is instructive to note that one
of the four outstanding cases before the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the Karadžić case,
one of the pending cases, is now at the sentencing
state, arguments having concluded in October, while
there remains only one appeal before the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, in the Butare case.
In turn, the Residual Mechanism has clearly worked
intensively, with the appeal decision currently pending.
This will also mark a milestone in the judicial work of
the Mechanism.
As Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, I wish to reiterate my country’s
commitment to supporting the work of the Tribunals
and the Mechanism. We believe that collaboration in
their completion strategies is one of the most direct ways
in which the Council can contribute to international
justice.
In that regard, in recent months we have conducted
a constructive dialogue with the Office for Human
Resources Management of the Secretariat in seeking
legal-administrative formulas to provide concrete
solutions to the challenges presented by the closure
process for the staffing of the Tribunals in The
Hague and Arusha, which has a direct impact on their
functioning.
We note the concerns regarding the situation of
those persons in Tanzania requiring relocation, and we
urge a dignified solution to be found for them swiftly,
with due consideration given to the humanitarian
implications of their situation.
We have also begun informal consultations on
extending the mandates of the judges and prosecutors
in both Tribunals following the requests from their
respective Presidents and from the Secretary-General
himself.

14-68221

10/12/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7332

We are aware of the challenges that task implies. We
trust that the Council will be able to reach agreement on
the issues, thus meeting the responsibilities it assumed a
little over two decades ago and giving due consideration
to the international rule of law and justice.
My delegation hopes that this process of
accountability can be completed and serve as a clear
message from the international community that it will
not allow for crimes against humanity to go unpunished.
Finally, my delegation reiterates its congratulations
to the International Tribunal for Rwanda on the recently
celebrated twentieth anniversary of its establishment.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I would like to start
by thanking Judges Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors
Brammertz and Jallow for their informative briefings,
and to commend their continuous commitment, and that
of their staff, to the important missions being carried
out by both Tribunals and the Residual Mechanism.
Last month, the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) marked its twentieth anniversary.
The Court stands as a reminder of the massive human
tragedy of the people of Rwanda and of the failure of
the international community to protect. At the same
time, it is also a symbol of our common determination
to uphold and actively pursue accountability for those
responsible for the most serious crimes.
Through its jurisprudence, the ICTR has contributed
significantly, and continues to do so, to international
criminal law, especially through its verdicts in relation
to genocide and on sexual crimes. The ICTR and the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) continue to champion respect for the rule of
law and contribute to the painful but necessary process
of reconciliation leading to sustainable peace. As
creations of the Security Council, they are also part of
the legacy of the Council itself.
The reports that were presented this morning
clearly indicate that both Tribunals are moving steadily
towards the completion of their mandates. We welcome
the steps that they have taken to effectively conclude
the cases still under consideration, while referring the
outstanding tasks to the Residual Mechanism. The
ICTR has made tangible progress over the last reporting
period, as it has completed appellate proceedings with
respect to five more individuals. Today, only one
appeals case remains before the Tribunal concludes
its judicial activities. We acknowledge the challenges
that ICTY has been facing in meeting the deadlines

of the remaining four trial and five appellate cases,
including the recently discovered mass graves. In that
regard, we take note of the updated projections from
both Presidents and encourage them to continue taking
all necessary measures in order to keep the delays at a
minimum.
Accountability for war crimes and crimes against
humanity depends both on the timely completion of the
remaining proceedings by the Tribunals and the Residual
Mechanism and on the success of national prosecutions.
In that regard, we share the concern expressed by
Prosecutor Brammertz regarding the slow processing
of war crimes, in particular cases of sexual violence, by
national institutions in the countries that emerged out of
the former Yugoslavia. While recognizing that it is up
to the national authorities to complete the outstanding
caseload, we welcome the efforts of the Office of
the Prosecutor in that regard, including through the
transfer of expertise and information so as to build the
necessary national capacities.
The support and cooperation of the international
community continues to be essential in achieving some
of the most critical tasks of both the Tribunals and the
Residual Mechanism. In that regard, we note the efforts
described by Prosecutor Jallow regarding the pending
arrest and surrender of the remaining nine fugitives
indicted by the ICTR, and we emphasize the need to
strengthen international cooperation to that effect. We
also note the slow progress reported with regard to
the relocation of individuals who have been acquitted
or who have served their sentences imposed by the
ICTR. We encourage all States in a position to do so to
respond positively to the Tribunals’ relocation requests,
the example of Belgium being the most recent example
to follow.
We note that the Residual Mechanism, working
closely with both Tribunals, has gradually assumed
many of its core functions, including with regard to
the enforcement of sentences, the protection of victims
and witnesses, and the management of archives. In
particular, the increase in the judicial proceedings
in the Residual Mechanism and the manner in which
it has been handling that workload provides us
with confidence in its preparedness to continue the
Tribunals’ functions.
We stress that the smooth transition of the functions
of Tribunals to the International Residual Mechanism
also lies in the hands of the Security Council, as it has
to decide on further extensions of the mandates of the

14-6822113/33

S/PV.7332 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 10/12/2014

judges and prosecutors. In that regard, we should like
to use this opportunity to thank Chile, the Chair of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
for its leadership in guiding the consultations on that
matter. We recognize that closure dates depend on
the completion of ongoing proceedings, while fully
respecting the standards of due process and fairness.
Finally, while the ICTY and the ICTR have dealt
with some of the most horrendous crimes in modern
history, they are certainly not the only bodies to have
done so. Mass atrocities continue to be committed in
other parts of the world with impunity. The creation of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) as a permanent
body has provided a realistic prospect of ending
impunity for the most serious crimes of international
concern where justice could not or would not be
ensured otherwise. We therefore stress once again
the importance of ensuring that the Council fulfils
its responsibilities in putting an end to impunity and
ensuring justice and accountability. In that regard,
support for the ICC is essential in order to make sure
that it can deliver on the expectations of the numerous
victims of such crimes, for whom this body may be the
only recourse to justice.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): At the outset,
I should like to thank President Meron, President
Joensen, Prosecutor Brammertz and Prosecutor Jallow
for their briefings.
The year 2014 is a symbolic milestone for the
International Tribunals in that their mandates to fight
against impunity could be completed as called for in
resolution 1966 (2010). Almost all of the pending
cases of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), as well as the Tribunals
themselves, are close to the finish line. We note and
wish to compliment the hard work of the judges, staff
members, prosecutors and defence lawyers during their
respective reporting periods. However, it is expected
that the completion of the case work of the Tribunals
will be delayed. One ICTR case and several ICTY cases
are still pending and will not be finished before 2017.
While the Tribunals were not able to completely finish
up all the mandates scheduled to end in 2014, such
important mandates cannot be left unfinished.
The Republic of Korea therefore believes that the
extension of the mandates of the judges and prosecutors
of the Tribunals is necessary in order for them to complete
their work. However, as it is true that the mandates are
14/33

expected to run over the deadline, we would like to ask
the Tribunals to redouble their efforts to finish their
work according to their respective completion strategies.
If the reason for delay is because of the inefficiency
or backlog of procedural problems for the Tribunals,
significant additional efforts or special solutions should
be sought. At this juncture, we have to remember that
resolution 1966 (2010) represents a promise not only to
the Security Council but also to the victims, witnesses
and the larger international community. We hope that
the Tribunals with their extended terms will lay a solid
foundation for the international community to close the
impunity gap for future generations.
Lastly, my delegation stresses the importance of
the continuous efforts to disseminate the legacy of the
Tribunals. We recommend that the rich activities of the
Tribunals and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals serve to bring the work of
the Tribunals closer to international and regional
communities.
Mr. Stehelin (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank President Meron, President Joensen and
Prosecutors Jallow and Brammertz for their briefings.
France reiterates its thanks to all the staff of the
Tribunals for their work to carry out the procedures
to a successful end. We note the importance of the
mobilization of all parties to respect the calendar
defined by the Council, with reference to both trials
and appeals before the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). The ICTY and the
ICTR branches of the Residual Mechanism have begun
the transition, so that the work of justice can continue
and come to a conclusion.
France attaches particular importance to ensuring,
as part of the completion strategy, that the Tribunals
should continue to render justice while fully respecting
procedural guarantees. While there are many reasons
for the delays relative to the deadlines in resolution
1966 (2010), the delays mean that we must redouble
our attention on the effectiveness of the work and the
use of the resources allocated. Bearing in mind that
double requirement, France can support the extension
of the mandates of the judges and prosecutors beyond
31 December 2014.
This debate is an opportunity for the Council
to welcome the significant work carried out by the
Tribunals aimed at combating impunity and promoting
reconciliation and for us to identify the work that now
14-68221

10/12/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7332

rests with the States to carry out, so that the work of
justice accomplished can be recorded for history.
In 2013, we marked the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 827 (1993), establishing the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. In
20 years, as part of the resolute action undertaken by
the European Union, regional political dialogue has
made significant progress. Through its judgements, its
decisive weight with regard to cooperation and criminal
assistance between the various States’ prosecution
authorities aimed at prosecuting criminals, and through
its effectiveness in dealing with 166 people who have
had arrest warrants issued for them and were arrested
and tried, the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia has served as a guarantee for the right to
the truth, for the fight against impunity and for a legacy
that has played a central role in regional developments.
From now on, it will be up to the States concerned to
continue to build up the rule of law, which is what will
ensure the independence of judicial power. Because of
that, trying so-called mid-level criminals must remain
a national priority supported by sustained regional
cooperation and involvement.
Concerning the ICTR, 2014 witnessed the
celebration of the Tribunal’s twentieth anniversary.
The ceremonies provided an opportunity to recall
the importance of the work of the ICTR, which has
positioned justice at the heart of national reconciliation
and reconstruction. France will continue to support the
Tribunal and the International Residual Mechanism on
issues that have been raised this morning, particularly
the arrest of the remaining nine fugitives on whom
the Tribunal has issued warrants. France recalls the
obligation of all States to cooperate with the Tribunal
and the Mechanism in that regard. I would also like
to point out that the two cases referred by the ICTR
to French jurisdictions, those of Mr. Bucyibaruta and
Mr. Munyeshyaka, have been addressed with all the
necessary diligence and rigour. Finally, France, which
recently hosted two persons, would like to emphasize
the importance of relocating those persons acquitted by
the ICTR or who have served their time.
The International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda constitute a major phase of the fight against
impunity. As they implement their completion strategies
for their work, it is appropriate now to appreciate their
juridical legacy as much as their efforts on behalf of
justice, and which should now be kept alive, from

the point of view of memory as well as the academic
record. That has also demanded continued vigilance
in protecting witnesses and focusing on the rights of
victims. At the Assembly of the States Parties to the
International Criminal Court, which is in session right
now, the general debate will be an opportunity for
those 122 States parties to recall their support for the
fight against impunity and for pursuing the demands
of justice.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the
Ambassador of Chile, Chair of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, and his entire team,
particularly for their efforts on the issue of settling the
question of the management of the completion strategy.
I would also like to thank the representatives of the
International Tribunals and the Office of Legal Affairs
of the Secretariat for their work in implementing the
transition provided for in resolutions 1966 (2010) and
2130 (2013).
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would like to thank
Judge Theodor Meron, President of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Vagn Joensen, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals and Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
This year, 2014, marks a double twentieth anniversary
as we commemorate the genocide against the Tutsi in
April and the creation of the ICTR in November. As we
look back, we acknowledge the important role played
by the ICTR in the fight against impunity for genocide
and other mass atrocities. The Tribunal has produced a
substantial body of jurisprudence, including definitions
of the crime of genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes, as well as of forms of responsibility, such
as superior responsibility. In that regard, the ICTR Trial
Chamber, through its Akayesu judgement, established
that genocide occurred in Rwanda against the Tutsi
as a group. In the same case, the Tribunal also ruled
that acts of rape and sexual violence constitute a crime
against justice if committed with the intent to destroy
a targeted group. Since defence lawyers in Arusha had,
I am sorry to say, a bad habit of using genocide denial
as a defence argument, in 2006 the ICTR Appeals
Chamber issued a judicial notice deciding that the

14-6822115/33

S/PV.7332 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 10/12/2014

genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda occurred as a fact
of common knowledge.
Nonetheless, despite that clear and constant
jurisprudence, the Security Council and even
the Tribunal itself were reluctant to specify — in
resolutions, reports or other documents — that genocide
was committed against the Tutsi, opting for a general
formulation of Rwandan genocide. I would like to
recall that resolution 2150 (2014) of 16 April reminded
us that genocide was committed against the Tutsi
and that during that genocide, Hutu and others who
opposed it were also killed. In that regard, we note with
satisfaction that for the first time, the ICTR uses in its
latest report (S/2014/546) the language of resolution
2150 (2014). As Rwandans, we believe that the use of
such terminology, which names the targeted group, is
of paramount importance, since it contributes to the
fight against genocide deniers, who misuse the term
“Rwandan genocide” in an attempt to confuse the world
as to who were the targets of that genocide.
As the ICTR winds down, we note that 93 individuals
have been indicted for genocide; these are mainly
masterminds and national and local leaders who
had been out of the reach of Rwandan justice, as
they were international fugitives. We welcome the
recent condemnation of Matthieu Ngirumpatse and
Édouard Karemera, the President and Vice-President
respectively of the Mouvement révolutionnaire national
pour le développement, the former presidential party
that planned and executed the genocide. We regret,
however, that a number of other masterminds of the
genocide, including senior military leaders, cabinet
ministers and heads of local Governments, were
acquitted despite substantive evidence against them.
We also regret the ICTR’s delays in its completion
strategy, as demonstrated by endless proceedings in the
Butare case. We strongly urge the Tribunal to ensure
that the case is completed as soon as possible.
Concerning the monitoring of cases referred to
national courts, we know that the cases of Wenceslas
Munyeshyaka and Laurent Bucyibaruta, referred to
French courts in 2007, are once again said to be in an
investigative phase, without any significant progress.
We are extremely concerned about these repeated delays
of proceedings in cases referred by the ICTR to France,
in accordance with article 11 bis of the Tribunal’s rules
of procedure and evidence. In comparison, I would like
to point out that the two cases referred to Rwanda in
2012 and 2013, which are also under ICTR monitoring,

16/33

are far ahead in their proceedings, despite the fact that
their referrals occurred five and six years after the
cases referred to France. Since justice delayed is justice
denied, I call on the French authorities to ensure that
the remaining investigations are expedited.
In addition, Rwanda is still concerned about the fact
that nine ICTR fugitives remain at large, include the
top-priority three — Félicien Kabuga, Protais Mpiranya
and Augustin Bizimana. In that regard, I would like to
recognize something that Prosecutor Jallow mentioned
earlier, the launching in Kigali on 24 July of an
international fugitives initiative, together with the
Office of Global Criminal Justice of the United States
Department of State and INTERPOL. The Prosecutor
General of Rwanda wishes to see that initiative followed
by tangible results. For that to happen, we reiterate our
call on United Nations Member States, especially those
of our region, to collaborate in arresting all remaining
genocide fugitives pursuant to resolution 2150 (2014).
In relation to outreach programmes, we note that
while the Arusha-based information centre of the ICTR
was visited by 437 visitors, the Kigali-based information
centre was visited by 42,000 visitors and that ICTR
mini-information centres attracted 23,000 visitors,
including high-level United Nations and Government
officials, academics, civil society and non-governmental
organizations representatives, and the general public.
That justifies our request, supported by all five States
of the East African Community — Tanzania, Uganda,
Kenya, Burundi and Rwanda — that ICTR archives
be transferred to Rwanda after the completion of the
International Residual Mechanism’s proceedings. We
are hopeful that the handover of the management of the
Umusanzu Information and Documentation Centre to
the Government of Rwanda, along with 10 additional
provincial centres, will be an important step in the
handover of all ICTR archives.
Next year will mark the twentieth commemoration
of another genocide — the genocide of Bosniacs in
Srebrenica, as established in 2004 by the ICTY. We
commend the ICTY, which has arrested all of the indicted
fugitives and concluded proceedings against 141 of the
161 indicted individuals, for its achievements. We note
that the ICTY will not be able to complete its work by
31 December and we urge it, as we did the ICTR, to
expedite its proceedings. We take this opportunity
to express deep concern over the persistent scourge
of denial of the genocide in Srebrenica, including by
State officials, which is an additional and unnecessary

14-68221

10/12/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7332

pain imposed on the survivors. We therefore call on
all leaders in the region to own their history and work
towards a genuine reconciliation and healing.
As we commemorate, for the twentieth time, the
genocides in Rwanda and in Srebrenica, we wish to
commend the ICTY, ICTR and the Residual Mechanism
for their continued efforts to ensure justice and
accountability for the most serious crimes. We urge the
Residual Mechanism and the international community
to ensure that the remaining ICTR fugitives are
apprehended and brought to justice, and the ICTR and
the ICTY to complete their remaining cases. Of course,
we hope that the French authorities will expedite their
proceedings in the seven-year investigations of the two
cases referred by the ICTR.
Ms. King (Australia): I would like to thank
Presidents Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors
Brammertz and Jallow for their comprehensive
briefings. We commend the Tribunals for the progress
made in relation to their respective mandates over the
past six months. As we mark the twentieth anniversary
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR), those reports serve to highlight the contribution
that all three entities continue to make to international
criminal justice. We agree with Judge Joensen that
they have forever altered the landscape of international
criminal law and that their contribution is not limited to
the ongoing development of international criminal law,
but extends to the provision of assistance and support
to victims and witnesses and to capacity-building
and legacy preservation. Australia also commends
both Tribunals on their efforts to complete their work
expeditiously, while ensuring that trials and appeals
are conducted in a manner consistent with fair trial
standards.
As the reports highlight, there is one remaining
appeal before the ICTR and four trials and five appeals
before the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). It is in all of our interests that the
work of the Tribunals not continue indefinitely, but
it is equally important that provision be made for the
successful completion of their case work. Australia’s
view is that the terms of office of the Tribunals’ judges
and prosecutors should therefore be extended until the
completion of their cases.
The successful completion of the Tribunals’
work will, however, require much more than just the
extension of the judges’ terms. First, it is critical that
all stakeholders work together to ensure that the nine

remaining ICTR fugitives are apprehended. Member
States must cooperate with the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, which is not
only tracking the three fugitives over which it has
jurisdiction, but also providing assistance in tracking
the other six individuals whose cases have been
transferred to Rwanda. To that end, we welcome the
launch of the international fugitives initiative in Kigali
on 24 July by the ICTR Prosecutor, the Office of Global
Criminal Justice of the United States Department
of State, INTERPOL and the Prosecutor General of
Rwanda.
Secondly, we must work together to find solutions
to address the plight of the eight persons acquitted
by the ICTR and the three persons released by the
Tribunal who need to be relocated from Arusha. While
we welcome the recent resettlement in Belgium of one
individual, as is now well known the 11 individuals
who remain in Tanzania are effectively stuck in a legal
limbo without identity documents, proper immigration
status or the means to survive independent of the
Tribunal. The work of the Tribunals does not end with
the delivery of a final appeals judgement. The ongoing
welfare of victims and witnesses, as well as accused and
sentenced persons, is an integral part of the Tribunals’
mandate. The Council, through its Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, must provide the
support the ICTR and Residual Mechanism need to find
a satisfactory solution to the relocation issue. We would
like to take this opportunity to thank Ambassador
Barros Melet and his team for Chile’s leadership of the
Informal Working Group.
Thirdly, we note the concerns outlined in Prosecutor
Brammertz’s report (S/2014/827, annex I) that there
has been insufficient progress in the cases transferred
to national institutions in the former Yugoslavia,
particularly in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We encourage
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to ensure that
cases transferred to its jurisdiction from the ICTY are
progressed as soon as possible. The arrest on 5 December
of 15 individuals said to have been involved in a 1993
massacre, following a joint investigation by Bosnian
and Serb authorities, is a welcome development.
We note with concern the barriers to reconciliation
outlined in Prosecutor Brammertz’s report. Australia
encourages officials in Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina to refrain from making statements
questioning or rejecting the ICTY’s judgements, and
calls on them to ensure that steps are taken to reject

14-6822117/33

S/PV.7332 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 10/12/2014

revisionism, including the denial of the genocide in
Srebrenica. Indeed, all efforts at revisionism and
genocide denial must be firmly rejected, as inimical
to reconciliation and accountability and deeply
disrespectful to all victims.
Finally, we continue to be concerned about the
negative impact that the loss of experienced staff
and difficulties in recruiting new staff is having on
the Tribunals’ ability to meet their completion target
dates. We are ready to support any human resource
initiatives that will assist the Tribunals in addressing
those challenges.
It is imperative that the Council extend its full
support to the Tribunals and the Residual Mechanism.
We agree with Judge Meron that the Tribunals have
inaugurated a new era of accountability. The Council,
of course, was instrumental in ushering in that era
and it has a fundamental responsibility to continue
to support it. If the Council is committed to ensuring
that the victims and survivors of the tragedies in the
former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda get the justice they
deserve, and if the Council truly means what it says
when it speaks of the importance of the fight against
impunity for the most serious international crimes, it
will continue to provide all necessary support to the
Tribunals and to the Residual Mechanism so to enable
them to complete their work and conclude this particular
chapter in international criminal justice, which will
leave a lasting and vital legacy.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s debate on the work of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR). I join those who have taken the floor
before me to thank our distinguished briefers for their
succinct briefings.
We want to express our deep appreciation to the
Presidents of the ICTY and the ICTR for their reports
(S/2014/556 and S/2014/546), which set out in particular
the progress made towards the implementation of the
completion strategy of the Tribunals and the measures
the Tribunals are taking to ensure a smooth transition
to the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.
With regard to the ICTY, Nigeria notes that the
Tribunal has concluded proceedings against 141 of
the 161 individuals it has indicted. We commend the
Tribunal’s judges and staff members for their determined

18/33

focus on completing the remaining judicial proceedings
as expeditiously as possible without compromising the
principles of due process and fairness. We applaud the
success of the ICTY and cooperating States in locating
and transferring fugitives to the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal. As a result, there are no outstanding fugitives
from the law as far as the ICTY is concerned. That is a
remarkable achievement in the fight against impunity.
We commend the ICTY for the measures it has
taken to expedite its work. Of particular significance is
the close monitoring of the progress of trials and appeals
by the Working Group on Trials and Appeals Schedules
to prevent delays to judicial proceedings. With that
and other measures in place, we are confident that the
ICTY will be able to work efficiently and effectively to
dispose of all outstanding cases with minimum delay.
On staff recruitment and retention, the report
indicates that it has become a problem that is having
an adverse impact on the completion strategy of the
Tribunal. That is understandable in the light of the
Tribunal’s ongoing downsizing. Nevertheless, it is
necessary to maintain a careful balance that will allow
the work of the Tribunal to go on unhindered. In that
regard, we are pleased to note that the Tribunal has
taken measures to improve staff retention, recruitment
and promotion. It is our hope that this matter can be
resolved in a timely manner through engagement with
the relevant division in the United Nations Secretariat.
Nigeria takes positive note of the progress made
by the ICTR in implementing its completion strategy,
which has been continuously updated since 2003.
It is significant that during the reporting period all
outstanding appeal judgements with exception of the
Nyiramasuhuko et al. (“Butare”) case were delivered.
That has allowed the ICTR to focus its efforts on the
transition to the Mechanism. The near-completion of
its cases demonstrates the effectiveness of the ICTR as
a tool in the search for justice and accountability for
perpetrators of mass atrocity crimes.
We note that the preparation and submission of
archives to the Mechanism are major challenges.
Nevertheless, we urge the ICTR to continue to pay
attention to the process of transferring these records
and archives to the Mechanism. It is also noteworthy
that, on 5 November 2014, the ICTR launched its new
website, which includes information on its remaining
work, milestones attained and lessons learned in its
pursuit of justice. We commend the initiative last
September to hold a developed practices workshop
14-68221

10/12/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7332

for the International Tribunals and the International
Criminal Court, which indeed was the first of its kind.
Nigeria welcomes the progress reports of the
President and the Prosecutor of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals from
16 May to 19 November 2014 (S/2014/826, annex I).
We are pleased to note that the Mechanism has been
receiving support from the ICTR, the ICTY, the Office
of Legal Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat and
States Members of the United Nations. In accordance
with its mandate, the Mechanism has now assumed
responsibility for many functions of the ICTY and
ICTR. We call on the Mechanism to continue to work
closely with the principals and staff of both Tribunals to
ensure a smooth transition of the remaining functions
and services. The Mechanism should also work towards
the harmonization and adoption of best practices.
Nigeria commends the ICTR and the ICTY for their
contributions to the development of substantive and
procedural international criminal law. The Tribunals
have also symbolized the firm commitment of the
international community to fight against impunity and
crimes against humanity.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to acknowledge the presence in the
Security Council of Presidents Meron and Joensen and
Prosecutors Jallow and Brammertz.
I take this opportunity to thank Chile and to
acknowledge the way in which it has guided the work of
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
I extend my appreciation to Ambassador Cristian Barros
Melet and his team.
After two decades of activity, the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
are at the stage of completion and, in accordance with
the completion strategy adopted by the Council, must
complete their judicial work according to schedule and
transfer cases and files to the Residual Mechanism.
Argentina wants to positively recognize the progress
reported with respect to the Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda as well as the way in which the
Mechanism continues its work at its two locations.
As for the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, it should be noted that the prosecutions
of almost all of the 161 individuals charged have been
completed and that there are no more cases of fugitives.
The Tribunal has made progress in the completion of

the cases that are pending. Of these, some will continue
to the end of this year. It is therefore worth taking into
account the circumstances that may affect the length
of proceedings, such as the recent discovery of mass
graves and the challenge or difficulty in retaining
qualified personnel.
We believe that the judicial function itself is facing
certain difficulties, given the complexity of the cases,
the current transitional situation, and such issues
as the arrest of last fugitives from the ICTY in 2011.
Argentina will support the Security Council’s renewal
of the mandates of judges and prosecutors of both
Tribunals. My country also believes that the Security
Council should continue to consider, in the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, measures to
facilitate the retention of staff from both Tribunals. We
recognize the active role the Chilean presidency of the
Working Group is playing in this regard.
We also appreciate the information from the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda with
respect to the implementation of its completion strategy.
The Tribunal has completed substantive activities for
all of the 93 accused, having completed or nearing
completion the cases in the trial phase and advance
appeals, leaving only the appeal of the Nyiramasuhuko
et al. (“Butare”) case for completion in August 2015.
We recognize that it is a priority to capture the
fugitives of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda. The fact that nine defendants among
those indicted by the Tribunal remain fugitives is
not encouraging. Of those, three are still under the
jurisdiction that has been transferred to the Mechanism,
which is ready to submit them to trial as soon as they
are arrested. However, as Argentina already indicated,
in order to arrest fugitives, both those under the
jurisdiction of the Mechanism and those who have been
transferred to Rwandan jurisdiction, the cooperation of
all States is necessary in accordance with the obligation
set out in resolution 955 (1994).
I wish to highlight the activities of both Tribunals
on cooperation for training in investigative and trial
skills, including on sexual and sexist gender-based
violence.
With regard to the Residual Mechanism, I would
like to note in particular that the branches in Arusha
and The Hague are fully operational and will be fully
ready to operate when both Tribunals close. Therefore,
I take this opportunity to once again acknowledge the

14-6822119/33

S/PV.7332 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 10/12/2014

Government of the Republic of Tanzania for supporting
the Mechanism by concluding the headquarters
agreement, which entered into force this year,
and providing the facilities for the construction of
headquarters, as well as the Netherlands support to the
branch in The Hague.
The international community should continue to
support the work of the Tribunals, not only in their
judicial activity but also through the lives of those
directly affected by the justice they render. An important
element is reparations to victims. A few months ago,
we were encouraged by the signing of a memorandum
of understanding with the International Organization
for Migration to discuss how to address the issue of
reparations to victims of the genocide in Rwanda in
a way that would promote positive involvement on
the part of victims’ and survivors’ associations, civil
society and the Rwandan Government. We are now
pleased that International Organization for Migration
has completed a study that identifies options for
providing reparations to victims and survivors of the
genocide in Rwanda, including for financing them. We
eagerly await the final report, which will be issued in
the coming months.
In addition, there is the challenge of those whose
charges have been dismissed or who have completed the
sentences they received from the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda. The Tribunal has actively sought
to find a State that would host such persons and provide
them with the documentation necessary for full civilian
lives and the enjoyment of their rights, and Argentina
welcomes those efforts. Argentina welcomes, as an
important step, the readiness of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals to continue to consider
this issue in order to support these efforts. It would
also be fitting for the Security Council to encourage
all Member States to do the same, and for Members
to commit ourselves to supporting the Tribunal in line
with our ability to do so.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of
the genocide in Rwanda and of the establishment
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
We believe it is appropriate that the international
community recognize the progress in the fight against
impunity that that Tribunal and the ICTY represent,
with important contributions in terms of doctrine to
international law, including international humanitarian
law, and that we also recognize the role and importance
of international criminal justice.

20/33

The legacy of both ad hoc Tribunals in terms of
affirming the recognition on the part of the international
community that there can be no lasting peace without
justice is undeniable. That legacy has taken concrete
form in the establishment of a permanent international
criminal tribunal — the International Criminal
Court — which is today at the heart of the entire
criminal justice system of the international community.
This system requires commitment by all States, not
just States parties, as well as on the part of the United
Nations, in the same way that we are committed to the ad
hoc tribunals. Argentina is pleased that both Tribunals,
in particular the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, have initiated joint workshops with other
criminal tribunals, such as the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon, the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of
Cambodia, the Special Court for Sierra Leone and the
International Criminal Court.
Finally, as this is the last time that Argentina
speaks on the subject of the work of both Tribunals as a
non-permanent member of the Council, I would like to
again pay tribute to the judges, prosecutors and officials
of the International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and
the Former Yugoslavia for their contribution to the fight
against impunity, as represented in a phrase contained
in the report of the ICTR and which has haunted my
country for three decades: “never again” (S/2014/829,
para. 56).
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
thank Presidents Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors
Brammertz and Jallow for their reports (see S/2014/546,
S/2014/556, S/2014/826, S/2014/827 and S/2014/829)
and for their steadfast commitment to advancing global
justice. As the world faces the continued horrors of mass
atrocities in Syria, South Sudan, the Central African
Republic and elsewhere, their critically important
work reaffirms the importance of our collective efforts
to bring to justice those responsible for committing
atrocity crimes.
Approximately 20 years ago, the Security
Council established these two historic institutions,
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). The United States has
strongly supported those courts, which have served
as models of fairness, impartiality and independence
in the trials of more than 200 defendants accused of
the worst crimes known to humankind: genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity.

14-68221

10/12/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7332

As Justice Robert Jackson said in his opening
address to the Nuremburg Tribunal, such grave crimes
cannot be ignored, because the world cannot bear
them being repeated. These Tribunals have established
the truth about atrocities committed in the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda, and by doing so have sent a
message to those who might unleash similar violence
and laid the foundations for lasting peace and security.
We have supported these courts because they stand for
justice. They represent our steadfast commitment to
ensuring that those who perpetrate the world’s worst
crimes are held accountable; for we on the Council
learned long ago that lasting peace is advanced, not
undermined, by justice.
The United States commends the efforts of the
Presidents and Prosecutors to efficiently transfer the
remaining functions to the Mechanism for International
Criminal Tribunals. We recognize that the challenges in
completing the closure of the Tribunals and the utmost
need to preserve the fairness of the judicial process in
completing the trials and appeals.
The ICTY is continuing to focus on completing
all trials and appeals, and we are pleased that final
judgements in certain appeals cases are expected early
next year. We continue to support the ICTY’s important
work in moving forward thoroughly and expeditiously
to render verdicts in cases that serve the broader needs
of justice while protecting the rights of the accused.
We note in particular that a judgement in the trial
of Radovan Karadžić is expected next year. He stands
accused as an architect of the Srebrenica massacre,
the single worst crime committed on European soil
since the Second World War. Individuals now have the
opportunity, after many years, to testify to the horrors
of what they and their loved ones experienced. They
stand not just as victims, but as empowered survivors.
They bear witness, and in so doing they advance both
justice and peace.
We await the judgement in the trial of Vojislav Šešelj,
who stands accused of crimes against humanity and
violations of the laws and customs of war. Unfortunately,
Šešelj’s conduct following provisional release by the
court on humanitarian grounds on 6 November has
unearthed some of the painful divisions of the past.
The United States condemns his hostile public rhetoric
since his release — rhetoric that promotes a backwardslooking agenda and poses a challenge to regional
reconciliation. We urge all Governments and leaders in
the region to continue working towards reconciliation,

to avoid inflammatory statements and, importantly,
to ensure continued cooperation with the Court. We
strongly urge all parties to work to ensure that the
integrity of the judicial process is both respected and
protected.
Turning to the ICTR, we commend the Tribunal for
completing all trials at the trial level and recognize with
appreciation its continuing efforts to finish appeals in a
timely manner. We are pleased to hear that the branches
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals in Arusha and The Hague continue to take
over most prosecution and judicial responsibilities.
However, the United States is deeply concerned that
nine ICTR fugitives remain at large, including three
leaders alleged to have had key roles in the Rwandan
genocide: Augustin Bizimana, Félicien Kabuga and
Protais Mpiranya. These men have evaded justice,
but they have not escaped our continued attention and
our steadfast determination to see each of them face
justice for the horrific crimes of which they have been
accused. We will not and we cannot forget them, and
we will never forget their victims. They and six other
fugitives indicted by the Tribunal must be brought
to justice. As the Ambassador of Rwanda noted, in
Kagali in July, the United States Department of State
announced an international fugitives initiative with the
Prosecutor of the Residual Mechanism, the Prosecutor
General of Rwanda and INTERPOL to disseminate
information to the public and renewed calls for
international cooperation in tracking and arresting the
nine remaining fugitives. The United States continues
to offer up to $5 million in rewards for information
leading to their arrest, whether they will be prosecuted
in the Mechanism or in Rwandan courts.
The demand for justice and accountability by
victims and survivors of mass atrocities around
the world has never been stronger or louder or more
important. These two institutions have brought
to justice some of the worse mass murderers and
criminals in the history of the world. They have made
immeasurable contributions to ensuring accountability,
advancing peace and reconciliation, truth and justice.
They stand as powerful lessons to those perpetrating
mass atrocities today. The world cannot, and we will
not, forget.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
the Presidents and Prosecutors of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for

14-6822121/33

S/PV.7332 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 10/12/2014

their reports (see S/2014/546, S/2014/556, S/2014/827
and S/2014/829) and comprehensive briefings on the
work of the Tribunals and strategies for concluding
their work. I also thank the President and the Prosecutor
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals for their reports (S/2014/826, annex I and
II). Finally, I want to congratulate Ambassador Barros
Melet and the Chilean team for their work at the head of
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
The ICTY and ICTR were established by the
Security Council to prosecute the most serious crimes.
Guided by the principles of fairness, impartiality and
independence, the Tribunals uphold respect for the
rule of law, build capacity at the national level and
contribute to the process of justice and reconciliation,
which are essential for peace.
The ICTY has played a key rolе in strengthening
the rule of law and promoting stability and longterm reconciliation in the Western Balkans, but its
contribution goes beyond that. The ICTY jurisprudence
has contributed to the development of international
criminal law in areas such as individual criminal
responsibility and crimes of sexual violence. The
Tribunal has given a voice to victims, especially women
and children.
We are aware of the heavy workload of the Tribunal
and the considerable progress it has made. However, we
encourage the ICTY to take all necessary measures
to keep the delays to a minimum. Let there be no
misunderstanding: if we want the Tribunal conclude
its work as quickly as possible, nothing should limit
its capacity to render justice in an independent and
impartial manner. In this spirit, we support the mandate
extensions requested for the judges and prosecutors of
the two Tribunals. It is necessary to ensure continuity
in the interest of justice and to ensure the Tribunal’s
effectiveness.
We note with satisfaction that Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia continue to cooperate
fully with the ICTY. The cooperation of States is indeed
essential for the Tribunal to be able to conclude its
mandate. The effectiveness of prosecutions undertaken
at the national level for war crimes continues to be a
key element of the legacy of the ICTY. We share the
concern of Prosecutor Вrammertz with regard to
the slowness of war crimes prosecutions by national
institutions, and we welcome the measures taken by the
Office of the Prosecutor to strengthen the capacities
of those institutions. I am thinking in particular of the
22/33

training project for national prosecutors carried out
jointly with the European Union, and the efforts of the
Mission to Bosnia and Herzegovina of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe with regard to
training.
The International Tribunals have played a historic
role in the fight against impunity. The Security Council
recognized that in resolution 2150 (2014), adopted
unanimously on 16 April.
This year we commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the genocide in Rwanda and the
establishment of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda. On this occasion, it is good to recall that
there is no lasting peace without justice. We commend
the ICTR for its work aimed at bringing those most
responsible for the Rwandan genocide to account.
The ICTR’s work has been crucial in contributing to
bringing justice to the victims of the genocide. Nine
accused are still at large. Like other Council members,
we call on States, particularly those in which the
accused are suspected to be residing, to redouble their
efforts to arrest the fugitives so they can stand trial.
The issue of the resettlement of the eight people
acquitted and the three people released after serving
their sentences, who are still residing in Arusha, must
also remain a priority.
While the two Tribunals move towards the conclusion
of their work, we are well aware of the difficulty they
have in retaining qualified and experienced personnel.
The international community must ensure that the
ICTY, the ICTR and the Mechanism have adequate
human resources to carry out the mandate vested in
them by the Council.
Since this is the last time that we participate as a
non-permanent member of the Council in this biannual
debate, we want to take this opportunity to pay sincere
tribute to the work of the Tribunals and their overall
contribution to the promotion and realization of justice.
The implementation of the principle of accountability
is a key element in maintaining international peace and
security. Justice and accountability must continue to
occupy a central place in the Council’s work.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): We welcome
Judge Theodor Meron, President of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and
President of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals; Judge Vagn Joensen, President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR);
14-68221

10/12/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7332

Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the ICTY; and
Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of the ICTR and
Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. I thank them all for their important
and comprehensive briefings this morning.
The creation of the Tribunals 20 years ago by the
Council came in response to crimes against humanity,
war crimes and genocide and was aimed at ensuring
criminal justice and at preventing those responsible for
those crimes from escaping punishment. The work of
the Tribunals is a vital part of international law and
international criminal justice in upholding the rule of
law.
The Tribunals have recently made positive progress
towards achieving the objectives for which they were
created, as shown by the number of cases dealt with
and the reduced number of cases remaining before
them. Despite the difficulties and obstacles and despite
the financial costs of investigations and trials, the
achievement registered by the Tribunals in imposing
the rule of law makes clear the appropriateness of the
orientation underlying their creation and of their work,
which has been so successful. The Tribunals have
played a key role in the evolution of the principles of
international criminal law, which form the basis of
their work and that of many national tribunals in the
context of their judgements and decrees. The Tribunals
also improved international criminal proceedings and
contributed to putting an end to impunity in the case of
the most heinous crimes.
The achievement of the noble objectives for which
the two Tribunals were created is based on our strong
support and constructive cooperation. That is why
Jordan strongly supports the Tribunals and calls for
them to be provided with all the means necessary for
them to conclude their work in due time, as set out by
their Presidents. We reaffirm the need for a smooth
transition to the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. In this fashion, we will be able to
ensure that the remaining accused will be appropriately
tried.
We reaffirm also that the closure of the Tribunals
depends on the completion of the work currently under
way. Today we must focus in particular on the technical
and administrative aspects of the work of the Tribunals.
That is why we will not comment on the content of cases
or of investigations. However, we wish to reaffirm that
the work of the Tribunals has in no way been an obstacle
to the political processes, reconciliation or peace in

the former Yugoslavia or in Rwanda; on the contrary,
the Tribunals have demonstrated that international
justice and the achievement of peace, security and
reconciliation go hand in hand.
We express our conviction that absolute justice
cannot be achieved. The majority of the perpetrators
of international crimes in the former Yugoslavia and
in Rwanda will remain free, as has happened following
all wars. History has shown this. However, we must not
be discouraged, nor should the Council be discouraged
from supporting international humanitarian law and
international criminal law. We should not be discouraged
from responding to the challenge of impunity.
To conclude, I would like to thank the four briefers
for their achievements, and I thank them for continuing
with the exceptional activities carried out by both
Tribunals and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. I also congratulate the Permanent
Representative of Chile in his capacity as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
Mr. Li Yongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I should like to thank President Meron,
Prosecutor Brammertz, President Joensen and
Prosecutor Jallow for their respective briefings on
the work of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) and the Residual Mechanism.
During the reporting period, both Tribunals
continued to overcome difficulties, such as those in the
area of the retention of staff, and have made progress in
their work, which China duly recognizes. At the same
time, China takes note with concern of the fact that the
timetable for implementing the completion strategy
provided for in resolution 1966 (2010) can no longer be
met. For the ICTY it will be postponed to 2017 and for
the ICTR to 2015. China hopes that the two Tribunals
will continue to enhance their efficiency while ensuring
justice to avoid any further delay in their work.
The Residual Mechanism branch for the ICTR and
that for the ICTY began their work in July 2012 and
July 2013, respectively. We are pleased to see that the
transition from the ICTR to the Residual Mechanism is
close to completion and that the Residual Mechanism
will soon tender its first appeal judgement. The
transition of the ICTY to the Residual Mechanism is also
making progress smoothly. We appreciate all of these
developments. China hopes that the two Tribunals will
properly arrange their work according to the requests

14-6822123/33

S/PV.7332 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 10/12/2014

made in the relevant Security Council resolutions,
and in particular strengthen their communication
and coordination with the Residual Mechanism so as
to ensure the successful completion of the transition
thereto.
The cooperation of States, particularly those in the
regions concerned, is crucial to the smooth functioning
of the two Tribunals and the Residual Mechanism.
China appreciates the cooperation provided by the
relevant countries, including Serbia, Croatia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Rwanda, to the two Tribunals and
the Residual Mechanism for its work.
At the same time, we call on the countries with
capacity to show political will and to provide assistance
in areas such as the enforcement of judgements
and the relocation of the acquitted. In that respect,
China welcomes the recent agreement of Belgium to
accommodate an individual acquitted by the ICTR.
Moreover, among those indicted by the ICTR, nine
are still at large. We hope that progress will be made
towards apprehending those fugitives.
Finally, I should like to take this opportunity to
thank Chile, the Chair of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals, and the Office of Legal
Affairs for their work.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I, too, should like to thank the Presidents
and Prosecutors of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the Residual
Mechanism for their briefings. We have taken note of
the report of the leadership of the Tribunals and of the
information contained therein on the the proceedings
and work carried out in the context of the conclusion of
their activities.
This year is not just a milestone, the year specified
in resolution 1966 (2010) for the conclusion of the
activities of both Tribunals. This year also marks
the twentieth anniversary of the establishment of
the ICTR. The Russian Federation was a co-sponsor
of resolution 955 (1994), establishing the ICTR in
November 1994. The Tribunal has become a key
organ for international criminal justice, and has made
a contribution to combating impunity for the gravest
crimes under international law and to achieving
national reconciliation in Rwanda.
Both the ICTY and the ICTR were established by
the Security Council to undertake specific tasks, and
24/33

of course they were never intended to keep working
for such an extended period of time. In the four years
since the adoption of resolution 1966 (2010), we have
consistently called on the Tribunals to do their utmost
to conclude their work in the time frames set out by
the resolution. The Council created the necessary
conditions to that end. In that regard, we are very
disappointed to note from the reports that the course
of proceedings not only is not accelerating, but in a
number of trials there are even more delays. Some have
stopped altogether.
The trials in a number of cases in the ICTY have
dragged on so long that indictees are reporting health
problems with the passage of time; on that count,
trial schedules have had to be changed or suspended
indefinitely, and indictees even temporarily released, as
happened in the case of Šešelj. The duration of that case
long ago exceeded a decade, and in no way meets any
standard of criminal justice. The reasons for the many
delays are often purely administrative, such as unequal
distribution of the workflow on judges, unnecessarily
protracted proceedings or inaccurate evaluation of the
legal complexity of cases. The ICTY is again failing to
meet the deadlines established by the Security Council
for the completion of its work. In these circumstances,
the question arises: If the Tribunal demonstrates such
disrespect for the Security Council, what kind of
response can it expect to its own decisions and legacy?
As regards the ICTR, we expect the time frame for
the delivery of a verdict on the remaining case on its
dockets to be delayed no longer, although it is already
well known that the hearing for the case scheduled for
earlier this month never took place. We are compelled
to note with regret that the current situation provides an
unfavourable backdrop for considering the question of
extending the mandates of the judges and prosecutors
of the Tribunals. We trust that the appropriate solutions
will be found that will encourage the Tribunals to speed
up their work and at long last transfer the remaining
cases to the Residual Mechanism. This is all the more
important given the fact that, judging by the report
of the Mechanism, its activities are gradually moving
towards an active phase, and their first decision is due
to be delivered soon.
In recent years, national mechanisms of the fight
against impunity have been developed. An example of
successful cooperation between States in that sphere
was the implementation a few days ago of a joint
operation undertaken by Serbian and Bosnian law

14-68221

10/12/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7332

enforcement bodies to detain suspects in the killing
of civilians in the Bosnian village of Štrpce in 1993.
Such efforts give us reason to believe that the goals of
combating impunity can effectively be achieved at the
national level.
Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by once again expressing the United Kingdom’s
continued support for the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugsolavia (ICTY), the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. Their
work remains vital to ensuring accountability and
promoting international justice across the globe. I
would like to thank the Tribunals’ Presidents and
Prosecutors for their reports and today’s presentations,
and to commend the progress they have made to date.
I would also like to thank Chile for its chairmanship of
the Informal Working Group.
I will begin with the ICTY. We are pleased to see
that the trial of Radovan Karadžić remains on track,
and we hope that the Goran Hadžić trial and the Ratko
Mladić trial timetables can also be maintained. We
note the position in the Vojislav Šešelj case. While we
understand the complexities, we encourage the ICTY
to take all necessary steps to ensure that his trial can
recommence as soon as possible. The timely completion
of all ICTY trials remains a top priority. The ICTY
Prosecutor is once again concerned about the slow
progress of war crime in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
share those concerns. More needs to be done to address
the most complex cases, as envisaged by the National
War Crimes Strategy of 2008, and for joint cases that
have been broken up by the State Prosecutors’ Office and
thus move between State and municipality prosecutors’
offices. That issue is becoming increasingly urgent,
and it is vital that these cases be completed in a timely
manner.
It is good to see that the Bosnian Prosecutor’s Office
has been provided with additional resources to help
address the slow progress of those cases. That activity
should be prioritized in accordance with the European
Union-funded Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance
project. In order to ensure the timely disbursement of
the second tranche of this project’s budget, we urge
the relevant authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
take the necessary steps to adopt the new justice sector
reform strategy. We also share the Prosecutor’s concern
about the threats posed by barriers being raised, which
may hinder regional reconciliation We urge all parties

to ensure that those barriers do not materialize, and
that the rights and feelings of victims continue to
be respected. We are particularly concerned about
genocide denial, which is unacceptable.
However, on a positive note, the United Kingdom
welcomes the continued cooperation of Serbia, Croatia
and Bosnia with the ICTY. That is vital if the ICTY
is to operate effectively, complete its mandate and
deliver justice for the countless victims of the wars in
the former Yugoslavia. We thank those States for their
continued support, and we trust that this will continue
as the Tribunal moves ever closer to the completion of
its mandate.
Turning to the ICTR, 2014 marks the twentieth
anniversary of the Rwandan genocide, a global
tragedy that has had an immeasurable influence on
the international community’s approach to conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and international justice.
Between April and July 1994, in 100 short days,
1 million people were killed, many in the most horrific
manner. Rwanda’s transformation since those dark
days has been extraordinary. I would like to echo the
comments of the Minister of State at the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office, Baroness Anelay, and commend
the work of the ICTR on the Tribunal’s recent twentieth
anniversary. The ICTY’s work over the past 20 years has
been instrumental in developing international law and
ensuring that those most responsible for the Rwandan
genocide are held accountable. We are pleased that the
Tribunal has now completed its substantive trial cases.
However, it is disappointing that there has been
no progress in apprehending the nine fugitives. The
work of ensuring accountability cannot be completed
until those individuals have been brought to justice.
We encourage all States to provide their full support
to Rwanda and the Mechanism so as to achieve their
arrest and surrender. We also regret that the problem
of relocating individuals in Arusha who have been
acquitted or have completed their sentences remains
unresolved. Such individuals must be able to resume
their lives. We thank the ICTR and the Mechanism for
their continued efforts to try to resolve that problem,
and we commend Belgium for accepting one of these
individuals. But more work needs to be done to find
a long-term solution to that issue. In the meantime,
we encourage all States to cooperate to resolve that
matter as quickly as possible. We wish to assure the
Tribunals of our support regarding the extension of the
judges’ and prosecutors’ mandates. That is essential for

14-6822125/33

S/PV.7332 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 10/12/2014

the work of the Tribunals if they are to complete their
mandates.
To conclude on a positive note, we commend
both Tribunals for the ongoing smooth transition of
activities to the Mechanism. That is a priority for the
United Kingdom and we hope that it will continue.
We encourage both Tribunals and the Mechanism
to continue to collaborate closely on that important
objective. We commend the outreach, capacity-building
and training activities of the Tribunals and Mechanism,
which are essential for continuing the fight against
impunity and ensuring that the excellent legacy of the
Tribunals is used to good effect.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as representative
of Chad.
I thank Presidents Meron and Joensen and
Prosecutors Brammetz and Jallow of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal Rwanda (ICTR) and
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, respectively, for their briefings. I join
other members in commending the role played by
both Tribunals in prosecuting international crimes
committed in the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda,
and for their contribution to the fight against impunity
and to the development of international law.
Since the last debate of 5 June (see S/PV.7192),
progress has been made both in the implementation
of the completion strategy for their work and for
the establishment of the Residual Mechanism. Four
accused were tried, with sixteen appeals heard at the
ICTY and four at the ICTR. The completion strategy
has continued to move forward thanks to the provision
of administrative, technical and legal support.
Meanwhile, the Mechanism has begun to take over the
responsibilities of both Tribunals, providing protection
to victims and witnesses, receiving transferred files
and moving ahead with its judicial duties.
The Tribunals have continued to support victims,
to strengthen their legacy, to build national capacity
and to intensify efforts designed to raise awareness.
Unfortunately, the completion of the legal process,
in particular at the ICTY, will not take place before
31 December, as mandated by resolution 1996 (2010).
Ten pending trials concerning the 20 individuals most
recently accused are now scheduled for 2015 and 2017.
The reasons adduced since our last debate, especially

26/33

the delayed arrest of the accused, technical issues, the
complexity of certain matters and other unforeseen
circumstances, have contributed to the postponement.
The reduction of often qualified personnel as part of
the completion strategy has also been a fundamental
problem, which leads us to call for maintaining a
significant number of such staff in order to fill the
gaps left by the departure, voluntary or otherwise, of
other staff members who have found more lucrative
employment.
Turning to the matter of extending the terms of
the judges, the members of the Council have not been
able to reach consensus on the terms. We therefore
encourage them to do so as quickly as possible within
the framework of the draft resolutions currently under
discussion, in order to permit the ICTY in particular
to meet its obligations under the completion strategy
within the required time frame.
To date, the ICTR has been unable to arrest any
of the nine Rwandan fugitives despite the efforts of
the United States and Rwandan Governments to track
them. We encourage the President and the Prosecutor
of the ICTR and we congratulate the Government of
Rwanda as well as INTERPOL for their cooperation.
We also thank the European Union and the Government
of Finland for financing the work on awareness-raising
and a study on reparations for victims. Like other
delegations, we appeal to States to cooperate with
the ICTR and with the Mechanism in order to find
the fugitives who remain at large and to welcome the
dozens of others who were acquitted or freed by the
Tribunals.
While we deplore the delays reported by the
Tribunals, we nonetheless recognize their enormous
efforts, especially the 141 brought before the ICTY
of 161 who were sought. We welcome that result and
encourage them to persevere, with a view to concluding
their work as quickly as possible with due respect for
the judicial process.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to thank the Presidents and the Prosecutors of both
Tribunals and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals for their comprehensive reports

14-68221

10/12/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7332

(see S/2014/546, S/2014/556, S/2014/826, S/2014/827
and S/2014/829) and respective briefings.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has supported the
establishment and work of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) since its
inception. The legacy of the ICTY is manifested through
its extensive documentation of serious violations of
international humanitarian law committed on the
territory of the former Yugoslavia since 1991. As such,
it should serve as a constant reminder that there is no
impunity for serious war crimes.
Concerning the work of the ICTY, we note that
all indictees have been brought before the Tribunal,
including several long-term fugitives. We are also aware
of the Tribunal’s heavy current workload. However, we
expect the Tribunal to complete its work in the nearest
possible future and to take all necessary measures to
eliminate delays.
Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches high importance
to regional cooperation, which we deem essential if the
ICTY is to complete its mandate and deliver justice
for the many victims of the conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia. That remains a crucial precondition for the
process of reconciliation within the country and within
the region as a whole. In an effort to promote further
regional cooperation with its neighbours, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has signed protocols on cooperation
in the prosecution of war crimes, which define the
channels for conducting investigations that concern
the citizens of other countries. Within the framework
of those protocols, productive cooperation among the
judicial institutions of the countries in the region has
intensified, particularly in the areas of investigation and
witness protection. On 5 December, 15 people believed
to have been involved in the torture and murder of some
20 people February 1993 were arrested in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in Serbia. Those arrests were made
possible thanks to cooperation between the prosecutors’
offices and law enforcement officials of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Serbia. That is a clear example of
regional cooperation between our two countries and
sends a strong message for ending impunity for crimes
committed during the war.
The cooperation of witnesses, especially victimwitnesses, is critical to successful war crimes
prosecutions not only before the ICTY, but also before
the courts in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Victim-witnesses
often testify about very traumatic events, and during
the course of their testimony they relive their trauma.

Often, the same victim-witnesses testify in different
trials and against different persons accused of war
crimes. Considering such complexities, we stress that
all those dealing with victim-witnesses must exhibit a
high degree of awareness and treat them with respect
for their dignity and human rights. In that regard, we
respect today’s remarks and Prosecutor Brammetz’s
recognition of the role of witnesses in court proceedings.
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to cooperate with
the ICTY by allowing access to documents and archives
in witness protection matters. Our commitment to
investigating, prosecuting and appropriately punishing
persons responsible for the war crimes remains
unquestionable. The prosecutions of war crimes that
are now the responsibility of the justice system of
Bosnia and Herzegovina are a critical component of the
ICTY legacy. In its fight against impunity, Bosnia and
Herzegovina continues to strengthen the national justice
system at all levels, while bringing those responsible
for the most serious crimes to justice.
In November, the Office of the Prosecutor of
Bosnia and Herzegovina had 679 recorded war crimes
cases, against 5,119 persons accused of war crimes.
Today, 35 prosecutors are working in the Office of the
Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina on war crimes
cases. This year, 42 war crimes indictments have been
issued against 82 persons. We expect that by the end of
the year this number will increase to 100, which is about
25 per cent of the total number of all persons accused
of war crimes in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the past
10 years. The Courts of Bosnia and Herzegovina have
issued 107 final judgments against 175 persons.
The National War Crimes Strategy, which was
adopted in 2008, sets the uniform criteria in Bosnia
and Herzegovina for assessing the complexity of war
crimes cases. According to the Strategy, the most
complex and highest-priority war crimes cases should
be judged within seven years, and the other cases
within a period of 15 years from the adoption of the
Strategy. The Strategy improves consistency in judicial
practices across the whole country and at all levels. It
also strengthens the capacity of the judiciary and police
authorities while ensuring the protection and support of
victims and witnesses.
The implementation of the Strategy is a complex
process with participation of numerous institutions of
all authority levels in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
main causes of delays in the implementation of the
Strategy occur due to delays in the transfer of less-

14-6822127/33

S/PV.7332 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 10/12/2014

complex cases from the State level to the level of the
entities and the Brčko district, delays in establishing a
centralized database of war crimes case files, and the
method of measuring the performance of prosecutors’
and judges’ performance. Strengthening the efficiency
of the implementation of the Strategy depends on our
ability to strengthen the capacity of the judicial system.
In achieving this objective, we would like to welcome
the European Union’s support to the implementation of
the Strategy’s goals.
An important aspect of cooperation between
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the ICTY is the search for
missing persons, exhumation efforts and the exchange
of information about victims. In the aftermath of the
war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the number of missing
persons is estimated at 30,000. While 20,000 cases have
been solved to date, 8,000 persons remain missing.
The search for missing persons involves cooperation
between the Government institutions of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and international organizations,
non-governmental organizations and the network of
Red Cross and Red Crescent societies.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank the Ambassador of Chile in his role as Chair of
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
and the Office of Legal Affairs of the United Nations
for their work.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Milanović (Serbia): Let me begin by welcoming
the Presidents and the Prosecutors of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
two of whom are also officials of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and by
thanking them for their briefings today.
At the outset, I would like to express our
appreciation of the acknowledgement of the continued
high level of cooperation of the Republic of Serbia
with the ICTY that the President and the Prosecutor
presented in their reports. As a consequence, there are
no outstanding indictees at large and all of the 3,466
requests for assistance received from the Office of the
Prosecutor or defence counsels for access to documents,
archives and witnesses have been complied with, with
only two of the most recent still pending. This has been
brought about not only through the compliance of the
Government of Serbia with its international obligations,

28/33

but also through its firm commitment to the principles
of international humanitarian law. Let me reiterate that
the Government of Serbia is committed to continuing
its cooperation, with the Tribunal and the Residual
Mechanism alike.
Serbia has followed with particular attention
ICTY activities to implement its completion strategy
and transition smoothly to the Mechanism. While
the Tribunal, regrettably, will not complete all of its
judicial work by the end of this year, as set forth in
resolution 1966 (2010), it is in the interest of my country
to see the trials against its citizens completed and have
their defences presented under a fair and expeditious
procedure. We hope that the remaining proceedings
will be completed as planned.
Serbia welcomes the progress made in the
establishment of the operational capacities of The Hague
branch of the International Residual Mechanism over
the past year, which is essential for the implementation
of the ICTY mission in accordance with its mandate
and, in particular, for enabling national judiciaries
to continue to prosecute war crimes. In this context,
I would like to mention once again, with particular
appreciation, the visit to Belgrade of Mechanism
Prosecutor Hassan Bubacar Jallow on 8 September,
during which a memorandum of understanding was
signed to facilitate continued cooperation in the
exchange of evidence to be used in cases tried by the
national judiciary of Serbia.
With the ICTY completion strategy entering its
final stages, the emphasis of war crimes prosecutions
has been shifting to national judiciaries, and will soon
be their full responsibility. Serbia, for its part, has
systematically and persistently continued to prosecute
war crimes committed in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia in the firm belief that the quest and respect
for justice and fairness are of vital importance. The
number of cases tried in domestic courts has increased
considerably in the past period. The facts speak for
themselves: the Serbian judiciary has so far tried
435 persons for criminal offences committed against
international humanitarian law, while 78 persons are
currently under investigation.
To further this task, an action plan has been
conceived, in line with the European Union (EU)
negotiating framework, under the chapter on judiciary
and fundamental rights, and has been submitted to the
European Commission. The implementation of the
action plan will further contribute to enhancing the
14-68221

10/12/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7332

capacity and strengthening the work of the Office of
the War Crimes Prosecutor and other State bodies, in
line with our obligations as a nation, society and an
aspiring EU member State. Much, however, remains
to be done, and we are fully aware that the task will
require diligence and persistence. The assistance
provided to national judicial authorities by the Office of
the Prosecutor for the purpose of strengthening national
capacities has been vital and will remain a high priority
until the very closure of the Tribunal — as much in
Serbia as in the rest of the region.
In order to make a successful contribution to
regional peace and reconciliation, we believe that
regional cooperation must continue to be a priority.
With anything short of full cooperation by the countries
on whose territories the crimes were committed, justice
can hardly be served. Regional cooperation is and will
be of key importance in the struggle against impunity
for international criminal offences — all the more so in
the time to come. Such cooperation with the war crimes
prosecutors of Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Montenegro and with the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo has been constantly intensifying,
with the latest example demonstrated by the successful
outcome of the joint Serbian-Bosnian investigation
that led to the arrest on 5 December of five suspects
in Serbia and 10 in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
notorious case of the abduction and killing in 1993
of 20 people from a train near the Bosnian village of
Štrpci. The 20 years of attempts to investigate this case
and uncover the perpetrators of this heinous atrocity
could not have succeeded without intensive cooperation
within the judicial and police organs of the two countries,
particularly in the past two years. Let me also point
out that evidence has been exchanged in 252 cases so
far. Another recent positive element on this path is the
agreement on the exchange of liaison officers signed
on 11 September between the War Crimes Prosecutors
of Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, which will
facilitate bilateral cooperation on access to evidence.
Given Serbia’s earlier stated efforts, as well as
the aforementioned positive trends, it is imperative to
keep up the momentum. It is also our right to expect
all countries of the former Yugoslavia to do the same
and to investigate and try the cases of war crimes in
which Serbs were victims. This is their duty not only
towards the victims and their own people, but towards
humankind as well.

I have pointed out at previous Security Council
meetings on the ICTY, and most recently in a General
Assembly plenary meeting, the need to see the processes
before the Tribunal completed and to have defences
presented in a fair and expeditious procedure, arguing
that protracted procedures that prolong detention, often
indefinitely, are contrary to the recognized norms
regulating the rights of the accused. In line with that,
we take the case of Vojislav Šešelj as indicative, with
the indictee having been held in detention without
sentencing for almost 12 years following his voluntary
surrender. I have underscored that this case is less
than conducive to the reputation of the ICTY and that
concrete measures should be taken speedily in order
to unlock the legal procedural deadlock in which this
case has remained. To that end, I wish to emphasize
that Serbia has never made any request to the Tribunal
but to complete the pending cases with full respect for
the trial rights of the accused and the defence. Since
then, as stated in President Meron’s report (S/2014/556),
on 6 November the Trial Chamber, with a decision by
the majority, ordered the provisional release of Vojislav
Šešelj to Serbia for an indefinite period on humanitarian
grounds.
Committed to the policy of peace and stability, as
well as to regional cooperation and dialogue, Serbia
does not condone warmongering rhetoric no matter
where it comes from. Likewise, my country cannot
accept allegations of collective responsibility and
guilt. Bearing in mind the path that our countries have
traversed over the past two decades, from the ashes of
war and devastation through the establishment of peace
and the quest for reconciliation, and coming to terms
with the past and particularly looking to the future and
to the work that remains ahead of us, the importance of
regional cooperation cannot be overstated. While much
has been said about the successes achieved so far, as
in any endeavour, to bear the full fruit of success one
has to be forward-looking, courageous and persistent.
Abusing events and occurrences for one’s political ends
is neither forward-looking nor courageous, and can
only be said to be effective in awakening the demons
of the past.
The statements made by Vojislav Šešelj after his
temporary release are no different from those he made
regularly in the ICTY courtroom. Besides, he has said
on a number of occasions that he would not accept
any restrictions on his public statements. Yet, he was
released nonetheless. In deciding on the release, the

14-6822129/33

S/PV.7332 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 10/12/2014

Trial Chamber certainly knew quite well the kind of
statements he would make. His statements against the
Government of the Republic of Serbia and its policies
cannot be attributed to the Republic of Serbia, and
there is no basis whatsoever to accuse my country
and its Government of anything levelled against them
in Mr. Šešelj’s statements before or after his release.
As to the impact of those statements and the political
views that they advocate, the results of the past several
elections offer sufficient testimony to their marginality.
Regional destabilization is not in the interest of
Serbia, just as it is not in the interest of the Balkan
countries or of Europe. What we all aspire to is respect
for civilizational and democratic achievements, the rule
of law and the economic progress and stability of the
region. It is difficult to build peace and stability in the
region, but it is very easy to raze it. Hate speech is,
let me remind the Council, not exclusive to Serbia but,
sadly and regrettably, a region-wide phenomenon.
As I stated in the previous Security Council
debate six months ago (see S/PV.7192), bearing in
mind that Serbia is firmly committed to cooperation
with the ICTY and that 20 years have elapsed since its
establishment, I would like to point out once again that
my country attaches great importance to the initiative
aimed at ensuring that those convicted by the Tribunal
in The Hague be allowed to serve their sentences in
the States that emerged in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia. In that context, let me recall that, since
2009, Serbia has requested to sign such an agreement
with the ICTY and sought very actively to promote
the initiative all along. Its officials have written to the
United Nations and the ICTY on numerous occasions,
yet, regrettably, no progress has been made.
Without prejudging the outcome of this purely
humanitarian request, and bearing in mind that President
Meron has on a number of occasions stated in his
reports and in public statements that the International
Residual Mechanism is actively working to secure
additional agreements to increase its enforcement
capacity and that he welcomes the cooperation of States
in that regard, Serbia would appreciate an opportunity
to sign such an agreement. The results of its many years
of cooperation with the ICTY indicate that my country
takes this question very seriously and that it is ready to
accept international supervision of the enforcement of
sentences and provide all necessary guarantees.
I take this opportunity to reiterate the readiness of
Serbia to, and its interest in, addressing the questions
30/33

of ICTY archives. We advised the Security Council of
our official position on the matter in October 2008. My
country is ready to participate actively in all future
discussions and to continue to cooperate with the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals on
this question. Also, as in the past, Serbia is ready to
fulfil all obligations resulting from cooperation with
the ICTY and the International Residual Mechanism.
Let me conclude by expressing once again my
country’s satisfaction concerning the progress made in
the establishment of operational capacities of the Hague
branch of the International Residual Mechanism. Its
work is and will continue to be of key importance in
facilitating the full establishment of justice, in particular
in enabling the continued work of national judiciaries
in prosecuting war crimes. The international judicial
system has a key role to play in the process, and it is
obligated to make a contribution through full respect
for international norms and human rights principles.
Let me point out once again that Serbia is committed to
regional peace, stability and reconciliation.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Let me start by welcoming
the Presidents of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, Judges Meron and Joensen,
as well as Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow. We
commend their important work and appreciate their
comprehensive reports on the work of the Tribunals
(S/2014/546 and S/2014/556) and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals in the
reporting period.
There is appropriate symbolism in the date of
today’s Security Council meeting. Today we celebrate
Human Rights Day; yesterday we commemorated the
adoption of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. The issues we
are discussing now properly fit into both categories.
As the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) prepares to bring its work to a final
conclusion after more than two decades of existence,
there has been an increased focus on the question of
the legacy that the Tribunal leaves behind. The ad
hoc Tribunals have been widely praised for playing a
pioneering role in the development and implementation
of international criminal law. The ICTY has produced
an impressive body of jurisprudence in the field of

14-68221

10/12/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7332

international humanitarian law and international
criminal procedure. The Tribunal has contributed to
putting an end to the culture of impunity, providing
an incentive for domestic judiciaries to conduct
proceedings impartially and to incorporate international
legal standards. Due to the existence of the Tribunal, the
voices of victims are being heard and written historical
records established. That is a worthy legacy.
There is no doubt that the Tribunal’s principal
contribution to peace and security, regional stability
and reconciliation is its establishment of undisputed
facts and individual criminal responsibility and its
bringing to justice the persons who are responsible
for widespread and flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law. The road to justice is not an easy
one, but at its very end lie true peace and appeasement.
As many would say — and as in fact has been said
here today — justice delayed is justice denied. In our
view, a speedy trial resulting in a court decision — a
conviction or acquittal — represents not only one of the
most essential rights of the accused, but also an equally
essential right of the victims. Protracted proceedings
may weaken public trust in international justice and its
proper administration. In that context, we should not
forget the case of the mastermind of the terrible events
in the former Yugoslavia, Slobodan Milošević, in which
the proceedings lasted so long that his death thwarted
the conviction he deserved. Very long trials, measured
not in mere months but in too many years, are not an
exception in the ICTY practice; unfortunately, they are
the rule.
Vojislav Šešelj, notorious for his warmongering,
was indicted in 2003 for war crimes and crimes
against humanity, as well as for making inflammatory
speeches and spreading hatred in the media and during
public events. And the latter are precisely the activities
that Šešelj is carrying out as we speak. The Tribunal’s
indictment of Šešelj, it is worth noting, is 33 pages long.
He advocated an ideology that left thousands of deaths,
horrible crimes, destruction and suffering in its wake.
If the Tribunal’s procedures and decisions are perceived
by the general public, especially the victims, as unjust
or grossly unbalanced, they could produce an effect
opposite to that desired. Such negative perceptions
can result from a number of factors, particularly
including lengthy trials, such as in the Vojislav Šešelj
case, notwithstanding the fact that to a great extent he
contributed to it himself.

Šešelj was released for humanitarian reasons, but
the current consequences of that decision are anything
but humanitarian. It is difficult to understand, to
say the least, why Šešelj was released with no clear
conditions attached to his activities and conduct. The
fact that he is abusing his temporary freedom as much
as possible comes as no surprise to anyone familiar
with his indictment and behaviour during the trial. The
basic conditions for provisional release, as provided
for in the Tribunal’s rules of procedure and evidence,
stipulate that an accused provisionally released must not
in any way obstruct proceedings or harm by his deeds
the fundamentals of international justice, for which
the ICTY was established. The potential escalation of
Šešelj’s political activities and the danger that his hate
speech might gain new advocates, as well as followers,
is increasingly damaging the very foundations of peace
and stability in South-East Europe. To wait more than
11 years for justice to be served is painful and difficult
enough; to see the accused set free and able to continue
with the inflammatory speeches and scandalous
provocations for which he was on trial is beyond
difficult: it is utterly unacceptable and insulting.
Owing to all of this, the President of the Republic
of Croatia, Ivo Josipović, has decided to draw the
attention of the Tribunal and the Security Council to the
impact of the Trial Chamber’s decision to allow Šešelj’s
temporary release. His letter has been distributed as
a document of the Council and the General Assembly
(S/2014/839, annex), and we hope that members have
taken note of it. On 26 November 2014 the Croatian
Parliament adopted a declaration on the ICTY decision
on Šešelj’s provisional release, expressing its deep
concern. We commend Prosecutor Brammertz’s recent
motion that the Tribunal demand that Šešelj’s temporary
release be revoked, based on his well-founded opinion
that the Tribunal’s trust in Šešelj’s conduct was without
foundation. We expect the motion to be processed
rapidly.
On its official Web page, the ICTY describes its
role as follows:
“The Tribunal has contributed to an
indisputable historical record, combating denial
and helping communities come to terms with their
recent history. Crimes across the region can no
longer be denied.”
With Šešelj’s provisional release, those noble goals have
been not only ignored but also seriously compromised.

14-6822131/33

S/PV.7332 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 10/12/2014

Šešelj is now mocking both the victims and international
criminal justice. Through his speeches he spreads the
hatred that led to the war in the former Yugoslavia.
While we are not questioning the legal foundation of
the Tribunal’s decision, we have to say it, loud and clear,
that releasing Šešelj is nothing short of cynical laughter
in the faces of his countless victims. Considering
Šešelj’s provocative, abusive and highly dangerous
behaviour, Croatia sincerely hopes that many will join
us in voicing their discontent and calling for putting a
definitive end to it.
In that regard, it is worth noting that in Brussels
on 27 November the European Parliament adopted a
resolution on the Šešelj case that strongly condemns
his warmongering and deplores his provocative public
activities. The resolution notes with concern that the
lack of an adequate political reaction and legal response
from the Serbian authorities to Šešelj’s behavior
undermines the victims’ trust in the judicial process. At
the same time, in the resolution the European Parliament
encourages the ICTY to take determined action to
reaffirm confidence in the Tribunal, weakened as it
has been by Šešelj’s appalling and inadmissible public
statements. We hope the messages in this important
resolution will be taken seriously by all concerned.
Some of us were present in this very Chamber more
than 21 years ago when the Security Council adopted
resolution 827 (1993), establishing the ICTY. Croatia
has come a long way since then, becoming a member
State of both the European Union and NATO and an
anchor of stability and cooperation in the region. The
last thing we need today, while the entire international
community is facing all the new challenges of the
twenty-first century, is an indicted war criminal let
loose to evoke ghosts from the past, stirring up hatred
and national intolerance. All those who are in a position
to stop that, whether through legal action or public
statements, must do their utmost. Inaction in that regard
is not an acceptable option.
Croatia will continue to support both the immediate
goal of the ICTY — ending impunity and prosecuting
those responsible for the most serious crimes in the
former Yugoslavia — as well as its more ambitious
and long-term one of contributing to lasting peace in
the region. We fully respect the independence of the
Tribunal and its Trial and Appeal Chambers and are well
aware of the challenges they face. We also agree that
reconciliation and confidence-building must primarily
come from within societies. However, the Tribunal does

32/33

not exist in a vacuum, and its decisions do have an impact
on the ground, whether positive or negative. It would
not be prudent to ignore that important fact. Clearly,
the decision to provisionally release a person who has
been charged with numerous war crimes committed in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Croatia can only add to
the growing distrust of international tribunals and the
justice they provide, even among those who are strong
proponents of international criminal law.
Finally, I would like to reiterate our full and
continued support for the work of the Tribunal, despite
the criticism Croatia has voiced today and on previous
occasions. We will continue to cooperate fully with
the Tribunal and we hope that the lessons learned
will be used appropriately for improving international
criminal justice and the future work of the International
Criminal Court, which Croatia strongly supports.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Serbia, who has asked to
make a further statement.
Mr. Milanović (Serbia): I am regretfully compelled
to take the floor once again. This body is too precious
to be abused for the conduct of a domestic electoral
campaign. The conduct of Croatia related to some recent
events cannot be said to have been fully conducive to
building on what we have achieved thus far — not
the future that we all aspire to. One needs to look no
further than to the treatment of the members of the
Serbian minority over the past 20 years in Croatia, and
still today, and the character of the frequent incidents
directed against them.
Serbia has invested significant efforts in stabilizing
its delicate relations with Croatia and in resolving
outstanding questions to mutual satisfaction and
benefit. Numerous problems in the area of the rule
of law, human rights and freedoms and the return
of displaced Serbs and restitution of their property
existed as Croatia marched towards European Union
accession. They continue to exist today, well after its
accession. Those problems could have been raised and
solutions insisted upon, yet my country did not do so as
it considered that open questions could be resolved in
a bilateral context and that European integration by all
of the countries of the region was much more important
to regional stability and would have served to solve all
of the questions.

14-68221

10/12/2014 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7332

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia, who has asked to
make a further statement.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): It is not with pleasure
that I take the floor for the second time today. But I
cannot let some parts of Serbia’s second intervention go
unanswered. To reply to some of the comments, I will
use the European Parliament resolution in the Šešelj
case. The resolution states as follows:
“whereas in his public statements Šešelj
repeatedly called for the creation of ‘Greater
Serbia’, publicly stating claims on neighbouring
countries, including EU Member State Croatia, and
inciting hatred against non-Serb people”;
“stresses that Šešelj’s recent statements could
have the effect of undermining the progress made
in regional cooperation and reconciliation and
subverting the efforts of recent years”;
“reminds the Serbian authorities of their
obligations under the framework for cooperation
with the ICTY and of Serbia’s obligations as an
EU candidate country; notes with concern that
the absence of an adequate political reaction and
legal response by the Serbian authorities ... [and]
encourages the Serbian authorities and the democratic
parties to condemn any public manifestation of
hate speech or wartime rhetoric and to promote
the protection of minority and cultural rights [and]
asks the Serbian authorities to investigate whether
Šešelj has violated Serbian law and to strengthen
and fully apply the legislation outlawing hate
speech, discrimination and incitement to violence”.

The European Parliament is the pivotal institution
of the European Union. Its documents represent the
highest authority to the European Union, of which
Croatia is a member State and Serbia is a candidate for
membership. The resolution perfectly encapsulates the
core of the problem in the Šešelj case and outlines the
way out.
Finally, let me conclude by saying that it is
deplorable, to put it mildly, that the issue of the
Serbian minority in Croatia has been opened today.
The Security Council is the last place where such an
issue should be debated. There is no reason at all to
do so, especially during a debate on the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. I see no reason to
explain or to justify the Croatian position in that regard,
because in doing so I would be conferring on the matter
importance it does not at all deserve.
On the other hand, Šešelj concerns an issue that
must be discussed. Making any connection between
the Serbian minority in Croatia and the absence of
any reaction on the part of the Serbian authorities to
the Šešelj case is not only grossly misplaced, but also
demonstrates the inability of Serbia to understand the
seriousness of the Šešelj problem and to deal with it.
Some lessons from the past, it seems, Serbia just refuses
to learn.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

14-6822133/33
