UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1970 th

MEETING:

12 NOVEMBER

1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
. ... ... ,... . .,. .. .. .. .. ... ... ., .. .. ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Admission of hew Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning
the application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for admission to
membership in the United Nations (S/12225) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l970)

..

S/PV. 1970

-

,:

!’ i,’
I’
,
,;“‘: /,
1
‘,I
x:
,I
‘3,

PI

NOTE

,i

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . !) are normally published in
Supp/~m~~~~,s of the Officicrl Reco,vl,s of the Sccwrity Council, The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about -----Elit is given.
--~

quarterly

1
Sts
Lit
SW
Ki
Ur
An

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Re.sd~~tiom rrm/
Decisions of the Security Cwncil. The new system, which has been applied
rctroactivelv
tn r~cnllltinn~ a,+ntPd hefnre 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.
.--------

--a

L”

,YY”,UL.“I.U

..YYr.--

--.---

f

--.-.

\d
1

V

X

f
1z
el
0

‘k
I
!I

1970th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 12 November
Mr. Jorge Enrique ILLUECA

President:

(Panama).

the Council chamber, on the usual understanding
that they will be invited to take a place at the Council
table when they wish to address the Council.

Present:
The representatives
of the following
States: Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan,
.Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
.Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania and United States of
.America.

Provisional
1. Adoption

1976, at 3 p.m.

agenda (S/Agenda/l970)

of the agenda

12. Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members concerning the application of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for admission to membership
in the United Nations
(S/12225)

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpwtatiorl
jiw~~ Spunk/l):
The Security Council will now take up the item on
its agenda concerning the report of the Committee
on the Admission of New Members concerning the
application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for
admission to membership in the United Nations.

Adoption of the agenda

4. In this connexion, the’ Council has before it a
draft resolution sponsored by the delegations of Benin,
China, Guyana, Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Sweden, the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the United Republic of Tanzania contained in document S/12226. I have been
asked to inform the Council that the delegation of
France has requested to be added as a sponsor of
that draft resolution.

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for admission to membership in the United Nations (S/12225)

5. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (intrrpl.ptotiolr
jivn~
Ruwiw):
Today the
Security Council again proceeds to consider the
question of the admission of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam to membership in the United Nations.
The delegations of the States members of the Security Council, as well as those of non-members of
the Security Council, have already had the opportunity
to explain their position on this particularly important
problem.

1. The PRESIDENT
(intc~rp/.etcition jinnr Spmrid?):
I wish to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the Permanent Representatives
(of Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Democratic Kampuchea,
‘the German Democratic Republic, Hungary, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Madagascar, Malta,
Poland, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, the
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and Yugoslavia
in which they ask to be invited to participate in the
debate. I therefore propose that the Council agree,
in accordance with the provisions of Article 31 of
lthe Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of
procedure, and if there are no objections, to invite
ithose representatives to participate in the discusIsion without the right to vote.

6. Why does the delegation of the Soviet Union
consider it necessary to speak now on this question’?
For our country, for the Soviet people and for the
Government of the Soviet Union there is no dilemma
as to whether or not to admit the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam to the Unidad Nations. Our people
has been linked for many years by close and friendly

2. I shall invite the aforementioned
representatives
to take the places reserved for them at the side of
I

with the Vietnamese
people. When the question
arises once again whether the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam should be admitted to the United Nations,
we do not hesitate; we reply: “Tt must be admitted
immediately,
without any procrastination,
without
any conditions and without any attempt to delay a
decision on this question”.

ties

in its country, a society which knows no calamity,
nor the exploitation of man by man’and which will
open up the way to a just and happy society in Viet
Nam.
13. Of course, in relations between States there
are events and situations which cannot be easily
forgotten by those who participated
in them, and
which are sometimes still felt after many years.
And in the present case, we should not forget that.
This is due to the recent cruel war. But is Viet Nam
guilty of that war? Is it the Vietnamese people that
started that war? No; I can say again, no. That war
was imposed on it, and in that war it successfully
defended its honour, its freedom and its independence in a long and difficult struggle.

7. There is no reason at all which could justify any
attempt to postpone a positive decision on this request
of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. Indeed, what
arguments, what motivations
could be put forward
by those who are still hesitating and who, when this
matter is discussed, take a negative position, thus
impeding the admission of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam to the United Nations?
8. Is the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam an independent State? Yes; the people of Viet Nam has
proved this by its heroic struggle for freedom and
independence. The people of Viet Nam has sacrificed
thousands of lives to defend its freedom and independence. The blood of its best fathers, sons, daughters
and children was shed to defend the right of that
people to live freely and to move forward towards
independent development,
which is the path it has
chosen.

14. In the situation that has now arisen, the best
way for those who are still living with the ideas of
the recent past would be to rise above those feelings
and ideas and try to institute friendly relations with
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.
15. Relations between States go through different
phases, including periods of unfriendliness. This is
what happened to the relations between the United
States and Viet Nam. But one must look not at the
past but at the future. Nobody can escape the reality
of life. Viet Nam will exist; it will develop: it will
grow stronger as an independent State. The number
of its friends is great, and it will become even greater.
The Soviet Union and all Viet Nam’s sincere friends
want to see that country become as the freedomloving, heroic, honest, hard-working and intelligent
people of Viet Nam itself wants it. It wants to see its
country happy, flourishing
and successful on the
socialist path which it has chosen. We can all only
wish it success in its difficult undertaking,

9. Is the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam a peaceloving country‘? Yes, it is a peace-loving country.
Its people, sacrificing life and limb, has struggled
for peace in its land, for the right to live in the way
best suited to its basic, vital interests.
10. Is the independent
Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam a free country with regard to its policies? It
seems to me that even to ask such a question is absurd.
Yes, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is a free
and independent State and, as stich, it will develop and
grow stronger.

16. More than one year ago the Council considered
the application of the two Vietnamese States for
admission to the United Nations. At that time there
were two sovereign Vietnamese States in existence.
We recall that the positive solution of the question
without any delay was even at that time supported
by an overwhelming majority not only of the Security
Council but also of the General Assembly. The
Council at that time was not in a position to recommend
the admission of the two States because of stubborn
opposition and the negative vote, not backed by any
reason at all, of one of its permanent Members, the
United States. But 14 members of the Security COuncil [SLY 1846th nmthg] and a majority of 123 in the
General Assembly .[~~.so/~rion 3366 (XXX) of 19 Se/.‘re~~rher~19751 took a stand in favour of a positive
solution of the question of the admission of the two
Vietnamese States to the United Nations, in strict
compliance
with the provisions
of the Charter.
Unfortunately,
repeated
consideration
of this
question last year did not, for the reason we ah
know, lead to the only legitimate and just solution,
which would have enabled the heroic Vietnamese

II.
Does the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam comply
with the Charter of the United Nations? Perhaps
this question should rather be put to those who are
still impeding the admission of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam to the United Nations. As far as our
country is concerned, we are firmly convinced and
we declare here that the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam, even though it is not yet a Member of the
United Nations, not only complies with the Charter
but is also firmly striving to achieve the noble
purposes and principles
of the United Nations’ in
international affairs and relations among States.
12. Is the State of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam conducting a humane policy‘? Yes, it conducts
such a policy and does so strictly, clearly and
consistently.
The people of that country has won
peace by paying a high price. It conquered its freedom
by paying a high price. It is not threatening anyone.
It has chosen the path of socialist development and
is firmly determined to construct a socialist society
2

p’eopte to take its legitimate
Nations.

place in the United

co-operate fully with the Vietnamese people as
they build socialism, exerting every effort to
develop and strengthen brotherly friendship and
co-operation with the Workers’ Party of Viet Nam
and the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, in the
interest of strengthening the unity and solidarity
y all socialist countries on the basis of the unshakable principles of Marxism-Leninism
and pro/etarian internalionalism.”

1’7. In his letter of IO August 1976 addressed to
the Secretary-General
[S//2/&?, ~//~/~c~sI, the Prime
Minister of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam again
solemnly declared that his country accepted the
commitments
enshrined in the Charter and agreed to
albide by them. But at that time the Security Council
was again not able to consider the matter in substance
XIld to make a positive recommendation
for the
General Assambly
to consider that applicntkm,
again for the same reason-the
threat of the use 01
the veto. That threat was wholly unjust, since it
at’ose out of quite another question that had no relation
whatsoever to the sutiject or to the matter contained
in the letter of the Prime Minister of Viet Nam.

22. The Vietnamese people have now turned a new
page in their history. The complete liberation of
South Viet Nam in the spring of I975 was the
crowning point of the unification of the country as a
State. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam was then
proclaimed. In the telegram of congratulations setit
by the General Secretary of the Central Committee
of the Communist
Party of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, Comrade Brezhnev; the President
of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, Comrade Podgorny;
and the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the
I_Jnion of Soviet Socialist
Republics, Comrade
Kosygin, to the leaders of the Workers’ Party of
Viet Nam, they said:

113. In the situation that arose at that time, the Counconsideration
of the application until
hlovember,
on the understanding,
however, that
the General Assembly would be able to considet
the question of the application of Viet Nam at its
thirty-first session. The Vietnamese side consented
to such an approach in order not to complicate the
situation. However, we never had any doubt as to
what decision would be taken with respect0 to this
problem and what decision would really be in keeping
with the interests of peace and security, would serve
the cause of peace, independence and equal rights
for peoples and would be in accordance with the
requirements of deepening the relaxation of interniational tensions,
ciil postponed

“The creation of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam crowns many years of the heroic struggle of
the Vietnamese people under the leadership of
its Marxist-Leninist
vanguard, the Workers’ Party
of Viet Nam, for the confirmation of basic national
rights, for the unity, independence and territorial
integrity of the whole country. It is the expression of
that people’s sovereign will to construct a new free
life in socialism.”

19. The position of the Soviet Union on the question
of the admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet
N’am is well known. We firmly and unflinchingly
support and will always support the admission of
that country to the United Nations. Such a positio~i
is dictated by recognition of the enormous role played
by the Vietnamese people in the strengthening of
international peace and security. It is dictated by WI
solidarity with that people in its work and its struggle
and by the whole of the history of SovietaVict Nam
relations which are based on the solid foundation
of true internationalism
and friendship.

23. In these days the Vietnamese people, which is
engaged in peaceful, constructive work, has been
preparing for an important event, the opening of the
Fourth Congress of the Workers’ Party of Viet Nam.
The success achieved by Viet Nam is obvious,
because the tasks that were set by the Vietnamese
revolution have been achieved: the South has been
liberated: Viet Nam is now unified; it is free and
democratic. Vast horizons have now been opened
up for socialist construction on a wide scale.
24. The working people of Viet Nam now face new,
enormous tasks in eliminating the effects of the war,
developing the economy and culture and improving
living conditions. A Constitution is being worked
out in the country. This Constitution must CrYstalliZe
the results of the struggle of the people of Viet Nam
and will mobilize that people to make socialist
changes, to create a new society and to build socialism
in the country, A new task has been outlined for the
Cot~Iltry’s speedy progress towards socialism, for
transforming that land into a flourishing State for
the happiness and welfare of all the people. Comrade
Brezhnev recently said:

20. Our country helped in the creation of the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam which came into existence 31 years ago. We shall continue to act in the
same way in respect of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam.
211. 1 wish to quote here from the telegram of congratuIations sent by Comrades Brezhnev, Podgorny
and Kosygin, the leaders of the Soviet Union, to the
leaders of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on
2 September 1976. It reads:
“True to the principles of proletarian
internationalism,
the Communist
Party of the Soviet
Union and the Soviet people will continue to

“Viet Nam, with its enormous experience of
heroic struggle against imperialist aggression and for
3

freedom and independence, with its great revolutionary authority, has now become an important
factor for peace in South-East Asia, and indeed in
Asia as a whole.”

of Viet Nam meets all the requirements that Members of the United Nations must meet, and they
made a high assessment of that country’s contribution
to the restoration and maintenance
of peace and
security in the Asian continent and the whole world,

2.5. Viet Nam’s international
authority and prestige
are growing. By its long and heroic struggle for
freedom and independence, the Viet Nam has earned
the respect of progressive forces throughout the
world. In that struggle the Vietnamese people has
always received the unselfish help of the socialist
countries, including the Soviet Union, and it has
enjoyed the support also of the non-aligned countries.

31. The application
of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam for membership
is a very logical and
legitimate step. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam,
one of the largest States in South-East Asia, plays
an active role in international relations. It has proved
that it is prepared to carry out all the commitments
that must be undertaken
in accordance with the
Charter.

26. In the political declaration on Viet Nam adopted
by the Fourth Conference of Heads of State or
Government
of Non-Aligned
Countries,
held at
Algiers, the victory ,of the Vietnamese people was
considered to be the common victory of the nonaligned countries and of all the peoples struggling
against imperialism
and colonialism
and for peace,
national sovereignty, democracy and social progress.

32. The foreign policy of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam clearly shows that in its relations with
other States it has taken a firm stand in favour of
peace. Clear confirmation
of this is found in the
statement made following the Soviet-Vietnamese
talks on 30 September 1975, which says that Wet
Nam and. the Soviet Union take a stand “in favour
of the strengthening of peace and for the development
of international relations on the basis of the non-use
of force, of strict respect for the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of all States, of non-interference
in their domestic affairs, and of real equality and
international co-operation among peoples”.

27. In the Political Declaration and Strategy adopted
at Lima in September 1975, the non-aligned countries directly committed
themselves to supporting
Viet Nam’s admission to membership of the United
Nations, as well as to achieving a positive solution
of this question.’

33. Today, as we discuss the question of the
admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the
United Nations and the question whether thal
Republic meets the requirements
for admission,
there cannot be two opinions: the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam does fully meet all the requirements
that mtist be met by all Members of the United Nations.

28. At the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held recently
at Colombo, there was a very favourable assessment
of the contribution of Viet Nam to the struggle of the
peoples for national liberation
and against foreign
domination
and subjugation.
The Conference reconfirmed the determination
of the non-aligned countries
to support Viet Nam’s application
for admission
to the United Nations. In the Political Declaration,
the Conference called upon the Security Council
to give prompt and positive consideration
to the
application
of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
for admission to membership of the United Nations,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution
3366 (XXX).2

34. The Vietnamese people, engaged as they are in
peaceful activities, is prepared to develop normal
relations with all States, on the basis of the principles
of respect for sovereignty,
non-interference
in
domestic affairs, non-aggression,
equality, mutual
benefit and peaceful coexistence, principles which
the Republic has proclaimed.
35. A positive solution to the question of the admission of Viet Nam to the United Nations would
doubtless contribute to the further strengthening of
peace not only in South-East Asia but in the entire
Asian continent, and in fact in the world.

29. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is taking an
important post in the non-aligned movement: it has
been elected to the Co-ordinating
Bureau. So far,
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam has established
and is maintaining
diplomatic
relations with almost
100 States in the world, including
13 of the States
members of the Security Council.

36. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, country
that has taken the path of pea&, national independence, unity and social progress, is fully entitled
to place before us the question of its admission to
membership in the United Nations. It wishes, together
with other peace-loving States, to make a positive
contribution
to the cause of strengthening
international peace and security, to the cause of friendship and co-operation among the peoples of the entire
planet. This step must be supported by all those who
are in favour of the strengthening and the universality

30. During the general debate at the thirty-first
session of the General Assembly,
the heads of
delegations of more than 80 countries took a firm
stand in favour of the immediate
admission of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations
so that it can take the place in the United Nations
to which it is entitled. They stressed that the Republic
4

I
I
,

of the United Nations, all those who respect
sovereignty and independence of every country.

42. The Soviet delegation
entirely
supports the
draft resolution
introduced today by the President
of the Security Council and of which it is a sponsor,
along with other States.

the

37. It is to be hoped that, this time, no artificial
obstacles will be placed in the path of the admission
of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the United
Nations, that no artificial difficulties,
old or new,
will be raised to impede the admission of the Socialist
IRepublic of Viet Nam. If that were to occur, it would
lnot be understood by any Member of the United
INations; it would not be understood by any people
or any State, because it would be tantamount
to
ignoring the almost unanimous view that Viet Nam
should immediately-not
at some future date, but
now-be admitted to the United Nations and take the
place it is entitled to here.

43. Mr. DATCU
(Romania)
(i7lferpretotim
jTon7
Finch):
Romania, which truly believes in the mission
of the United Nations to unite the efforts of all peaceloving States to achieve common goals, as usual
warmly supports the application
of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam for membership in the United
Nations.
44. There can be no doubt that Viet Nam fulfils all
the conditions in Article 4 of the Charter concerning
admission
as a Member
State. Furthermore,
the
admission
of that country to the United Nations
would be an act of justice to the people of Viet Nam,
which was so sorely tried by its heroic struggle to
achieve national independence
and u&y. Its entry
into the United Nations would at the same time be a
significant act that would benefit international peace
and understanding
and the very life of the Organization itself.

38. Satisfaction should be given to the just and
legitimate request by Viet Nam. The admission of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam will serve the
cause of the achievement
of the purposes and
principles of the Carter. It will strengthen peace.
It will consolidate d&ente in international
relations.
39. Let us, then, take the hand that the intelligent,
hard-working, freedom-loving
people of Viet Nam
hold out to us. Let us admit them to the international
community.
In so doing, we shall strengthen the
United Nations; we shall make it more effective and
more useful. There is not and there cannot be any
justification for refraining from taking such action.
The sooner all States-all
of them, including
the
United States-recognize
the need for the immediate
admission of Viet Nam to the United Nations, the
sooner the remains of the feelings of the recent past
will be dispelled.

45. The Vietnamese people was forced to fight for
30 years against internal
reactionary
forces and
against foreign imperialist
intervention
to defend its
right to worthy development and independent growth
and to reunify the country. The world today is aware
that Viet Nam stands as the living symbol of the
will of peoples to defend their sacred right to decide
their own destiny, free from foreign interference.
46. Last year the people of Viet Nam succeeded
in liberaring the whole of its territory after a long
struggle during which it had made innumerable
sacrifices. This year, through general elections, the
Vietnamese
people expressed its desire to reunify
An historic
event of international
its country.
magnitude,
the reunification
of Viet Nam crowned
the long struggle of the Vietnamese people to attain
its aspirations to freedom, independence and social
progress for its country. Thus the natural institutional
framework of every nation was created, that is, a
unitary State, which will undoubtedly encourage the
full exploitation
of the material and spiritual potential
of the Vietnamese nation.

40. The Vietnamese people have every reason to be
distrustful of and offended by those who imposed
the war on them, yet they stretch out their hand to
all of us through the United Nations. It is a hand of
friendship, of co-operation and of peace. Viet Nam
comes to the United Nations with honest intentions.
It wants to co-operate with all in the important task
of struggling for peace and freedom for all peoples.
Viet Nam stretches out its hand to us, and proposes
that we struggle together for the implementation
of
the major principles and goals of the United Nations
so as to prevent a new war and to eliminate
colonialism,
racism and ccpa~kei~l from our planet.
Viet Nam proposes to all of us that we fight together
against economic
and cultural
backwardness,
a
remnant of the past which afflicts the developing
countries.

47. Romania,
whose militant
solidarity with the
Vietnamese
people during its struggle completely
to free its territory is well known, is happy that the
unified Vietnamese
State has asked to be admitted
to membership
in the United Nations.
48. The admission
of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam to membership in the United Nations is but
a logical and natural step, loyg awaited by the
international
community,
in the entry of that country
into the community
of sovereign and independent
States. It is also in conformity
with the interests
of both the United Nations and the people of Viet

41. The whole world will judge the actions of the
Security Council by the way it deals with the matter
before us today. Let us, then, justify the hopes of the
peoples. Let us unanimously
decide to admit the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to membership in the
United Nations.
5

Romania has joined in sponsoring the draft resolution
of 10 November, sponsored by 11 delegations and
contained in document S/12226, recommending the
admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to
United Nations membership.

Nam. We believe that the Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which follows a policy
of peace and co-operation among nations, is called
upon to play within the community of nations a basic
role in the consolidation of peace in South-East Asia
and in the maintenance of international security in
general.

5.5. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (interpwtcltion
jwn
On 10 August 1976 [ibid.], the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam submitted an application for
admission to membership
in the United Nations.
The Chinese delegation holds that, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter, the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam is fully qualified for membership in the Organization. Therefore, we firmly support
its application and maintain that the Security Council
should forthwith recommend the admission of .the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for membership in
the United Nations.
Chinese):

49. Furthermore, the Vietnamese, people, who are
devoting their major efforts at present to the reconstruction. and democratic
development
of their
society, must in their complex undertaking be able to
rely upon the support and solidarity of the entire
international
community
and to benefit from the
fruits of international
co-operation in the international organizations.
50. I do not intend to adduce now all the political
and legal arguments that clearly support the admission
of Viet Nam to the United Nations. They are well
known. I should merely like to stress that admission
to the Organization must be considered a right inherent
in all peace-loving, sovereign States-I repeat, a right
inherent in all peace-loving, sovereign States. The
admission of new Members must no longer be considered a favour dependent on the whims of certain
privileged States. It is inadmissible to block the
legitimate demand for admission of a State on the
pretext of the bilateral relations with that State or
certain aspects of such relations. In the case of
Viet Nam, the normalization
of relations with the
United States is a matter than can have no bearing
at all on its application for membership in the United
Nations.

56. Over a long period, the heroic Vietnamese
people have waged an extremely arduous struggle for
the independence of their fatherland and for national
liberation. Holding high President Ho Chi Minh’s
glorious banner of “firm resolve to fight and win”,
the Vietnamese people under the leadership of the
Workers’ Party of Viet Nam have carried on valiant
struggles over decades, successively resisted imperialist aggressors in a dauntless spirit of revolutionary
heroism and achieved one victory after another.
In the spring of 1975, they thoroughly defeated the
domestic and foreign reactionary forces, liberated the
whole of south Viet Nam and won complete victory in
the war against United States aggression and for
national salvation, thus achieving the independence
and liberation of the entire nation.

51. The admission of a State to the United Nations
cannot be conditional upon the degree of progress
towards a solution of bilateral problems between
the State concerned and one of the permanent
members of the Security Council,

57. This victory ,of the Vietnamese people broughl
to a glorious end the war for saving and defending
the fatherland, which began with the August Revolution in 1945 and lasted 30 years, thus paving the
way for the reunification of the whole country. On
3 July 1976, the Sixth National
Assembly of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam solemnly proclaimed
the reunification
of the whole of Viet Nam. The
reunification of Viet Nam is a great event in the
political life of the Vietnamese
people and is of
great significance in the history of the Vietnamese
national liberation struggle. The Vietnamese people’s
victory in their national liberation war constitutes an
important contribution to the cause of liberation of the
oppressed peoples and nations in the world and i\
heavy blow to imperialism,
colonialism
and hegemonism.

52. Furthermore, we have noted the sincere desire
of Viet Nam to normalize its relations with all States,
including those which took part in the war against
the Vietnamese people.
53. As is clear from paragraph 4 of the report of
the Committee on the Admission of New Members,
which the Council has before it, one of the permanent
members of the Council declared that it could not
support the application of Viet Nam for membership
in the United Nations. We believe that neither the
Council as a whole, nor any of its permanent members in particular, can disregard the opinion of the
General Assembly. No one is unaware of the fact
that the Charter confers special rights upon the
permanent members of the Council, but it is wholly
contrary to ihe very spirit of the Charter to abuse
such privileges in order to perpetrate an injustice.

58. China and Viet Nam are friendly neighbours
linked by mountains and rivers. There is a longstanding traditional friendship between the peoples
of our two countries. Our two peoples have symp;lthized with and supported each other in our protracted
revolutionary
struggles against imperialism.
The
Chinese people warmly hail the great historic victory
of the Vietnamese people in their great cause ol

54. It is in the light of the views I have just voiced
and on the basis of our position of principle that
6

iachieving the independence
and liberation
of the
,whole nation and the realization of the reunification
lof their fatherland and heartily rejoice at all the
#achievements scored by the Vietnamese people in their
#efforts to heal the wounds of war, restore and
and carry out socialist
develop the economy,
transformation
and socialist
construction.
The
Chinese people will, as always, continue to make
contributions to the enhancement of the revolutionary
friendship between our two peoples and sincerely wish
the Vietnamese people new and greater victories in
theircause of revolution and construction in thefuture.

represented
then by the Provisional
Revolutionary
Government
of South Viet Nam and the Government
of the Democratic
Republic. of Viet Nam. Those
applications
came up for discussion before this very
Council in August 1975, and on that occasion two
draft resolutions [S//17Y.5 alzd S/l/796], one in respect
of each of the applications,
gained a majority
of
I3 member States voting in favour; one, a permanent
member, voting against, with one State abstaining
IIX3hth tneating,
para.v. 105 ut~d 1961.
65. Subsequently,
in that very year the United
Nations passed by an overwhelming
majority resolution 3366 (XXX) endorsing the application of the two
States of Viet Nam and requesting the Security
Council to reconsider their admission to membership.
That vote was extremely
significant:
123 Member
States voted in favour of that resolution; not a single
State voted against it, and 9 Member States abstained.

59. In our view, it is utterly unjustifiable for any
country to obstruct the admission of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations on any
pretext. We are convinced that upon its admission to
the United Nations, the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam will make positive contributions to the realization
of the purposes and principles of the Charter together
with all the other justice-upholding
States Members.

66. Subsequent
lo that resolution,
on 29 and
30 September
1975 [1843rd to 1846th meetit~gs],
the Council met once again in response to the request
of the General Assembly, and Security Council draft
resolutions
contained
in documents
S/11832 and
S/11833 were voted on. The result of those votes, as
we all know, was that 14 of the 15 members of the
Council supported those draft resolutions; one member
State, a permanent
member of the Council, voted
against them and therefore those draft resolutions
were defeated.

60. The PRESIDENT
(int~~pI.L’tctfiot7Ji.ot11
Spunislz):
The next speaker is the representative of Sri Lanka,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
61. Mr. KANAKARATNE
(Sri Lanka): Mr. President, let me first thank you and the other members
of the Security Cotincil
for having given my
delegation the opportunity of participating in the debate
on the very important matter which has come up
for deliberation this afternoon. The application of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for membership in the
United Nations is something which enlists the support of Sri Lanka for two reasons, and it is -for those
two reasons that we have sought your permission
to address the Council as an interested delegation.

67. we are met here again to discuss the same
application,
but in a changed situation. In mid-1976,
as we have already heard, the two Vietnamese component
States, by democratic
elections
and a
referendum,
unified themselves to form one unitary
Socialist
Republic
of Viet Nam. If that member
State which had voted against the successive applications of the two component
States had any legal
difficulties at that stage, it is the view of my delegation
that such impediment
no longer should be facing
them. What we have for consideration is an application
by a sovereign, independent
State, a peace-loving
State, for membership in the United Nations, the great
international
community
of the world. In this connexion, it is our submission that the only relevant
part of the Charter of the United Nations that needs
to be applied and taken into consideration
by the
Council is Article 4, which says: “Membership
in the
United
Nations is open to all other peace-loving
States which accept the obligations contained in the
present Charter”. It is our sincere submission that the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is just as qualified
as any other Member now seated in the Assembly
-indeed,
we would think even more so than some
of them-to
be admitted as a sovereign, independent
State with a peace-loving policy.

62. In the first instance, Sri Lanka and the Republic
of Viet Nam are sister nations of the Asian continent,
and we view with considerable dismay the inalibity
of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam so far to become
a full Member of the United Nations.
63. In the second place, I speak today before
the Council not merely as the representative of Sri
Lanka but as the representative of the current Chairman of the group of non-aligned countries now
numbering 86 States Members of the United Nations.
The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is not only a
member nation of that group but at the recent
conference of Heads of State or Government
of
Non-Aligned Countries, held in my country’s capital in
August this year, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
was elected a member of the 25member Co-ordinating
Bureau of that group of nations.
64. It was as long ago as August 1975 that applications were made on behalf of the two States that
then formed Viet Nam for membership in the United
Nations [S/11756 otzti S/11761]. Those States were

68, The fact that the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
is sovereign and independent
cannot be gainsaid.
Indeed, the fact that the heroic Vietnamese people
7

73. Subsequently,
at the Ministerial
Meeting of
the Co-ordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Countries held at Algiers between 30 May and 2 June 1976,
in paragraph 5 of that meeting’s Final CommuniquC.-1
the non-aligned countries were requested to extend
vigorous support and to renew that support on behalf
of the admission of Viet Nam to membership in the
United Nations.

have for the last 30 years struggled to obtain their
independence and their sovereignty is evidence enough
of the fact that they are an independent nation.
69. I do not have to recall here the efforts, the
sacrifices, the sufferings and the travails that more
than a generation of Vietnamese
people had to
undergo and to face. Successive waves of the armed
forces of foreign Powers entered their territory.
After having successfully eliminated
the French
imperial presence, after having briefly resisted and
overcome the armed forces of Japan, and after
having fought for the last 12 or 13 years against
more than half a million armed troops of other foreign
Powers, this small, weak and essentially rural community of individuals, whom we know as the Vietnamese people, have surely justified before us all
and before the bar of history their entitlement
to be
called genuinely politically independent and sovereign.

74. More recently, at the Fifth Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries
held at Colombo in August this year, there was ir
similar call on the part of the non-aligned countries
for appropriate action with regard to the application
of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for memhership in the United Nations. I quote from the Political
Declaration of the non-aligned countries adopted i\t
Colombo:
“The Conference further declared that the commitment entered into by the United States under
article, 21, chapter VIII,
of the Agreement
on
ending the war and restoring peace in Viet Nam,*
signed on 27 January 1973, should be honoured ant1
called upon the United Nations Security Council to
give prompt and positive consideration
to the
application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Natlr
for admission to membership of the United Nations.
in accordance with resolution 3366 adopted by the
United Nations General Assembly at its thirtieth
session.“*

70. What is the second qualification for membership
in the United Nations.? That each applicant should
be a peace-loving State. Is there any one of us around
this table who can suggest by reference to recorded
history that the Vietnamese people have ever been
guilty of aggression? Have their armed forces marched
across their frontiers? On the contrary, they have
been the victims of aggression for the last quarter
of a century or more. It was on their soil that others
have come and fought for various purposes and for
various motives. It is the view of my delegation,
therefore, that both the political and legal requirements
for the admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam to membership in the United Nations have
been amply fulfilled by that Government
and those
people.

75. More recently, the Prime Minister of Sri Lank:t,
in her capacity as current Chairman of the group of
non-aligned countries, said from the rostrum of the
General Assembly of the United Nations:
“At the Colombo Conference, as at all previous
meetings of the non-aligned, we have reaffirmed or~r
adherence to the purposes and principles
of the
United Nations Charter and we remain commitlc<l
to the cause of strengthening its role in all aspects
of international life.

71. I said earlier in my remarks that I was speaking
also as the representative of the current Chairman
of the group of non-aligned countries. It is therefore
relevant for me to point out to the Council the position
taken up by the non-aligned countries in regard to
Viet Nam in the past year or so.

“A primary requirement for the strengthenirrg
of the United Nations is the universality
of its
membership. We cannot but express dissatisfaction
and dismay at the continued denial, by the USC of
the veto, to nations which are qualified in every wary
and have won the recognition of more than t\sc?
thirds of the membership of this Organization,
of the
opportunity to share in its endeavours.“5

72. As far back as August 1975, soon after the
meetings of the Security Council of that month, a
Co-ordinating
Committee
was set up by the nonaligned countries, which fully endorsed the application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam-or
the
two component States at that time-for
admission to
the United Nations. Let me quote from that declaration
of the Co-ordinating Committee
of the Non-Aligned
Countries:

76. It is our belief that the United Nations,
reprcsenting the great family of nations, would benefit
considerably by expanding its membership
to fir lfil
the requirement of universality. We find it difficult
to accept that bilateral difficulties or disputes
or
problems between such a nation and any other Member
State of the Organization, albeit a permanent men-&or
of the Security Council, should vitiate the right tu
membership in this family of a State otherwise qualified

“The Co-ordinating
Committee
whole-heartedly
supports these candidatures, which it considers as
being fully in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and as representing an action on
behalf of peace, freedom and the fruitful development of relations of friendship and co-operation
among all peoples.” [S/1179.?]
8

-

by the requirements of the Charter itself. We believe
that if there are problems-and
there are problems
not only between Member States of the General
Assembly but even among members of the Councilthat is a matter which has no relevance to the
problem of the qualifications of a State for admission
to the United Nations.

81. We take this opportunity also to congratulate
Mr. Akhund of Pakistan, who so tactfully and
competently presided over the work of the Council
in October.
82. My delegation attaches great importance to and
has a special interest in the question now before the
Council. Indeed, as an immediate
neighbour of
Viet Nam, my country, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, feels great solidarity with that country.
We have geographical, historical, cultural and human
ties which are well known to all, Moreover, the Lao,
Vietnamese and Kampuchean peoples have had a
common destiny for more than a century. We were
all under the same colonial domination and oppression.
We were exposed to the most cruel aggression from
colonialism, imperialism and neo-colonialism. During
the revolutionary struggles for the reconquest of OUI
independence and freedom, struggles which went on
for over 30 years, the Kampuchea, Lao and Vietnamese peoples fought against the common enemy.
They shared hardships, they gave one another support
and, thanks to their brotherly and militant. solidarity,
they have almost simultaneously
achieved great
victories over imperialism,
colonialism
and neocolonialism.

77. We urge the one permanent member whose
attitude and whose vote has prevented this small,
heroic, sovereign, independent, peace-loving nation
from joining our family to reconsider its position.
We regret that a great Power, a major Power,
wielding major influence in global affairs, cannot
rise to the challenge and exhibit the statesmanship
that our times require. We are sincerely convinced
that, in its own interests as well as in the interests
of the rest of the international
community, it should
find it possible to cast an affirmative vote on the
draft resolution that has now been introduced to the
Council, as such action would be of great benefit to
itself and to the rest of us.
78. It is in that spirit, Mr. President, that we have
:sought your permission and that of‘the Council to
place these facts before it for consideration.
Long
years ago-if I may cite an historical example-soon
after Great Britain had defeated France, after seven
years of wars in Europe, the then British Prime
Minister
declared in the House of Commons:
“Mr. Speaker, Honourable
Members, England has
today saved itself by its exertions and the world by
its example”. If I may change that quotation slightly,
we urge the representative of the United States to
show to us and, through us, to the world that it
can save itself by its actions and perhaps the world
by its example.

83. In peace and in national reconstruction, as
in wartime, our solidarity continues and is in fact even
being reinforced. The struggle at present being waged
by the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam in the diplomatic sphere to gain recognition for its cause is our
struggle, too. The members of the Council will realize
that we feel great emotion; but we are also full of
determination
as we speak here today to give our
support to the admission of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam to the United Nations.
84. Its admission, which is expected and wished
for by the overwhelming
majority of the international community, is a necessity, particularly since
Viet Nam has completely recovered its freedom
and independence and has in a most peaceful and
democratic way brought about its national reunification. The Vietnamese people has thus admirably
demonstrated
by many examples its capacity fOl
sacrifice and heroism and has shown great political
wisdom, Therefore one .may be sure that the Organization wi]] greatly benefit from the admission of Vict
Nam to its ranks. It will be a great step forward fol
the United Nations on the path to the universality
which is a pre-conditions of its effectiveness.

79. The PRESIDENT
(infcrprrfolio/l
jko/ll Sprrnish):
The next speaker is the representative of the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, whom I invite to take
a place at the Council table and to make a statement.
80. Mr. SOURINHO
(Lao People’s Democratic
Republic) (irltl’,pl.PtatiorI.f,.o/ll
F,cnc*h): Mr. President,
my first words will be words of sincere congratulation
on your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of November. I also wish to
express to you and to all the members of the Council
my gratitude for the permission
granted to my
delegation to participate in the debate of the Council to
outline our position in respect of this important matte1
before the Council, the admission of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations. MY
delegation is happy to see that this question wi]] be
considered by the Council at a time when You, an
eminent representative of the Republic of Panama,
whom my country esteems highly, have assumed the
presidency. Your great qualities and your dedication to
justice are we]] known, and my delegation is sure that
YOU wi]] be successful in carrying out the important
duties which have been entrusted to You.

85. For the peoples of South-East Asia it will be a
sign of normalization
after the great changes that
have occurred in that part of the world, nOrma]izatiOn
which is necessary because it wi]] reinfOrCe
peace
and stability in Indo-China, in South-East Asia and
in the world.
86, For the peoples throughout the world who
love peace and justice, its admission wi]] not only
9

make good sense politically but will ~SO be MI act
of justice which the Vietnamese people well deserve
after fighting heroically, undergoing many sacrifices
and always maintaining and upholding the ideals of the
Charter. By its enormous sacrifices and the suffering
it has endured, the Vietnamese people has served
the Organization and, in fact, rendered great services
to the international community as a whole.
87. On the basis of this consideration, my delegation
wishes to appeal to all the members of the Council,
and in particular to the permanent members of the
Council, to be guided in their deliberations
by
consciousness of their responsibility and by justice,
not by considerations which have no bearing on the
subject-matter before us.
88. In this context, my delegation, at the risk of
being repetitious, must state again that in the matter of
the admission of new Members, Article 4, paragraph I,
of the Charter is the only legal, valid basis for the
consideration of applications by the Council. To take
any other course, and in particular to take into account
elements which have nothing to do with the question
of admission as such, would be profoundly discriminatory and arbitrary, and detrimental to the principles
of the Charter.
89. The Security Council, the supreme organ of the
United Nations, which has responsibility
for the
maintenance of world peace and security, must
properly apply the provisions of the Carter if it wants
the United Nations to respond to the hopes which the
peoples of the world have placed in it. In any case,
mankind, which in one generation has known so
much destruction and terrible suffering in two world
conflagrations-the
second of which occurred because
the League of Nations, owing to the many injustices
it had perpetuated, was not capable of preventing itcertainly would not wish to see the United Nations,
built on the ruins of the Second World War and the
repository of the great ideals of peace, freedom,
equality and justice, take the same path as its predecessor.
90. But concepts of justice and equality must be
universal in character and applied to aII peoples,
including the Vietnamese people. The Council would
commit a grave injustice against that heroic people il
it continued to oppose the admission of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations. Furthermore, any manoeuvre or attempt to refuse or delay
the immediate accession of that country to the United
Nations when it meets all the stipulated conditions
would be to defy the overwhelming majority of the
Member States and of the international community 21s
a whole. My country, for its part, will certainly
denounce and condemn firmly any such m:m(euvre.
91. Even though the matter now before the Council
is perfectly clear, some doubts and uncertainties
still weigh heavily on the deliberations of the Council,

and it must be said that the attitude of the United
States, one of the permanent members of the Council,
is responsible for this malaise.
92. My delegation recalls with regret that consideration of Viet Nam’s application by the Council
should have taken place on 10 September,
but
because of the United States election, it was postponed until today. Thus the thirty-first session of the
General Assembly was deprived of the very valuable
co-operation of the Vietnamese delegation. At that
time, the outgoing Republican Administration
of the
United States, more preoccupied with its re-election
than with the admission of Viet Nam to the United
Nations and counting on rallying to its cause the votes
of the most reactionary elements of the United
States electorate, threatened to use its veto-as it had
done the year before when the Council had considered
the app!ications for admission of the Republic of
South Viet Nam and the Democratic Republic of
Viet Nam-if
the candidacy of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam was submitted for consideration by the
Security Council.
93. To show its good will, the Vietnamese delegation agreed, at the Council’s request, to postpone for
some time the submission of its candidacy, thus
making it possible for the United States Government
to avoid the unpopular exercise of the right of veto
which would have put it in a very embarrassing situation just before the election.
94. Today, in the calm of the post-electoral period,
the Government of the United States is certainly in
a much better situation-at
least we hope so-to
approach the consideration of the application of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam whith the justice and
equity that are the dominant characteristics of the
American people. But the Government of the United
States, contrary to its past practice, is now maintaining a solemn silence which leads us to surmise that
it is still refusing or hesitating to accede to the justified
requesl of Wet Nam.
9s. ‘The refusal of the United States Government,
if it is confirmed, would not only disappoint worId
public opinion but would be most prejudicial to the
credibility of the Security Council and to the United
as a whole, hccuuse no consideration of right 01’ of
fairness could justify such an arbitrary attitude.
96. BLH since the United States Government, which
has no valid juridical reasons for preventing the admission, now raises the question of those missing in
action during the war and makes Viet Nam‘s admission to the United Nations dependent on the solution
of that problem, my delegation wants to make a
statement on that subject. Even though, of course,
we all feel the greatest compassion for the families
of those missing in action, my delegation wants to
stress forcefully that that question has nothing to do
with Viet Nam’s admission to the United Nations,

:ud

it.

iS

Wrthlly

not

appropiate

for

the

United

during the bombardment of Saigon. During
the year
1976, the Vietnamese Government authorized the
repatriation of all Americans who were stranded in
South Viet Nam after April 1975. Finally, on 6 September last, the Government of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam communicated through its Embassy in
Paris to the United States Government information
on the I2 American pilots who were killed in the
bombardments carried out against North Viet Nam.

States to raise this question at this time.
97. The problem of the missing persons is a bilateral
one; therefore, it should be settled within the framework of normal bilateral relations between the United
States and the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, Meanwhile, if the United States Government,
as it has
stated SO many times, wants to put an end to the
uncertainty
and anxiety of the families of those
missing in action and not to use the existence of that
problem to continue to arouse the American people
against the Vietnamese people, thus justifying
its
pallicy of hostility against Viet Nam, it should begin,
on the basis of the Paris Agreements,4 to establish
normal relations with Viet Nam, thus opening the way
to co-operation
in all fields, including that of those
missing in action. In this connexion, the dialogue
wlhich is beginning today between the representatives
of the United States and of Viet Nam will undoubtedly
provide an opportunity once again tojudge the sincerity
of the United States Government.

101. Those acts of good will on the part of the
Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam are
such that the Government of the United States should
ASO respond by acts of a similar nature, or should at
least demonstrate
that it wants to tackle seriously
the problem of missing persons as a whole. The
United States Government should not exploit for
special aims the suffering of the families of the missing
persons and it should not adopt an arrogant attitude
towards Viet Nam, claiming that Viet Nam must
immediately
carry out article 8 (h) of the Paris
Agreements concerning persons missing in action,
while obstinately refusing to carry out its own obligations to dress the wounds of the war in Viet Nam,
in accordance with article 21 of the Agreement. That
method of proceeding, which shows the chauvinism
of a great Power, is anachronistic and does not help
to resolve the problems.

5%. The problem of persons who disappeared during
the long war of aggression waged by the United
States against the people of Viet Nam and the other
peoples of Indo-China, does not preoccupy only the
United States Government which is entirely responsible for it; this problem is equally urgent and tragic
for the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which also
has a very long list of missing Vietnamese. In the
view of my delegation, only sincere and constructive
co-operation
by the United States Government
in
response to the sincere and constructive co-operation
already demonstrated
by the Government
of the
S’ocialist Republic of Viet Nam, can contribute to
putting an end to the anguish of the families of missing
pIersons.

102. In the same of the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, which was the only country in Indo-China
to maintain diplomatic relations with the United States
after the profound changes that occurred, not because
it wants to receive any material or financial assistance,
but because it wants to prove that the people of IndoChina desire to continue to have in the future fruitful
and mutually advantageous relations with the American people, my delegation wishes to appeal to the
Government of the United States to be faithful to the
great traditions of liberty, equality and justice of the
its people, and to adopt on the question of the admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the
United Nations a realistic and constructive position
in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations.

99. In respect of this grave problem, my delegation
would like to cite some further examples which
prove irrefutably that the Vietnamese Government
wishes to bring about favourable conditions that
would enable the Government of the United States
to end its policy of unilateral recriminations.
and
alccusations and engage in a sincere search for solutions
to the problem still pending.

103. Furthermore,
in requesting admission to the
United Nations, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
is simply exercising its right as an independent
State to occupy the place which belongs to it in the
international Organization.

100. These are the facts. In March 1974 the Government of the Democratic
Republic of Viet Nam,
which was then North Viet Nam, authorized the
Government
of the United States to accept the
repatriation
of the remains of 23 American pilots
killed in the attack against North Wet Nam. In
December 1975, the Government of Viet Nam gave
to the delegation of Senator Montgomery
authorization for the repatriation
of the remains of three
American pilots who had been considered missing
during the war. In April 197.5, the Government of
Wet Nam allowed the representative
Of Senator
Kennedy to repatriate the remains of two American
soldiers who were killed at the Tan Son Nhut airport

104. By reacting positively to this request, as
demanded by the overwhelming majority Of the international community
and as the other members of
the Security Council have unanimously done, the
Government of the United States would be reaffirming
the tradition of justice of its people.
105.

The PRESIDENT

(j/7t~r’p~f~lfiO/l

.f;.(Jll*

~~!~~~~*-

ish): I should like to inform members of the Council
that 1 have received letters from
the
rwese”tatives of Bulgaria and Mongolia, in which they
11

ask to be invited to participate
in the debate. In
accordance with the provisions of Article 31 of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, and if there are no objections, .I propose to
invite those representatives .‘to participate
in the
discussion without the right to vote.

111. With these thoughts and hopes, we urge the
members of the Council to vote unanimously for the
draft resolution in document
S/12226, of which
Pakistan has the honour to be a sponsor along with
other delegations.

106. I invite the representatives
of Bulgaria and
Mongolia to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber, on the usual understanding that they will be invited to take a place at the
Council table when they wish to address the Council.

Spcrnish):

107. Mr. MIRZA (Pakistan): I should like first to
take this opportunity to thank, on behalf of Mr. Iqbal
Akhund, all the representatives
for the very kind
words which they addressed to him at our meetings
yesterday and today.
108. It is the considered view of the delegation of
Pakistan that the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
amply fulfils the conditions for membership laid down
in the Charter. Further, its Prime Minister has declared
that his Government
accepts all the obligations
contained in the Charter and solemnly undertakes
to fulfil them.

PRESIDENT
(i/?top/.Pttrtion
Jiuur
The next speaker is the representative
of Cuba. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
112. The

113.

Mr, ALARCdN
(Cuba) (itztop/‘ctrrtio/?
.fiau~
Mr. President, I should like at the outset
to’thank you and, Jhrough you, thC other members
of the Security Council for allowing my delegation
to participate in this debate. It is a source of sincere
satisfaction for me to participate in the work of the
Council under your presidency. The presence of
Panama in the Council is a tribute to its Government
and its people and an expression of international
solidarity in its just struggle for the effective exercise
of national,sovereignty
over the whole of its territory,
including the Canal and the Canal Zone. Your
experience and talent will undoubtedly
enable the
Council fully to discharge its responsibilities
in the
course of the month of November.

Spatzish):

114. Once again the Council is called upon to
examine the application for membership in the United
Nations of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. As
we all know, it is doing so after having given an
opportunity
for mature reflection
to one of its
permanent members, which, obsessed by pressures
of a local nature, indicated its intention of impeding
a favourable decision on the admission of that State
when the question was first brought to the Council’s
attention a few months ago.

109. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is among
the new members of the third world. Its people have
won their independence after an arduous and long
struggle and are now engaged in repairing their
economy and taking their rightful place in the comity
of nations. The people and the Government
of
Pakistan hold in great respect the Vietnamese people
and Government and wish them peace and prosperity.
We also look forward ,to the contribution
which the
great Vietnamese
people and its Government
are
certain to make to the just causes of the third world
and unity among its peoples.

11.5. If we are to believe the rumours that are rife
in the corridors of this building, we must suspect
that the present debate may conclude with new proof
of the abusive, irresponsible and illegitimate use of
the veto. Were that to be the case, the present
discussion might lead us to consider the need to
assess more thoroughly the conduct of certain Powers
and the damage that this does to the United Nations
and to the purposes and principles’ proclaimed in
the Charter. For that reason, this situation calls for
a rigorous but calm analysis of its true meaning and
all its implications. That consideration seems all the
more necessary for those countries which, linked
to the Government of the United States by alliances
which call upon them to share interests and responsibilities, would be in a position, at least in this case,
to offer useful advice to the authorities in Washington.

110. It is the sincere hope of my delegation that
the Council will consider the application of Viet Nam
on its objective merits and will recommend to the
General Assembly that the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam be admitted to the Organization.
We believe
that the admission of Viet Nam to the United Nations
will contribute
to the strengthening
of peace and
stability in South-East Asia, a region which has
suffered tremendous turmoil in the past and where it is
essential that opportunities
be given to the people
to live in peace and amity. In our view, it will also
promote international
peace and security in general,
thus ensuring, the achievement
of one of the basic
objectives of the Organization.
Further, we believe
that Viet Nam’s admission to the United Nations will
facilitate the solution of the unresolved problems
arising out of the conflict in Viet Nam.

116. The illegal use of the power of veto to stand
in the way of the admission of a new State, despite
the fact that its aspirations are in keeping with the
terms of the Charter, is an inadmissible action which
attacks and weakens the foundations
of the very
Charter on which the special prerogatives of certain
members rest.
12

117. The admission of new members to the United
Nations must be considered exclusively in accordance
witlh what is set forth in Article 4 of the Charter,
Aside from the terms laid down therein, there is
absolutely no other condition for admission to the
Un:ited Nations. To lay down any other condition
would obviously be a clear and direct violation of
the letter and the spirit of the basic document
governing the activities of the Organization.

regions
and of all social systems and it has been
admitted to a number of the specialized agencies of
the United Nations system. The records of the
General Assembly and the Security Council clear-y
show what is the view of the Organization on this
matter. If Viet Nam is not yet in the United Nations,
it is solely due to the obstructionist, arbitrary,
illegal
and discriminatory
attitude of the Government of the
United States of America,

118. What the Council should do, the only thing it is
authorized
to do, is decide whether the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam is a peace-loving State and if,
in Ithe Organization’s judgement, it is ready and able
to fulfil its obligations under the Charter. It is on
that and on that alone that the members of the Council must pronounce themselves. To adduce anything
elsis would, above all, be irrelevant to the matter
now before us. To use as a pretext for objecting
to the admission supposed or real factors having
nothing to do with the text of Article 4 would make
that objection illegitimate, deprive it of any legal value
and, consequently, make it inadmissible.

123. The fallacious
arguments adduced by the
United States Government in an attempt to explain
such unjustifiable
conduct cannot bear the slightest
scrutiny. They have nothing whatsoever to do with
Article 4 of the Carter, and, as such, are inadmissible,

119. Nevertheless, we find ourselves in the unheardof-situation of having kept outside the United Nations
for more than a year after its first application a
State which fulfils all the necessary requirements
for becoming a Member. The votes taken in the
General Assembly and in the Council have clearly
delmonstrated that almost all the delegations are in
favour of the admission of Viet Nam.

125. I think it is appropriate to note here that these
persons did not disappear in Viet Nam while they
were on a friendly visit, or when they had legally
entered Vietnamese territory, or when they were
engaged in tourism. Nevertheless, as the representative of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
rightly pointed out a few moments ago, the authorities and other people in Viet Nam have shown great
generosity and flexibility
in connexion with these
matters and, as he told the Council, the Vietnamese
liave made every possible effort to solve this question
with the United States. Be that as it may, it is
obvious that this question has absolutely nothing to do
with the admission of a State to the United Nations.
If anything, it is a question within the framework
of the bilateral relations of the States concerned.
It cannot be used, if common sense has any meaning
at all, as a pretext to flout the opinion of almost
all the Members of the United Nations concerning
the admission of Viet Nam.

120. None has dared to cast doubts on the fact
that the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is a peaceloving State..Because
of its love of peace, independence and freedom, the Vietnamese people undertook
the greatest sacrifices, confronted the most brutal
aggression, resisted with heroism and unparalleled
dedication and gained a total victory in the cruel
war imposed upon it by United States imperialism.
The Vietnamese epic not only constituted irrefutable
proof of that people’s will to live in peace and free
from foreign domination but also made an invaluable
contribution
to the cause of all those struggling for
emancipation, justice and a peaceful future.

124. Last year the United States ‘tried to make the
admission of Viet Nam conditional on a totally alien
matter. Today Washington wishes to justify the veto
by using the demagogic argument of the so-called
missing in action as a result of the criminal aggression which Yankee imperialism
unleashed on the
people of Viet Nam.

126. The use of this argument is, frankly, irreSPOnsible. If the United States Government believes that
the question of the admission of Viet Nam to the
United Nations falls within the sphere of its national
policy
and that it must be conditioned on certain
agreements
it is seeking to obtain at the bilateral
level, Washington is then, in fact, treating the matter
as if it were a controversy in which the United States
was one of the interested parties.

121, In the world of today no one is better qualified
to be termed a peace-loving State than the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam. In order to secure the right to
live in peace it faced the severest tests and forced
thle aggressors to their knees. The defeat of imperialism
in Viet Nam allowed other peoples to preserve their
own independence and security and created propitious
conditions for the consolidation of world peace.

127. ln such conditions, a United States veto, based
on such a strange interpretation of international law,
would be doubly illegal. If the matter could be reduced
to a bilateral controversy, then the United States
would have to abstain from voting, in accordance
with Article 27, paragraph 3, of the Charter. What
other intention could the drafters of the Chaiter have

122. Similarly,
it is obvious that almost all the
ml:mbers of the international
community
consider
that the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam meets all
the conditions for becoming a Member of the United
N,ations. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam maintains
normal relations with almost 100 States from all
13

had in including this paragraph, if it was not precisely
to prevent any member of the Security Council from
abusing its prerogatives in order to obtain advantages
over other States?

Kampuchea would like to express its sincere thanks
to the Security Council for making it possible for us
to speak during the consideration of the question
of the admission of Viet Nam to the United Nations,

128. The world is watching this debate. The peoples
of the entire world demand that Viet Nam, unified
under the banner of socialism,
should occupy its
rightful place in the United Nations. That is the right
of the Vietnamese people, and it is in keeping with
the interests of all peoples struggling for independence
in Africa, Asia and Latin America. For that reason,
the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government
qf Non-Aligned Countries gave its enthusiastic support
to Viet Nam’s aspiration and called for a favourable
decision by the Council. As the representative of Sri
Lanka rightly said earlier in this meeting, that is an
unvarying,
constant attitude
of the non-aligned
movement, which understands that the heroic struggle
of the Vietnamese people was at the vanguard of the
movement for emancipation
of the peoples of the
third world, and that it is an overriding interest of that
movement
that the discriminatory
and aggressive
policy carried out against the Vietnamese people
should cease so that its lawful representatives may
occupy their rightful place in the international
community.

133. On 10 August last [S/12183, arzrlex], the Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam submitted
to the Secretary-General its application for admission
to membership of the United Nations. The delegation
of Democratic Kampuchea decisively and warmly
supports that application.
134. After a long, unremitting,
difficult and bloddy
struggle by the heroic Vietnamese people, the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam became independent, sovereign
and unified. Its foundation was thus the culmination
and fulfilment of the profound aspirations of the
Vietnamese people. That great event was a source of
joy to all the peoples of the world. The people of
Democratic Kampuchea, a neighbour and companion
in arms of the people of Viet Nam, warmly congratulated and hailed that people. The Government of
Democratic Kampuchea and the Governments of all
friendly nations felt then and feel now that it is the right
of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to become a
Member of the United Nations, for it fulfils all the
necessary conditions.

129. The exclusion of Viet Nam from the United
Nations is the result of the continuance of the aggressive policy of imperialism,
the same policy that
sowed death and destruction
in Indo-China.
The
international
community
cannot permit this to continue.

135. In August 1976 the Summit
Conference of
Non-Aligned
Countries at Colombo also gave its
decisive support to the application for admission to
the United Nations of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nanl.2 The Co-ordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Countries echoed that support on 8 Septembet
[S/12/98, LIIIIICX].

130. Whatever may be the result of this debate,
the matter will not end here. The effort to render
justice to the Vietnamese people will continue. And
the aggressors must understand that they would suffer
on the diplomatic
field the same kind ,of exemplary
defeat that they suffered on the battlefield.

136. In the course of the general debate at the
present session of the General Assembly very many
delegations also spoke out in favour of the admission
of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. The Security
Council has witnessed immense changes and upheavals
in the world situation since the United Nations was
founded. National sovereignty, the sovereignty of
States and the right of each people to be master of
its own destiny and that of its country, achieved
after hard military and political struggles in Asia,
Africa and Latin America, form part of an impetuous
historic current that no one and nothing can resist.
The same is true of the right of all independent and
sovereign States to participate in the work of the
United Nations and to be seated as full-fledged members of the international community.

13 1 , The PRESIDENT
(i/ltc’,~/.~‘trrlio,~ .fi*onr Spar?is/~); The next speaker is the representative
of
Democratic Kampuchea. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
132.

Mr. KEAT CHHON (Democratic Kampuchea)
$-o/~r F\.~nc/l~: I should like first to
extend to you, Mr. President, our warm congratulations on your accession to the presidency of, the
Security Council at a time when your country,
Panama’, is celebrating the anniversary of its independence.
Between Democratic
Kampuchea
and
Panama, both non-aligned countries, there is a common
aspiration to ensure the victory of the causes of our
third world, in particular
that of independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as of the
right of the people to be masters of their own fate.
That is why our countries, although far from each
other geographically,
feel close and united in our
common
struggle. The delegation
of Democratic

(intcrp~ct~rtiol?

137: In the light of those facts, the delegation of
Democratic Kampuchea is convinced that the Security
Council will shoulder its responsibilities
and warmly
and unreservedly vote in favour of the admission of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to membership
in the United Nations.
138. The PRESIDENT
(irltl~/.p~aforio/r @r!l S[ptr/lThe next speaker is the representative of

ish):

14

Mongolia. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make a statement.

neo-colonialism
and racism. The peace-loving foreign
policy of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nani, designed
to establish and develop normal relations with al’1
countries irrespective
of their so&l
structure and
on the basis of mutual respect for independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, of mutual benefit
and peaceful coexistence, found its clear reflection in
the recent draft political report of the Cential Committee of the Workers’
Party of Viet Nam, which
has been published and will be presented to the fourth
Congress of that Party.

139. Mr. PUNTSAGNOROV
(Mongolia) f’in~op!~~crti;o/r j?o/r~ Rnssirr~r): Mr. President, allow me first
of all to express to you and to all the members
of the Security Council our gratitude for this opportunity to participate in the debate. We take this
opjportunity to welcome you to your lofty position
as Presidenr of the Security Council. We most sincerely
wish you success in your endeavours.

145. The international
community
has found in the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam an active. supporter of
peace and security in Asia and in the whole world;
the international
prestige and authority of Viet Nam
have received world-wide recognition.

140. It is symbolic and significant that the Security
Council is discussing the question of admission to
membership in the United Nations of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam. In the application
of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam it is stated that, having
achieved independence and having completed
the
process of unification,
the Socialist Republic
of
Viet Nam and the Vietnamese people wish to join
in the efforts of the United Nations in the struggle for
peace, international
security,
independence
and
sovereignty for all peoples. This desire to become a
Member of the United Nations is expressed by a
State which represents an heroic people whose efforts
in clefence of peace and national independence and
fo’r the triumph of the new and just principles of
international
relations have received the broadest
support and recognition.

146. In the light of these facts, the efforts to
obstruct the admission of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam to United Nations membership are unrealistic and, in fact, altogether intolerable. Such acts
clearly contradict
Article 4 of the Charter of the
United Nations which states that:
“Membership
in the United Nations is open to
States which accept the obliall... peace-loving
gations contained in the. . . Charter and... are able
and willing to carry out these obligations.”
The Socialist
requirements

141. At the price of enormous sacrifices, the Vietnamese people has shown by deeds its dedication
to the noble ideals of the United Nations. The historic
vi’ctory of the Vietnamese people has eliminated
a
hotbed of war in South-East Asia. It has contributed
to the strengthening of peace in the Asian continent
and to the consolidation
of d6tente in international
relations as a whole. The name of Viet Nam has
become an international
synonym for courage and
determination in the struggle against imperialist aggressiion and internal reaction in the name of the great
cause of freedom and national independence.

Republic of Viet Nam fully meets these
of the Carter.

147. The attempts, in violation of the Charter, to
link Viet Nam’s
application
for United Nations
membership to problems which are bilateral in nature,
are inadmissible
and have no foundation whatsoever.
Any problems related to the past Vietnamese war
can and must be settled through negotiations between
the parties involved. The delegation of the Mongolian
People’s Republic appeals to the United States to
put an end to its tendentious
and discriminatory
approach to the question of the admission of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations,
and presses for the immediate granting of its legitimate
request.

142. With the creation in June 1976 of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam the aspirations of the Vietnamese people to national reunification were fulfilled.
The creation of a single powerful socialist State
opened up broad horizons for the speedy economic
and social progress of the country.

148. The Government
and people of Mongolia feel
that the admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam to the United Nations. would, in fact, be an
honour for the Organization.
The People’s Republic
which maintains
close relations of
of Mongolia,
brotherly friendship and co-operation with the people
of Vjet Nam, is convinced that the admission to
United
Nations
membership
by the Republic of
Viet Nam will enhance even more the prestige of
the Organization
and will contribute
to improving
the effectiveness of its actions. I am convinced that
the whole world will welcome the admission of unified
Viet Nam to the United Nations.

143. The domestic policy of the Socialist Republic
Viet Nam is aimed at healing the cruel wounds
the war. It is further aimed at improving
its
economy, at cultural enhancement and its people’s
well-being.

of
of

144. It is well known that the foreign policy of the
Vietnamese State is aimed at contributing
to the
positive changes occurring in international
life. It
is aimed at strengthening
peace, friendship
and
co-operation among nations and at continuing
the
determined struggle against imperialism,
colonialism,

149. The PRESIDENT
(inferprefcrfion
.f?o/7? SW/lis\?): The next spbaker is the representative
Or
15

the German Democratic Republic, whom I invite to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
150.

and international co-operation in the best possible
manner and thus to overcome speedily the difficulties encountered in the aftermath of the war
and to create the material and technological
base
for the building of socialism.”

Mr. FLORIN

(German Democratic Republic)
Mr. President, I thank
you for the opportunity which has been given me to
speak before this important organ of the United
Nations. I am particularly happy to be able to congratulate you on behalf of my delegation, on your
accession to your high office. In your person we are
congratulating the representative of a country with
which the German Democratic Republic enjoys close,
friendly relations which are now being developed
and strengthened. And I must tell you that we understand very well the aspirations of your people and its
wish to strengthen the independence of your country.

(interprettltion

from Rrasirrn):

155, The position of the German Democratic Republic on the question of the admission of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam to United Nations membership
must be well known to the members of the Security
Council, because my Government and people have
always been guided-as,
indeed, is required by the
Charter-by
the wish to enhance and further the
universality of the Organization,
to strengthen international peace and security and to contribute
to
equal co-operation among all States, in conformity
with the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations

151. I wish to take this occasion to congratulate
the Permanent Observer for the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam, our friend and comrade, Mr. Dinh Ba
Thi, on his activities at United Nations Headquarters
and to welcome him to this chamber, where the
application of his country for United Nations membership is being discussed.

156. The request of the Government
of the sovereign and independent Socialist Republic of Viet Nnm
for admission to membership in the United Nations
is, without a doubt, in strict conformity
with the
provisions of the Charter. The Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam is prepared and able to fulfil all obligations of United Nations membership. In this contest,
I want to draw attention to the text of the official
letter of the Government of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam addressed to the Secretary-General [S/12/83,
1111nex].

152. The people and Government of the German
Democratic Republic are bound by ties of sincere
friendship to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.
Through all the years of the heroic struggle of the
Vietnamese people, the German Democratic Republic,
along with other States of the Socialist community,
was at the side of the courageous Vietnamese people
and gave them active support in their just cause.

157. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam has conducted and continues to follow a consistent policy
of peace and friendship with other States on the basis
of mutual respect for national independence,
SOVereignty and equality, mutual benefit and peaceful
coexistence. Today the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam maintains diplomatic relations with more thnn
100 States. It is internationally
recognized as a respectable and respected State which not only carries
weight in South-East Asia and on the Asian continent
but also contributes considerably
to international
detente.

1.53. At the ninth Congress of the Socialist Unity
Party of the German Democratic Republic, the General
Secretary of the Central Committee of the Party and
Chairman of the State Council, Mr. Erich Honecker,
stated:
“Solidarity
with the heroic Vietnamese people
has always been close to our hearts. The victory
achieved by that people in a bloody struggle has
been a source of sincere satisfaction to our people.
In future, too, we shall give the Vietnamese people
active assistance in eliminating the consequences
of the war, and will help them in their building
of socialism.

158. I would recall that the result of the debate
on the question of Viet Nam at the thirtieth session
of the General Assembly and in the general debate at
the current session showed convincingly
the predominant view in the world with regard to the
admission of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Natn
to the United Nations as a full Member State.

154. The head of the Vietnamese delegation to
that Congress Comrade Nguyen Duy Trinh, gave a
high assessment of our assistance to the Vietnamese
people when he said:

159. The Conference of Non-Aligned
Countries
which took place at Colombo gave firm support to
the admission of Viet Nam to membership
in the
United Nations and called on the Security Council
to consider favourably
the application
for such
admission. Therefore, we are surprised to hear the
statements from certain circles by which they attempt
to exert pressure on the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam and make its admission to membership
in the
Organization dependent on certain bilateral questions.
To link the application of the Socialist Republic of

“In view of the new situation and the new tasks
faced by the Vietnamese revolution, the moral and
material assistance of the German Democratic
Republic and of other brotherly countries, as well as
of our friends throughout the world, is a powerful
stimulus for the Vietnamese people to work relentlessly and selflessly so as to utilize this assistance
16

Viet Nam for membership in the United Nations with
any problems that have no relation whatever to
membership in the United Nations is incompatible
with the Charter.

Security Council to support the application
of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for membership
in
the United Nations.
165. The PRESIDENT
(inter*pwtntion
fro171 sPC/IIis/z): The next speaker is the representative
of the
Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic.
Accordingly,
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

160. As the representative of the German Democratic
R.epublic, I share entirely the view of the Co-ordin,ating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries, which,
in their declaration of 8 September this year, said:
“any opposition to the admission of Viet Nam to
the United Nations is legally and morally irrelevant,
indefensible
and unjustifiable,
contrary
to the
Charter and an affront to the express wishes of the
overwhelming
majority
of the Members
of the
United Nations representing the widest possible
spectrum of international opinion” [S/12198, rrnlzex].

166. Mr. SHEVEL
(Ukrainian
Soviet
Socialist
Republic) (interpretation
from Russirrn): Mr. President, first of all allow me to thank you and the members of the Council for giving me the opportunity
to speak in this important organ of the United Nations.
167. The Security Council is meeting in connexion
with the application
of the Socialist Republic
of
Viet Nam for admission to membership.in
the United
Nations. The Ukrainian
SSR wishes to give strong
support to this application,
which is contained in a
letter from the Prime Minister of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam addressed to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations [S//2183, ((/1/1~~.\.],and we feel
that this question must be resolved positively without
any delay. In that letter it is stated that the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam accepts the obligations
contained in the Charter of the United Nations and
solemnly undertakes to c,arry out those obligations.

1161. The war in Indo-China was cruel. It was imposed
on the peoples of that region from outside and it cost
millions of people their lives or their health. It exacted
immense material sacrifices. Of course, after the end of
such a war many questions arise which are usually
taken care of in negotiations
between the States
involved. As regards the Vietnamese question, there
is an agreement which forms an excellent basis for
such negotiations. Moreover, the Government,of
the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam has repeatedly shown
its good will. From the representatives of the other
side, even from official personalities, one hears that
the war in Indo-China is now ended and that one
should face the future. If this is so, then why do we
hear statements here opposing the application of Viet
Nam for membership in the United Nations?

168. The admission
of the Socialist Republic
of
Viet Nam, a peace-loving country, as a full member
of the United Nations would be entirely in keeping
with the requirements
of Article 4, paragraph
1,
of the Charter and is vitally necessary for the United
Nations itself in order for it to enhance its efficiency,
its prestige and its authority and to ensure the true
universality of the Organization.

162. Humane and humanitarian considerations
have
been mentioned, but if we look at the real substance
of the problems and the understanding
of these
words in certain circles, we can discover something
that is quite characteristic of the approach of imperialist circles to these so-called humanitarian questions.
In particular, nothing is said about the millions of
victims of the imperialist
policies. There are no
tears for them, not to mention any restitution.
It is
tlhe political interests of specific circles only that are
taken into account, circles that are still thinking in
terms of a policy of strength. But fortunately,
we
can say that people are becoming increasingly aware
of the real substance of that game.

169. The immediate admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations in fact has
the support of an overwhelming
majority of the Members. This was clearly shown during the discussion
of this question in 197.5 in the Security Council and
also at the thirtieth session of the General Assembly.
170. As recently as a year ago, the General Assembly
in its resolution
3366 (XXX), which was adopted
by 123 votes, confirmed the legitimate right of Viet
Nam to become a Member of the United Nations
and also urged the immediate and speedy settlement
of this question in strict accordance with the Charter.
It is typical that not a single Member State voted
against that resolution.

163. We live in an era in which international relations
have acquired a new quality. The principles of peaceful
coexistence and mutually beneficial co-operation
are
practised increasingly in many spheres of public life.
The concern of peoples to see the process of dktente
continue is increasing. Governments, their representatives, who are active in many spheres of international relations, and the United Nations as a whole
are faced with great demands.

171. As has been pointed out, the Fifth Conference
of Heads of State or Government
of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Colombo, called upon the Security
Council to consider urgently and positively the application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam fol
admission
to membership
in the, United
Nations,
in accordance with the resolution 3366 (XXX).

164. On behalf of the Government of the German
I)emocratic Republic, I appeal to all members of the
17

172. By its lengthy and heroic struggle for freedom
and independence and for the restoration and strengthening of peace in Indo-China and by its historic
victory in that just struggle, Viet Nam made a
tremendous contribution
to the struggle of peoples
for their national liberation,
against imperialism,
foreign intervention and aggression and in favour of
the peace and security of peoples. The fact that peace
was restored in Indo-China as a result of that victory
conside,rably furthered the process of the improvement
of the international situation not only in that region
but throughout the world.
173. The victory of the people of Viet Nam, based
on the unchanging, tireless and unselfish support
given by the Socialist and non-aligned countries,
defeated the intention of imperialism and its stooges
to perpetuate the partitioning of the country and
subject part of it to foreign domination and also
removed the most dangerous hotbed of war in Asia.

,
.

174. As was emphasized at the Colombo Conference,
the great victory of the Vietnamese people represents
a weighty contribution to the joint struggle of the
peoples of the non-aligned countries and other peoples
and progressive forces against the common enemies of
colonialism, neo-colonialism and racism and in favour
of peace, national independence, democracy and social
progress.
175. The reunification of Viet Nam, which was
carried out in July this year at the desire of the Vietnamese people, and the formation of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam represented the culmination
of many years of heroic struggle waged by the Vietnamese people in order to confirm their basic national
rights to unity and independence and the territorial
integrity of the entire country and represented the
expression of the sovereign will of that people to
build a free life in conditions of socialism.
176. The steps being taken in the international arena
by the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam convincingly
demonstrate its desire to build relations with various
countries on the basis of the principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations. In its foreign
relations the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam pursues
a policy aimed at strengthening international peace
and security, consolidating international
co-operation and developing relations with all countries on
the basis of the principles of peaceful coexistence,
no-use of force and strict respect for the territorial
integrity and independence of all States, non-intervention in their internal affairs, genuine equality and
fruitful co-operation among peoples. Quite naturally,
this policy is fully in accordance with the requirements
of the Charter and enjoys the universal support of
the Member States. Because of its well-founded
peace-loving policy and its heroic struggle for peace,
liberty,
independence
and social progress, the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam enjoys wide international recognition and authority and the sincere
friendship of the peoples of the world.

177. It thus is particularly
strange that the implementation of the legitimate
right of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam to become a Member of the
United Nations has already been blocked twice when
this question was discussed in the Security Council,
and it was precisely by that permanent member of the
Security Council which for many years waged an
aggressive war against the Vietnamese people. At the
same time, in order to justify its negative position
on the admission of Viet Nam to membership in the
United Nations, that member used various artificial
pretexts and made attempts to connect this question
with other matters which are totally irrelevant to it.
178. The artificial blocking of the admission of
Viet Nam to membership
in the United Nations,
thus making it impossible for that country to enjoy
its legitimate right to become a Member of the United
Nations, is a violation of the principles of the Charter
and the principle of the universality of the United
Nations. Such actions constitute a gross violation
of the relevant provisions of the declaration of principles contained in the Final Act of the Conference
on Security and Co-operation
in Europe, which
confirms the necessity of respect for and the achievement of equality among all peoples of the world.
These actions also ignore the desire expressed by
the overwhelming majority of Members of the United
Nations in resolution 3366 (XXX).
179. The contrived obstacles which have been placed
in the way of the admission of Viet Nam to the United
Nations cannot in any way be justified, particularly
since, for its part, Viet Nam has frequently stated its
readiness to normalize its relations with the United
States and to solve all problems on the basis of the
well-known Paris Agreements.4 The specific steps
which have been taken by the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam in this area show both the sincerity Of
its declarations and the contrived nature of the pretexts
which camouflage the obstacles erected to the admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to membership in the United Nations.
180. Nor should we forget that the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam is a major State in Asia, with a territory
of 333,000 square kilometres and with a population
of 50 million people. That country, both because
of its territorial extent and because of the size of its
population, is considerably larger than some European
countries. I should recall that, in population,
the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam ranks sixteenth in.
the world. How, then, can we accept the fact that
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which is SUCh
a large State is having difficulty in being admitted
to the United Nations?
181. We consider that any further delay in taking u
positive decision on the admission of Viet Nam to
membership in the United Nations is completely
inadtnissible from the point of view of the Charter
and goes against the interests of the United Nations

itself, the strengthening of international
peace and
security and the normalisation
of the international
situation and relations among States. Such a delay
dloes not help to strengthen the United Nations and
further promote an improvement
of the political
climate in the world; on the contrary, it leads to a
violation of its principles and is tantamount to ignoring
the reality of the present-day world and also is in
conflict with the purpose of the further democratization
of international relations.

Republic of Viet Nam to become a M.ember of the
U.nited Nations. We believe that the Security Council
should declare itself in favour of the admission of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.
189. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam showed
maximum understanding on an earlier occasion of the
well-known
reasons suggested for postponement
of consideration
of its application
for ’ admission.
That constructive behaviour of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam showed once again what was already
known to us all, namely, that it is a country which
has demonstrated
its persistence, firm resolve and
unbounded will to live as a sovereign, independent
and united country, ready to assume its full share,of
responsibility
as an equal member of the international
community.

182. The Ukrainian
SSR calls upon all members
of the Security Council to perform their duty and
support the admission to the United Nations of a new
Member,
the peace-loving
State of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam.
183. Such a step would be in accordance with the
purposes of the United Nations, the principle
of
universality
and the requirements
of the Charter.
It would be an important contribution to the further
broadening of co-operation among peoples and the
implementation
in practice of the principle of peaceful
coexistence. It would also assist United Nations efforts
in the main .orientation of its activities, that is, to
strengthen international
peace and security, and to
broaden and increase the process of international
dCtente.

190. Owing to the fact that Security Council action
was twice blocked by the use of the veto, it is now
convened for a third time to consider the question
of the admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam to the United Nations, although the General
Assembly has expressed itself almost unanimously
in favour of that country’s admission to the world
Organization.
We believe that this time the decision
will be positive.

1184. We are convinced that the just cause of Viet
Nam, which after the war embarked on a course
of national restoration and social progress, will also
triumph, just as its cause triumphed in the burdenisome years of trial by war. And no manoeuvres will
prevent the Socialist Republic of Vief Nam, in the
:final analysis, from taking its proper place in the
United Nations. That is the real state of affairs
which is dictated by the imperious course of history.

19t. In the opinion of our delegation, what is really
involved in the Council’s consideration of this matter
is the case of a peace-loving country which has provided ample proof of its respect for the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. Viet Nam,
which suffered enormous losses in’ the struggle for
freedom and independence
in the course of a long
and devastating war, can best appreciate the freedom,
peace and independence of other countries. Viet Nam
has clearly proved this by its concrete initiatives
and determination
to develop good relations with
neighbouring and other countries.

185. We should like to express the hope that those
who resist Viet Nam’s admission to the United
Nations will finally heed the voice of reason and
common sense and not pile up artificial obstacles
and delay a decision on this question, which has in
fact been resolved in advance by the facts of life
themselves.

192. The contribution
of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam to peaceful co-operation
has been very
significant,
even during the short period of time
since the end of the war. By opting for the policy
of non-alignment
and becoming a member country of
the non-aligned
movement,
the Socialist Republic
of ,Viet Nam has accepted a platform of international
relations which enjoys the support of a very large
number of countries.
By developing
its relations
with many countries, regardless of differences in
internal
systems, by endeavouring
to normalize
relations
even with countries
which participated
in the war against Viet Nam, and by undertaking
efforts for the consolidation
of the situation in IndoChina and Asia as a whole, Viet Nam confirms that
it is dedicated to the implementation
of the principles
on which the Organization
is based and which
constitute the foundation of peace in the world.

186. The PRESIDENT
(inte~prefntion fro/n Spa/?is/z): The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
187. Mr. PETRIC (Yugoslavia): Please accept my
warm congratulations, Mr. President, and best wishes
for success in your responsible duties. My pleasure
in congratulating you is all the greater because you
represent ‘Panamti, with which Yugoslavia has very
close and friendly relations.
188. The Yugoslav delegation pledged, in the course
of this year’s debate in the General Assembly, its
unequivocal support for the right of the Socialist

193. During its long struggle for liberation
colonial invaders, . the people of Viet Nam
19
_’

.”

from
made

a

while the country suffered vast
great sacrifices,
devastation. The people of Viet Nam did not fight for
its own liberation only; it made a great contribution
towards strengthening
the international
relations
provided for in the Charter. Consequently,
the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam rightly enjoys great
prestige in the world.

for membership which is being made by the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam. It is not difficult to discern
that that application is widely supported by international opinion. My country shares that opinion, and
we feel that the troubles and tribulations which Viet
Nam suffered in the recent past are all the more
reason for it to be given the benefits of formal
admission to the Organization,
and that extraneous
considerations should not constitute an obstacle to
an application which satisfies all the requirements
of Article 4 of the Charter. The declared policy of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, founded on peace
and co-operation among nations, is sufficient evidence
that it could make an effective contribution to the work
and ideals of the Organization.

194. It is obvious that the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam fulfils, both formally and substantively,
all the conditions laid down in the Charter for the
admission of new Members. We expect that by its
decision the Security Council will enable Viet Nam
to take the seat that rightly belongs to it during the
current session of the General Assembly.
195. In this connexion, we should like to emphasize
that Yugoslavia has constantly supported the struggle
of the people of Vikt Nam for freedom. Today, its
relations with that friendly and peaceful country are
well developed in the political, economic, cultural
and other fields. We are convinced that the admission
of Viet Nam to the United Nations would represent
a further step in strengthening peace and security,
and would be an expression of appreciation of Viet
Nam’s peaceful policy and of the efforts of its people
to rebuild their war-devastated country.

200. Allow me to recall that at a time shortly
before the founding of the Organization,
when its
noble ideals were still stirring in the minds of the
wartime leaders, the late President Roosevelt, whose
citation on Malta occupies a prominent place in the
heart of ‘its people, stated in his last inaugural
address: “We have learned to be citizens of the
world, members of the human community. We have
learned the-simple truth, as Emerson said, that ‘the
only way to have a friend is to be one’ “. I sincerely
trust that this thought will inspire all delegations in
the consideration of the application before the Council, and that acceptance will no longer be delayed.

196. In the Charter the conditions for the admission
of new Members are clearly laid down. Therefore
the specific interests and demands of a permanent
Member of the Security Council cannot present an
obstacle to admission to the Organization. Actually,
past experience shows to what extent the misuse of the
veto in particular cases prevented the United Nations
from achieving universality. We are convinced that
all the members of the Council will rise above their
specific considerations,
bring their position into
harmony with the Charter and make possible the
immediate realization of the principle of’universality
of the Organization,

201. In this spirit, the admission of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam could provide an impetus for
the resolution of any outstanding bilateral problems.
202. I wish to thank you, Mr. President, and the
other members of the Security Council for allowing
me to speak on this question.
203.

The PRESIDENT
(interpretcrtiorz from Spa/lish): The next name on the list of speakers is that of
the representative of Hungary. I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

197. ‘The PRESIDENT(interpretcrtionjvm
Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Malta.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

204. Mr. HOLLAI
(Hungary): Mr. President, first
of all, I should like to congratulate you and express
our satisfaction that the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of November
has been
bestowed upon you-a period in which the Council is
embarking on its deliberation on a highly important
item. I am happy to note the good and friendly
relations between our two countries,
manifested
recently in the visit to Panama by the President of
the Presidential Council of the Hungarian People’s
Republic.

198. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): Mr. President, please
accept a brief homage from me on your assumption
of the exacting duties of presiding over the Security
Council for this month. Though our countries are
geographically distant, the collaboration between our
two missions has always been friendly and positive.
It therefore gives me great pleasure to see your
diplomatic
skill and your country’s commitment
to
peace finding expression in the high office your are
occupying.

205. May I at the same time thank you and the
members of the Council for giving my delegation the
opportunity to express its views, albeit briefly, on
the subject on our agenda, namely, the request for
admission to the United Nations of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam.

199. At this late hour I shall not take up too much
of the Council’s valuable time. My purpose in asking
to appear before this august body today is a simple
and straightforward one. It concerns the application
20

2016. I should also like to take this opportunity
to welcome most heartily the delegation
of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.

stable
region itself and to the development
of more
international
relations among all the Governments
concerned.‘16

207. Our reasons for asking to be heard on this
subject can be summed up very briefly. We consider
any request for admission an important matter both
in the life of the Organization and in that of the applicant
concerned, be it a big or small, developed or developing
country. The admission of new members, regardless
of their size or social system, and the increase in
our membership have reflected the historic changes
that have taken place since the founding of the
Organization 31 years ago, thereby proving the ability
of the United Nations to adapt itself like a living
organism to the changes of time and circumstances
and to reflect the realities of the world in which
w’e live. In addition, the admission of new members
has in fact contributed to the strengthening
of the
United Nations, not only because we have grown
quantitatively,
but because we have developed
qualitatively as well. Even the smallest new Members
have brought into the Organization
their special
characteristics, unique experiences, fresh ideas, and
new approaches from which we cati all benefit.
And through its enlarged membership,
the United
Nations has become more and more universal, not
only in organizational aspects but also in character.

That is one of the main reasons why the people
and
the Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
enjoy the respect and support of the vast majol*itY
Of
the Members of the United Nations.
211. Since last year’s debate, the Vietnamese
People
has achieved one of its fundamental goals, the reunlfication of its country. Having achieved it, both
the
people and the leadership
are directing
all
theit
resources and abundant energies to peaceful
Work
to
reconstruct and further develop the economy
of the
now unified country, to improve the lot of the whole
population and to follow the chosen’course of development, the building of socialism.
212. All the steps taken by the Socialist
Republic
of Viet Nam in the field of foreign policy
serve
the
same purpose, that of developing friendly
relations
with other countries and ensuring favourable
external
circumstances, that is, peace, for the great work
to be
performed at home on the economic and social fronts.
213. According to Article 4 of the Charter,
membership in the United Nations is open to all peaceloving States which accept the obligations
contained
in the present Charter and which, in the judgement
of the Organization,
are able and willing to carry
out
those obligations. The Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam
has expressed its acceptance of the obligations
of the
Charter. To say that that country is peace-loving
lnust
be an understatement
in view of what it has gone
through during its recent history, that of an especially
cruel and savage war. The only condition
for admission then remains, in the words of the Charter,
“the judgement of the Organization”.
There can be no
doubt that the Organization-the
overwhelnling
majority of its members-is
for the membership
of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.

208. If this is true in general, it is all the more so
in the case of the admission of the Socialist Republic
oF Viet Nam. Its admission would be of special
significance and, indeed, of great benefit for the
United Nations.
209. With a population
of almost 50 million,
the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is not a small country
by any standard. The long history of the Vietnamese
people is a shining example of a courageous struggle
for freedom and independence and of the refusal of
all foreign domination, ideals we all share and cherish.
It was their self-sacrificing
heroism which brought
an end to the war in Viet Nam, a war which, while
inflicting heavy losses and untold suffering on the
people of Viet Nam, had been poisoning the international atmosphere for years. No nation in the world
has recently suffered as much to gain independence
as did Viet Nam. No nation’s struggle has influenced
and affected international relations and, in some cases,
internal developments
as much as has that of the
heroic people of Viet Nam.

214. As well as in last year’s General
Assembly
resolution 3366 (XXX), this wish of the vast majority
of the Member States was reflected in the Political
Declaration
of the Fifth Conference
of He&s
of
State or Government
of Non-Aligned
Countries,
which called upon the Security Council
to give
prompt and positive consideration
to the application
of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for admissiun.
This stand was reaffirmed in the declaration
of the
Co-ordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Countl-ies
of 8 September
1976 [S/12/98, (1/111(~.\.]. Moreover,
the general debate at the present session of the Genei-al
Assembly has proved beyond the slightest shadow
uf
doubt that the Member States are for the admission
of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. We now need
only the recommendation
of the Security Council.

210. The establishment of peace in Viet Nam was a
great historic service not only to the people of Viet
Nam and the peoples of Indo-China
but also to
mankind as a whole. In this respect, we fully agree
with the Secretary-General’s
statement in the introduction to his annual report on the work of the Organization when he said:

215. We strongly hope that those members
Founcil which, by virtue of the Charter, have

“The end of that war more than a year ago opened
the door to a new and more peaceful future in the
21

of

the

special

responsibilities
and which therefore e~r$f~%$&‘n; ,. v.!217. We hope that the Council will consider this
privileges in the Organization
will act :accbrding ;t’o
case on its merits and recommend to the General
their responsibilities
and not misuse th,eir privileges’
,Assembly the admission of the Socialist Republic
‘*
concerning the admission of new members.
of Viet Nam. Such a decision would be in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and the wishes
216. Finally, allow me as the representative
of a
of the majority of the Members, would enhance the
socialist country to make a few more remarks in
prestige of the Council and would serve well the
concluding
my short statement. We are of course
general interests of the Organization. This step would
glad to have before us the request for admission of
at the same time be a further contribution by the
another socialist country. But among socialist counUnited Nations to the attainment of the purposes of
tries, Viet Nam has a special place in the minds and
the Charter and to peace in general.
hearts of the Hungarian people. Its cause has always
The meetilzg sose crt 6.45 p.m.
been ours and the solidarity and sympathy of our
people with the heroic people of Viet Nam have
forged the closest friendship between our two countries. These close relations and the knowledge of
I A/10217, Political Declaration and Strategy to Strengthen
International Peace and Security and to Intensify Solidarity and
the Government
and the people of the Socialist
Mutual Assistance among Non-Aligned Countries, para. 22.
Republic of Viet Nam have convinced us that this
2 A/31/197, annex I, para. 101.
request for admission meets all the conditions
set
X A/31/1 10, annex.
4 United Nations. Trmtv Seriu. vol. 935, No. 13295. D. 2.
out in the Charter. Those are the reasons for which
my Government joins those demanding the admission
of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the United
Nations.

22
Litho in United Nations, New York

00400

83-60801-April

1985-2,200

’
