A /69/PV.99

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

99th plenary meeting

Monday, 27 July 2015, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency Mr. Roble
Olhaye, Permanent Representative of Djibouti to
the United Nations
The President: Before proceeding to the item on our
agenda, it is my sad duty to pay tribute to the memory
of the late Permanent Representative of Djibouti to
the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Roble Olhaye,
who passed away on Wednesday, 22 July. Ambassador
Olhaye had a distinguished career as a respected
diplomat. He began his tenure at the United Nations
on 18 January 1988 and was appointed Ambassador to
the United States on 2 March of that year. He served
as the dean of the diplomatic corps in Washington,
D.C. On behalf of the General Assembly, I request the
representative of Djibouti to convey our condolences to
the Government and the people of Djibouti and to the
bereaved family of His Excellency Roble Olhaye.
I now invite representatives to stand and observe
a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of His
Excellency Mr. Roble Olhaye.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
The President: Today we pay tribute to Ambassador
Roble Olhaye of Djibouti, whose passing away last week
has saddened the United Nations community. Having
been appointed in 1988, as I said, Ambassador Olhaye
was the longest-serving Permanent Representative at the
United Nations. In his 27 years of service, Ambassador
Olhaye built an enduring legacy both in New York and

in Washington, D.C, where he served as Ambassador of
his country to the United States. He was also Djibouti’s
non-resident Ambassador to Canada. Here at the United
Nations Ambassador Olhaye served in a wide range of
capacities, including representing his country in the
Security Council in 1994. He served as President of the
Council in February 1994, as well as Chairman of the
Sanctions Committee established pursuant to resolution
841 (1993), on Haiti. He later served as Chairman of the
Second Committee in 1999.
Prior to coming to New York, Ambassador Olhaye
served as Djibouti’s Permanent Representative to the
United Nations Environment Programme and the United
Nations Human Settlements Programme in Nairobi. He
was also Honorary Consul of Djibouti to Kenya from
1980 to 1985, during which time the political relations
between the two countries were established.
Through more than two and half decades of
international service, Ambassador Olhaye’s presence
became an indelible part of daily life at the United
Nations. I know I speak for many of us when I say
that he will be greatly missed. I convey my sincere
condolences to the bereaved family, including his wife
and children, as well as to the Government and the
people of Djibouti. May his soul rest in eternal peace.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I welcome this opportunity
to pay tribute to the late Permanent Representative of
Djibouti, His Excellency Mr. Roble Olhaye. I extend
my deepest condolences to the President of Djibouti,

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-23166 (E)

*1523166*

A/69/PV.99

His Excellency Mr. Ismaël Omar Guelleh; its Minister
for Foreign Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Ali
Youssouf; and other colleagues in the Foreign Ministry
for their loss. At this time of mourning, we may take
some measure of comfort in knowing that Ambassador
Olhaye left a lasting legacy based on nearly 30 years of
engagement with the United Nations.
Ambassador Olhaye first presented his credentials
to Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar in January
1988. He also represented his country in North America.
He was fondly referred to as the Eternal Representative
among Permanent Representatives. He had great
wisdom. We considered him a leading dictionary, since
he knew so much.
During his long career of public service, he made
important contributions on issues across the United
Nations agenda, helping to advance progress in our
core mission of achieving peace, human rights and
development. Ambassador Olhaye showed strong
leadership on many occasions, including as President
of the Security Council and Chairman of the Haiti
Sanctions Committee in 1994, as well as Chairman of
the Second Committee in 1999. I deeply appreciated
his support when I travelled to Djibouti last October.
I remember how he helped to make my visit a great
success.
Ambassador Olhaye was a passionate champion of
Africa and a great believer in the value of the continent’s
partnership with the United Nations. Thanks in part to
his support we have strengthened our important bond,
making a difference in the lives of millions of people.
Beyond his many diplomatic successes, Ambassador
Olhaye was deeply admired for his energy, dedication
and sincerity. He once said that “never forgetting those
most in need is the reason why we are here” at the United
Nations. Ambassador Olhaye always remembered the
people who are suffering. Let us carry on that spirit as
we honour his memory.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of South
Africa, who will speak on behalf of the Group of
African States.
Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): At the outset, on
behalf of the Group of African States, I wish to extend
my deepest appreciation to Mr. Sam Kutesa, President
of the General Assembly, for organizing this special

2/18

27/07/2015

meeting of the General Assembly as a memorial
to the late Ambassador Roble Olhaye, Permanent
Representative of Djibouti to the United Nations and
Ambassador to the United States of America and to
Canada.
It is with profound sadness that the African Group
learned of the passing away, on Wednesday, 22 July,
of our beloved colleague and brother, His Excellency
Mr. Roble Olhaye, Permanent Representative of Djibouti
and Ambassador to the United States. Ambassador
Olhaye’s work at the United Nations spanned over three
decades and leaves behind an indelible legacy. Very
few Ambassadors can lay claim to having served at
the United Nations alongside four Secretaries-General.
And there are less than a handful of Ambassadors who
can ever claim to have served under five United States
Presidents, as Ambassador Olhaye did.
Our hearts are filled with deep sorrow, for he
welcomed most of us as Permanent Representatives
to the United Nations in his capacity as the dean of
the diplomatic corps. We hold in remembrance a big
brother, a diplomatic giant, a strong pillar and skilful
negotiator who worked tirelessly to advance the African
agenda. We also hold in remembrance his warm
welcome and mentoring of each of us as new Permanent
Representatives. The passing away of Ambassador
Olhaye is a great loss to his family, his country, the
African Group and the United Nations. It is indeed a
great loss for the diplomatic community.
Ambassador Olhaye had an illustrious diplomatic
career. For almost three decades, he served his country
with distinction at the United Nations. He was the
longest-serving Ambassador to the United Nations and
to the United States of America in Washington, D.C.
He therefore became the dean of the diplomatic corps.
Ambassador Olhaye was dedicated to his work and to
his homeland.
By all accounts, Ambassador Olhaye was an astute
and outstanding diplomat. He was well respected by
his fellow Permanent Representatives, and equally by
other diplomats. As the African Group, we relied on
his significant understanding, wisdom and knowledge
of the delicate process of the United Nations. His
enormous professionalism, dedication and significant
contribution to the unity and cohesion of the African
Group will always be missed.
We will remember him for tirelessly working on
advancing the African agenda. It is for this reason that

15-23166

27/07/2015

we in the African Group say we have lost a big brother,
a giant and an institution that we relied on during the
many difficult times in negotiations. He imparted
with enormous professionalism his unwavering
commitment to upholding the founding principles of
the United Nations and the unity and cohesion of the
African Group. His enduring legacy of core values and
principles will remain forever etched in our hearts and
minds as we continue to cherish the memory of our
departed brother.
On behalf of the African Group, please allow me
to offer our deepest condolences to his bereaved family
and to the Government and the people of Djibouti. May
his soul rest in eternal peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of Asia-Pacific States.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I am humbled to speak
on behalf of the Group of Asia-Pacific States at this
solemn moment to pay tribute to His Excellency
Mr. Roble Olhaye, Ambassador and Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Djibouti to the United
Nations. It was with a heavy heart and profound sadness
that last week we learned about the passing away of
our good friend, Ambassador Olhaye. On behalf of the
Asia-Pacific Group, I express our deepest condolences
and sympathy to the bereaved family of Ambassador
Olhaye as well as to the Government and the people of
the Republic of Djibouti for their great loss. The Group
thanks you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
to pay tribute to Ambassador Olhaye.
Ambassador Olhaye had an outstanding diplomatic
career. He held his country’s flag high in different United
Nations bodies, such as the United Nations Environment
Programme and the United Nations Centre for Human
Settlements. His engagement as the Ambassador and
Permanent Representative to the United Nations
spanned more than 27 years. During his long association
with the United Nations, he demonstrated exceptional
intellect, vision, skill and passion for the core ideals
of the Organization. All of us immensely benefited
from his wealth of knowledge, wisdom and experience.
Ambassador Olhaye’s contribution to global peace and
security, including as the President of the Security
Council and the Chairman of the Sanctions Committee
on Haiti and as a member of the Security Council
mission to Mozambique, earned him the respect of all
his peers. Ambassador Olhaye worked tirelessly in a
number of United Nations committees and offices, such

A/69/PV.99

as the position as Chair of the Second Committee, as
well as at the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Population Fund and the United
Nations Office for Project Services, to name a few.
On a personal note, I had a great deal of respect
for him. He shouldered the responsibilities of his nation
in two most important stations simultaneously, at the
United Nations in New York and the other at his country’s
Embassy to the the United States in Washington, D.C.
Yet as a colleague I never felt disconnected, as he was
always available when I needed him. He was especially
passionate on the issue of Africa, and therefore I once
described him as the voice of Africa, as he articulated
the aspirations of Africa in a very constructive and
meaningful way. Yet he never neglected the genuine
issues of other groups. He was affectionate, loving and
soft-spoken, and in times of need he stood solid like
rock.
There is a saying: “Death leaves a headache that no
one can heal; love leaves a memory no one can steal.”
While our hearts ache at the passing away of our friend
and dean, Ambassador Roble Olhaye, the love and
respect he earned by his work to this comity of nations,
through his loving, compassionate and amicable
behaviour will keep him always alive among us and no
one can steal his memory from us.
On this solemn occasion, on behalf of the AsiaPacific Group, I would like to reiterate our commitment
to continuing our close work with the Permanent
Mission and the Government of the Republic of Djibouti
in the coming days.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Eastern European States.
Mrs. Jurcan (Romania): The members of the Group
of Eastern European States express their condolences
to the bereft family and friends of His Excellency
Ambassador Roble Olhaye, Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Djibouti to the United Nations, on
the sad occasion of his passing away, on 22 July. During
his nearly 30-year diplomatic career as a Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Djibouti, he worked in
the United Nations Environment Programme and United
Nations-Habitat, and, starting in 1988, as Ambassador
to the United Nations, the United States and Canada.
Ambassador Olhaye, the dean of the diplomatic corps,
served his country in an active and professional manner
while holding a number of important posts, including

15-231663/18

A/69/PV.99

27/07/2015

that of President of the Security Council in February
1994. His presence will be sorely missed by all of us,
including the members of the Eastern European States.

sincere condolences to the Government of Djibouti
and to his bereaved wife and children, as well as to his
extended family and friends.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Paraguay, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.

Ambassador Olhaye was one of the seniormost
veteran members of the international community in
this country, where he used his valuable experience
and knowledge in the private and public sectors for
the service of a country that, although facing many
challenges, has proved its resilience and quality as a
partner in our common endeavours. Ambassador Olhaye
had the opportunity and honour to represent Djibouti
at the United Nations since 1988, where his previous
assignments as Permanent Representative to the United
Nations Environment Programme and to the United
Nations Human Settlements Programme in Nairobi
were an invaluable asset in defending the interests not
only of Djibouti but of the entire African continent.
He was also accredited Ambassador to Canada and the
United States of America. He then became the longestserving Ambassador to the United States of America
and was the dean of the diplomatic corps.

Mr. González Franco (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of the Group of Latin American
and Caribbean States (GRULAC), I address the General
Assembly to express our deep condolences on the
passing away of Ambassador Roble Olhaye, Permanent
Representative of Djibouti and dean of the diplomatic
corps.
Ambassador Roble Olhaye was a person committed
to his country and to the purposes and principles of
the Organization. At United Nations Headquarters, he
distinguished himself in carrying out his important
roles as, inter alia, Chair of the Second Committee
and President of the Security Council in February
1994, during a period when his country served as a
non-permanent member of that organ. He also played
a crucial role in the reform process of the Security
Council; indeed, he was one of the Permanent
Representatives appointed to conduct negotiations that
led to the adoption of decision 62/557 in 2008. That
decision broke for the first time a 14-year deadlock
in those discussions. In his native country, he will be
remembered as a diplomat who dedicated most of the
life to defending the overriding interests of Djibouti.
We are very saddened by the absence of
Ambassador Olhaye, and as we remember his place
in the Organization, the Member States of GRULAC
would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to him.
Without a doubt, the memory of Ambassador Olhaye
will remain very dear to whoever shared his friendship
and his company. To the members of his family, we
would like to convey our most sincere condolences and
to let them know that we share their grief at this very
difficult time.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain, who will speak on behalf of the
Group of Western European and Other States.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the sad duty to speak today on behalf
of the Group of Western European and Other States on
the loss of our colleague, Ambassador Roble Olhaye,
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Djibouti
to the United Nations. We would like to convey our
4/18

On behalf of the Group of Western European and
Other States, I would like to reiterate our deep sadness
once again for the loss of someone who was a husband,
a father and, for us, a colleague and a friend.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States of America, who
will speak on behalf of the host country.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I have the
honour to speak today on behalf of the Government
of the United States of America, the country that has
the privilege of hosting the United Nations. I offer our
deepest condolences to the people and the Government
of the Republic of Djibouti on the passing away of His
Excellency Ambassador Roble Olhaye, Permanent
Representative of Djibouti to the United Nations and
Djiboutian Ambassador to the United States of America.
Some days when we come to work we can feel
anything but united here at the United Nations. But if
there is one thing that all representatives of all nations
can agree upon, it is the depth of the loss that we feel
with Roble’s passing. He was our dean, our leader
and our big brother. We will miss not only his strong
opinions and commanding presence, but also, above all,
his personal warmth and generosity.
Before I moved to New York to take up my
position, I asked my predecessor, Ambassador Rice,
what were the first things I should do when I arrived
15-23166

27/07/2015

here. Her counsel was typically straightforward: “Go
see the Ambassador of Djibouti,” she said. “He knows
everyone and he knows everything.” When I paid a call
on him in my first days here, he greeted me with two
enormous boxes of cannolis and eclairs. “One box for
you,” he said with delight, “and one box for your son and
your daughter.” There was no geopolitical conversation
with Roble that did not begin with a discussion of our
families and our love of our kids. That is one quality
that made him such a tireless diplomat. He never lost
sight of the individuals and families who were, and still
are, affected by all of the debates we have here.
Although Roble seemed an omnipresent fixture
here at the United Nations, he somehow managed
to moonlight between New York and Washington,
D.C., where he was the longest-serving Ambassador
to the United States of America. When he took over
as Djibouti’s Ambassador in Washington, D.C., on
22 March 1988, he said, “Americans had never heard
of Djibouti.” Even among diplomats, the nation was
not very well known. Djibouti did not even have an
Embassy in Washington, D.C., before his arrival. But
Roble persuaded his President to open one, and then
used that Embassy as a perch from which to forge the
trust and relationships that were his currency.
“When we opened,” he later said, “a lot of people
in this country were writing to us for information,
addressing letters, “Dear Mr. Djibouti”. Roble changed
that. He mailed out information packages about his
country to high schools and elementary schools. He
seized opportunities to speak about his nation with
the broader public in press interviews, public forums
and conferences. Within the diplomatic community, of
course, he built the relationships that allowed him to
promote Djibouti’s interests and those of his continent.
It is a testament to the largeness of Roble’s
personality, the boundlessness of his energy and the
breadth of his ambition for Djibouti, and also for Africa
as a whole, that his colleagues and friends in both New
York and Washington, D.C., felt him as a full-time
presence. Wherever he was, he was a tireless advocate
for Djibouti and for economic development and trade on
the African continent. It is true that he will not get to see
the world’s embrace of the new sustainable development
goals in September, but it is no exaggeration to say that
the agenda Roble pushed his entire career is one that
will be enshrined in those goals.
How large a force was Roble? It is not every day
that the President of the United States of America pays

A/69/PV.99

tribute to the passing of a member of our community
here. But that is what President Obama did last week,
crediting our beloved colleague for his personal role in
helping secure the passage of the African Growth and
Opportunity Act, a piece of legislation that assists the
economies of sub-Saharan Africa, and praising Roble
for the way he “represented his nation and all of Africa
with pride”. Roble projected tremendous pride: pride in
Djibouti, pride in Africa and pride in what all of us
could do if we put our minds to it.
We mourn the passing of Roble Olhaye as a
colleague and as a friend. Our thoughts and prayers
are with his wife, Amina Farah Ahmed, and his five
children and all who loved him and were loved by him.
Early yesterday, an emotional President Guelleh and
most of the Djiboutian Cabinet were at the airport to
greet the arrival of the Ambassador’s remains. Given
all he did for his country, his people and his continent,
Roble’s was a truly triumphant return. A grieving and
forever grateful nation welcomes him home.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Djibouti
Miss. Hassan (Djibouti) (spoke in French): We
were greatly moved and greatly saddened to hear of the
death last week of His Excellency Mr. Roble Olhaye,
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary
of the Republic of Djibouti to the United States of
America and Permanent Representative of Djibouti
to the United Nations. On behalf of the Government
of Djibouti, I would like to thank the President of the
General Assembly for having convened this meeting
to pay tribute to Mr. Olhaye. Furthermore, I welcome
the presence of the Secretary-General and all Member
States that are here with us today. I would like to thank
all those who took the floor before me for sharing
their moving memories of Ambassador Olhaye. The
homage of the General Assembly comes a day after
his State funeral yesterday morning in Djbouti, where
the highest-level governing bodies of the State of
Djibouti were represented — including the President of
Republic as well as the members of the Government
and Parliament. The ceremony rightfully honoured
his selfless services to the nation of Djbouti. Roble
Olhaye’s services helped to strengthen and bolster the
influence of our nation’s diplomacy at the international
level.
The President of the Republic of Djibouti stressed
that:

15-231665/18

A/69/PV.99

“Our country’s diplomacy has lost one of its
most brilliant representatives and recognizes his
contribution to our rapprochement with the United
States and with Africa.”
Ambassador Olhaye was a diplomat endowed
with optimism and great confidence in the future of
Africa. At the annual celebration during Africa Week
in Washington, D.C. — which complements Africa Day
in New York — that all of us here are familiar with, in
reply to the question “What is there to celebrate?” his
answer was:
(spoke in English)
“There is a lot to celebrate. A lot of countries are
doing very well — extremely well. Africa is not
what you often read. It is not what you think. Africa
is open for business.”
(spoke in French)
During his long diplomatic career in the United
States and at the United Nations, Ambassador
Olhaye participated in and contributed to the
development, negotiation and adoption of a number of
intergovernmental processes in the General Assembly,
the Security Council and in the Economic and Social
Council, in which he held and took on various positions
and responsibilities. We are unable to summarize all
of his achievements in only a few minutes, but we
would like to take this opportunity to recognize and
celebrate the fact that Ambassador Olhaye — dean of
the diplomatic corps in Washington, D.C., and at the
United Nations — was an experienced diplomat, proud
to serve the interests of his country through thick and
thin. His long professional experience attests to the
outstanding nature of his work at the bilateral level and
his knowledge of the United Nations system, which
was a real asset to our diplomacy. Ambassador Olhaye
always defended the importance of multilateralism
in addressing global collective challenges and was
convinced of the ability of small States within the
United Nations to exercise their influence and play a
constructive role.
Many here had an opportunity to work and
interact with Ambassador Olhaye and saw first-hand
his dexterity and diplomatic experience on various
issues. He was always willing to offer advice on, and
discuss current matters with, all diplomats — whether
junior or senior. We already miss his effective and wise
leadership; his memory will live on in the friendly

6/18

27/07/2015

countries in which he served and among those of us
who worked with him.
In these painful circumstances, all the diplomats
and the staff of the Permanent Mission to the United
Nations in New York and those of the Embassy of
Djibouti to the United States of America would like
to reiterate their heartfelt condolences and sincere
sympathy to his wife and five children, as well as to
all the other members of the family and the friends and
relatives of the deceased. Our thoughts are with them
in this painful and difficult time, when they express
their mourning in accordance with tradition in Djbouti,
with: We implore Allah, the Almighty, to grant His
immense mercy to Ambassador Olhaye.
I would like to conclude with an expression intended
for such circumstances that many in the Assembly are
familiar with: surely, to Allah we belong and to Him
shall we return.
Agenda item 18 (continued)
Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of
the 2002 International Conference on Financing for
Development and the 2008 Review Conference
Draft resolution (A/69/L.82)
The President: I would like once again to
congratulate and commend the Government of Ethiopia
for successfully hosting the third International
Conference on Financing for Development.
The Addis Ababa Action Agenda, which
was adopted by the Conference on 16 July, is a
comprehensive framework for financing sustainable
development, with concrete deliverables, policies and
actions that will support the implementation of the post2015 development agenda. The edorsement of the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda by the General Assembly today
will further demonstrate our collective commitment to
eradicating poverty, achieving sustainable development
and building a better future for all. We should all do
whatever it will takes to ensure that the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda is fully implemented.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: Today, the General
Assembly will take a major step on the path towards
sustainable development and ending extreme poverty
in all its forms. By endorsing the outcome document

15-23166

27/07/2015

of the third International Conference on Financing
for Development, we launch a new era of cooperation
and global partnership. We provide the foundation for
success at the summit to adopt the post-2015 development
agenda, to be held in New York in September, and at the
Conference of Parties of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, to be held in Paris in
December.
The Addis Ababa Action Agenda provides a
new global framework for financing sustainable
development. It provides incentives for investment in
areas of global need and aligns financing flows and
policies with economic, social and environmental
priorities.
In addition to the agreements in the outcome
document, many initiatives were launched, including
the Addis Tax Initiative, increased commitments from
development banks, and a new financing partnership for
women’s and children’s health. The Addis Ababa Action
Agenda provides a guide for actions by all stakeholders.
It has laid down a strong foundation to support the
implementation of the post-2015 development agenda,
including the sustainable development agenda. The
Action Agenda also provides a strong accountability
mechanism.
Next year’s first Financing for Development Forum
will give the international community an important
opportunity to assess progress in implementation. Only
by staying engaged will we ensure that the commitments
we endorse today will lead to tangible progress on the
ground, in all countries and for all people.
Allow me to express my deepest appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for your admirable stewardship
during these many months. Your leadership,
patience and diplomatic skill enabled us to have a
successful outcome. Let us also thank Prime Minister
Hailemariam Desalegn, who served as President of
the Conference; Foreign Minister Tedros Adhanom
Ghebreyesus, who was Chairman of the Main
Committee; and the Government of Ethiopia for
hosting this historic conference and bringing it to a
successful conclusion. Their efforts and those of the
co-facilitators, Ambassadors George Talbot of Guyana
and Geir Pedersen of Norway, are greatly appreciated.
And I thank the Member States for their engagement
and flexibility in taking this critical step forward. By
showing such flexibility, we have forged this document
for all of the peoples of the world.

A/69/PV.99

Lastly, I should like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Wu Hongbo of the Department of Social and
Economic Affairs for his efforts as the SecretaryGeneral of the Conference. He and his staff worked with
dedication for a successful outcome. We are now firmly
on the path to a more prosperous, just and sustainable
world for this and future generations.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/69/L.82.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with
draft resolution A/69/L.82, entitled “Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference
on Financing for Development (Addis Ababa Action
Agenda)”, I wish to put on record the following
statement of financial implications on behalf of the
Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 153 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
The implementation of the recommendations
contained in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda would
give rise to additional resource requirements under
the regular budget and, possibly, extra-budgetary
resources. However, the recommendations contained
in the Action Agenda would require further assessment
and consultations with all stakeholders in order to
determine how the decisions contained in the Action
Agenda are proposed to be implemented.
Accordingly, it is not possible for the Secretariat to
determine at this stage the full extent of the programme
budget implications arising from the draft resolution.
Should the General Assembly adopt the draft
resolution, the Secretary-General will submit a detailed
revised estimates report for the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2016-2017 to the General
Assembly for consideration at its seventieth session.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/69/L.82, entitled “Addis
Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International
Conference on Financing for Development (Addis
Ababa Action Agenda)”. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt the draft resolution?

15-231667/18

A/69/PV.99

Draft resolution A/69/L.82 was adopted (resolution
69/313).
The President: Before giving the floor to the
speaker in explanation of position, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
I call on the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
Ms. Engelbrecht Schadtler (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela): I should like at the outset, on behalf
of the people and the Government of Venezuela, to
express our sincere condolences to the people and the
Government of Djibouti on the passing of Ambassador
Roble Olhaye.
(spoke in Spanish)
On behalf of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
I wish to reiterate our gratitude and congratulations to
the people and the Government of Ethiopia for their
hospitality and leadership at the third International
Conference on Financing for Development. Our country
fully supports the statement to be made later by South
Africa in its capacity as Chair of the Group of 77 and
China (G-77 and China).
With respect to the adoption of the Addis Ababa
document, the delegation of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela wishes to express some reservations on
its content, because we believe that it does not fully
reflect the diversity of opinions on matters related to
sustainable development. The Addis Ababa Conference
was an important effort towards the shared goal of
creating the economic and social conditions necessary
to eradicate poverty and exclusion.
As stated by French economist Thomas Piketty,
achieving sustainable development must go hand in
hand with a process involving the dissemination of
knowledge and investment in capacity-building and
training. Such mechanisms would lead to a greater
increase in productivity and reduced inequality, both
within and among countries.
Upon the adoption of resolution 69/313, entitled
“Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International
Conference on Financing for Development (Addis
Ababa Action Agenda)”, the outcome of the Conference,
Venezuela wishes to submits reservations on the
following issues.
8/18

27/07/2015

Concerning paragraph 31, as indicated at the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(Rio+20), reference to the elimination of fossil-fuel
subsidies is interventionist in the context of the public
policies of the State. Venezuela will not accept any kind
of evaluation, monitoring, reporting or review of our
national energy policies or measures that affect our
national sovereignty. That paragraph also distances
itself from and substantially modifies the positions
agreed on in the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation
of 2002.
Concerning paragraphs 60 and 69, Venezuela
rejects the references to low-carbon economies and the
listing of new and innovative mechanisms, especially
the mention of carbon-pricing mechanisms, for the
same reasons I have just set out.
With respect to the reference to modern energy
services for all in paragraph 49, we reiterate our
reservation in this respect, as we did in the final
document of Rio+20, “The future we want”. That is
because modern energy, in our opinion, involves the use
of new technologies without the necessary assessment
of their application in a national context or of priorities
in technological development.
We deplore the deletion in paragraph 14 of the
reference introduced by the G-77 and China on
initiatives to expand the availability of financing, in
particular through the establishment of new multilateral
development banks, such as the Bank of the South,
the Alba Bank and the Alba Fund, to complement
existing international institutions. Legitimate concerns
concerning the impact of trade barriers on developing
countries were disregarded, as well as the negative
effects of unilateral coercive measures, which threaten
the sovereignty and self-determination of peoples.
Lastly, we would recall once again that Venezuela
is not a party to the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea and that the fact that we did not object to
the text approved in this document cannot be interpreted
as a change in our position on that Convention.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
I shall now give the floor to those members who
wish to make statements following the adoption of
resolution 69/313.

15-23166

27/07/2015

Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.
The Group of 77 and China is most grateful to Ethiopia
for hosting the recent third International Conference on
Financing for Development. Furthermore, we would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
99th plenary meeting of the General Assembly with a
mandate to consider the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
of the third International Conference on Financing for
Development, which concluded its work on 16 July. In
that regard, we would also like to congratulate you, Sir,
for your able stewardship and leadership with regard to
the work and overall business of the current session of
the General Assembly. I would also like to add that we
are grateful to the facilitators, Ambassadors Talbot and
Pedersen, for having led the process.
The Group of 77 and China would like to welcome
the outcome document of the third International
Conference on Financing for Development, the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda, now adopted under resolution
69/313. In our understanding, the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda is complementary to and supplements the
means of implementation of the post-2015 development
agenda. In addition, as recognized in paragraph 19
of the Agenda, the post-2015 development agenda,
including the sustainable development goals, can
be met within the framework of a revitalized global
partnership for sustainable development, supported by
concrete policies and actions as outlined in the Action
Agenda.
The Group sought to be constructive in the financing
for development negotiations, in order to ensure that a
meaningful and ambitious outcome from the process
could be reached through good-faith intergovernmental
deliberations. We supported frank and transparent
negotiations towards a meaningful outcome. The Group
has also been consistent in its efforts to galvanize all
Member States and arrive at a common understanding
that will ensure that financing for development remains
relevant to the needs of developing countries.
Our participation in the negotiations that led to
the adoption of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda was
also based on our resolve to rid the world of poverty
in all its forms. We call for this global partnership
for development to be revitalized and reinvigorated,
particularly as we advance towards the adoption of
the post-2015 development agenda. We must, however,
never lose sight of the unfinished business of the

A/69/PV.99

Millennium Development Goals in order that no one
be left behind. Indeed, the work on implementation
that lies ahead of us will not be easy. Through the
revitalized and reinvigorated global partnership for
development and the North-South cooperation in the
centre thereof, we believe that more can be done to
sufficiently finance development. This would make a
huge impact in bridging the global economic disparities
and inequalities that continue to characterize the
current world economic system.
What is needed, therefore, is adequate financing,
which is an area where developed countries should
demonstrate leadership and unequivocal commitment
in order assist all of us to finally defeat poverty.
The private sector and South-South cooperation
should complement such efforts. Accordingly,
public international financing remains of paramount
importance, where the North should play a prominent
role.
The Group of 77 and China recognizes that progress
has been achieved. The Group is on record as noting
that compromise outcomes have been achieved in a
number of key areas, including, for example, the call
for a global infrastructure forum, more comprehensive
treatment of the issue of debt sustainability, providing
capacity-building and a technology transfer mechanism
and dedicated mechanism for follow-up and review
with intergovernmentally agreed conclusions and
recommendations.
However, the position of the Group is also on
record that there remain a number of issues of principle
that are important to and fully endorsed by the Group
that have not been adequately accommodated in the
current text, including, but not limited to, the explicit
reaffirmation of the key principle of common but
differentiated responsibilities in the context of the
global partnership for development. This principle
remains relevant and valid and, indeed, is the basis for all
international cooperation on sustainable development.
An unequivocal affirmation of this principle in the
outcome document of the post-2015 development is
essential for moving forward.
Other areas that have not been adequately
accommodated in the current text include the need
to maintain the integrity of the third International
Conference on Financing for Development and the post2015 development agenda as separate processes, while
acknowledging the need for stronger synergies between
them; the need for development partners to meet

15-231669/18

A/69/PV.99

current commitments and scale up official development
assistance (ODA) with binding timetables, including
the reaffirmation that ODA remains the main source of
development assistance; the need to address the diverse
and specific development needs of middle-income
countries in a coordinated manner through the
establishment of a United Nations plan of action to
that end that considers, inter alia, the multidimensional
nature of development and poverty; the need to fully
upgrade the Tax Committee into an intergovernmental
body; the need to make an explicit reference to
countries and peoples living under foreign occupation;
the need to explicitly address the issue of lifting and
terminating coercive measures, including unilateral
economic sanctions; and the need to explicitly address
the fact that climate financing is new and in addition
to — and therefore cannot be counted as — ODA, nor
can it be mixed with traditional development finance.
The foregoing agreed principles are fundamental to the
livelihoods of our people.
In the context of the current intergovernmental
negotiations on the post-2015 development agenda,
the Group of 77 and China would like to reiterate
the following. With regard to the relationship and/
or interlinkages among means of implementation,
aspects of the post-2015 development agenda and
the outcome of the third International Conference
on Financing for Development process, namely, the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda, the Group holds the
view that the integrity of the post-2015 development
agenda and financing for development process must be
respected, as they are completely different in scope and
purpose. The Group would also like to stress that the
means of implementation of a post-2015 development
agenda cannot be a substitute for nor be replaced by
the Addis Ababa Action Agenda. Rather, the financing
for development outcome from Addis Ababa should
support and supplement the means of implementation
for the post-2015 development agenda. The means of
implementation set out in each goal and in goal 17 are a
fundamental component of the post-2015 development
agenda in their own right and an integral part of the
agenda that we are currently negotiating.
The Group of 77 and China would like to reiterate
that it has not abandoned its principled positions, whose
objectives are to continue to strive for a just world
economic system in the spirit of multilateralism, ensure
that the global partnership for development is genuine
and adequately resourced, and assist in reversing the

10/18

27/07/2015

years of chronic underdevelopment and poverty that
continue to affect developing countries.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union) (spoke
in French); On the occasion of the loss of Mr. Roble
Olhaye, Permanent Representative of Djibouti and dean
of the diplomatic corps, I wish to begin my statement
today with the expression of the deepest condolences of
the members of the European Union and my personal
condolences to his family and to the people and
Government of Djibouti.
(spoke in English)
On behalf of the European Union and its member
States, I would also like to join in expressing profound
appreciation and congratulations to our Ethiopian hosts
for the successful organization of the third International
Conference on Financing for Development, held in
Addis Ababa from 13 to 16 July. I would also like to
profit from this occasion to thank you, Mr. President,
for your personal, strong engagement in this matter.
I acknowledge the earlier presence of the SecretaryGeneral and his engagement in the matter as well.
We would like to particularly thank Ambassadors
Geir Pedersen and George Talbot for their tireless
efforts during the past month. All their work is greatly
appreciated, and I think that we can all say that the Addis
Ababa Conference has been a resounding success.
The landmark Addis Ababa Action Agenda
provides us with a means to implement the post-2015
agenda with its sustainable development goals. Together
we have agreed to an ambitious vision that addresses
the full spectrum of the means of implementation.
Together we have agreed that everyone will need to
take action to achieve the post-2015 agenda. The true
value and strength of the Addis Ababa Agenda is its
comprehensiveness — a success that should not be put
at risk by any attempt to renegotiate selected subjects.
By bringing together domestic resources, investments,
international public finance — including official
development assistance — and good policies, it shows
that action on all fronts will be necessary to succeed
in our common fight against poverty, inequality
and exclusion and for sustainable development.
By integrating the three dimensions of sustainable
development in a balanced manner, it paves the way
towards a single universal framework and set of goals.

15-23166

27/07/2015

The European Union will continue to contribute its
share to that effort, both domestically and abroad, with
a particular focus on countries most in need and the
continent of Africa. The European Union is the most
open market in the world for developing countries,
the world’s largest donor and a pioneer in the design
and use of innovative financing mechanisms. In
our view, the successful outcome of the Conference
symbolizes Africa’s contribution to multilateralism. It
also constitutes the first and critical step towards the
adoption of the post-2015 agenda in September and the
Paris Conference of the Parties of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP 21) in
December. By mainstreaming sustainable development
in our common agenda and by mobilizing all actors for
its implementation, it provides us with the momentum
we need to achieve success at the September summit in
New York and to conclude an ambitious and universal
agreement on climate at COP 21 in Paris.
Mr. Mnisi (Swaziland), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The world has changed dramatically over the
past decades, including the nature and magnitude of
our global challenges, their cause and effects and our
respective capabilities to address them. The post-2015
development agenda needs to respond to those evolving
dynamics. We will continue to engage constructively
in the upcoming preparations for the September 2015
summit. We still have some way to go, but the agreement
in Addis Ababa has brought us a lot closer.
With regard to the oral statement on programme
budget implications read out by the representative of
the Secretariat in connection with the recommendations
contained in resolution 69/313, we understand that
detailed estimates will be presented in accordance with
applicable rules. Today’s statement does not prejudge
the Secretary-General’s submission to the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
and the Fifth Committee for the proposed budget for the
2016-2017 biennium, which should first and foremost
consider all cost-effective ways of addressing resource
requirements, if any, and the possibility of financing
through the redeployment of existing resources. We
believe that we should strive to achieve increased
transparency regarding budgetary figures, and any oral
statements on programme budget implications should
be provided to the Member States in advance.

A/69/PV.99

Ms. Rambally (Saint Lucia): I wish to take this
opportunity to express the heartfelt condolences of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) on the passing of
the Permanent Representative of Djibouti.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the 14 States members of the Caribbean Community.
We wish to align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of South Africa on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, and with the statement to be
delivered later today by the representative of Maldives
on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States.
The outcome of the third International Conference
on Financing for Development — the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda adopted in Ethiopia — is the culmination
of an inter-governmental process that began only a few
months ago in October 2014. The process involved
multiple rounds of substantive informal sessions with
Member States and informal hearings with civil society
and the business sector. The drafting sessions and
substantive negotiations that followed were intense
and protracted at times. In that regard, CARICOM
wishes to place on record our commendation to the
co-facilitators of the preparatory process, Ambassadors
George Talbot of Guyana and Geir Pedersen of Norway,
for their committed leadership and fortitude in guiding
us to an adopted outcome document. We also wish to
commend the Government and the people of the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia for their hosting of a
successful conference.
CARICOM welcomes the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda, as presented for our consideration in resolution
69/313. The outcome provides a basis for forging an
enhanced global partnership with the objectives of
fostering universal and inclusive economic prosperity
and improving people’s well-being while protecting the
environment. It details a financial plan to address a wide
range of issues, including social inequality, climate
change, technology, data collection and capacitybuilding. The action areas noted in the document will be
central to the achievement of our collective sustainable
development, as laid out in paragraph 19 of the outcome
document before us. The post-2015 development
agenda, including the sustainable development goals,
can be met within the framework of a revitalized global
partnership for sustainable development, supported by
the concrete policies and actions outlined in the Action
Agenda. That is to say, the Action Agenda will support
and complement the means for implementing the post2015 development agenda.

15-2316611/18

A/69/PV.99

CARICOM takes this opportunity to reiterate a few
key issues that must be addressed as we move forward
to ensure that Caribbean small island developing
countries (SIDS) are in a position to realize the full and
beneficial potential of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda.
We must reaffirm that full consideration shall continue
to be given to the peculiar development needs of SIDS,
as defined in the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
Pathway, cognizant of the necessary identification
of the financial instruments and financial resources,
including new and additional resources to address
SIDS’ major development challenges arising, inter
alia, from trade liberalization; global environmental
degradation, including climate change; global security
and other issues specifically targeted for attention in
the post-2015 development agenda.
We also reiterate our call on international financial
institutions to design and implement appropriate
risk-management instruments to fully address the
vulnerability associated with the natural disasters
and climate-related risk that disrupt the development
process in Caribbean SIDS. Finally, we reiterate our call
for urgent consideration to be given to the unsustainable
and persistent high level of debt that results in the
limited fiscal space that continues to hinder the
CARICOM region’s path to sustainable development
and will undermine the region’s achievement of the
sustainable development goals.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has called the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda a major step forward in
building a world of prosperity and dignity for all. Our
collective next step will be the successful realization of
that agenda — the implementation of the commitments,
revised policies and agreements contained therein on
the path to realizing our sustainable development.
CARICOM reaffirms its support for all efforts aimed at
the full realization of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda,
which is a critical component of the sustainable
development agenda of our region and that of all
Member States.
Mr. Sareer (Maldives): May I convey my deep
condolences to the Government of Djibouti on the loss
of our dear colleague, the Permanent Representative of
Djibouti, Ambassador Roble Olhaye. May I also take
this opportunity to convey our heartfelt condolences
to the Government and the people of India on the sad
demise of Sri A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, the former President
of India.

12/18

27/07/2015

I have the honour to deliver this statement on
behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS).
We align ourselves with the statement delivered by the
Permanent Representative of South Africa on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China.
We join others in commending the co-facilitators,
coordinators and negotiators who helped make this
document a reality. Let me extend our warmest thanks
to our gracious hosts, the people and the Government
of Ethiopia, who played a pivotal role throughout that
process. AOSIS welcomes the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda as a supportive document complementary to
the realization of the post-2015 development agenda,
including the sustainable development goals. As we all
eagerly await the convening of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC), to be held in Paris,
the Addis Ababa Action Agenda is also a further
reaffirmation of the financial commitments made
under the UNFCCC process.
What we have achieved here today is another
stepping stone on the path towards addressing the
greatest challenges faced by the global community.
May the seeds we have planted grow to fruition in the
coming months and years. The framework we have
created is geared to addressing the three dimensions of
sustainable development. It recognizes fundamentally
that development is holistic and that viable solutions
for national development are possible only through
increased political will, enhanced partnerships and
committed action.
The small island developing States (SIDS) have
engaged actively throughout the negotiation process,
and welcome the recognition of the special case of
SIDS in development and the specific provisions for its
implementation that this recognition entails, including
the linkages with the SIDS Accelerated Modalities
of Action Pathway. Although much of the language
in the document can be strengthened, we remain
convinced that this is the time to fucs on the early
start to the implementation of the outcome document
(resolution 69/313, annex) and the full realization of the
commitments outlined therein.
AOSIS remains committed to the full realization
of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda. Our goal is to
eradicate poverty and realize sustainable development.
Mr. Minami (Japan): Japan welcomes the adoption
of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda by the Assembly

15-23166

27/07/2015

(resolution 69/313, annex). I would like to take this
opportunity to express our deep gratitude to the people
and Government of Ethiopia for their generosity and
warm hospitality, as well as their dedication to making
the conference a great success. I also thank the two
co-facilitators of the process, Ambassador George
Talbot of Guyana and Ambassador Geir Pedersen of
Norway, for their tireless work.
The Addis Ababa Action Agenda builds on and
adds value to the Monterrey Consensus and the Doha
Declaration. Japan is starting to implement it in earnest,
and expects others to do the same. The Addis Ababa
Agenda gives us huge momentum to move forward
positively on the rest of the negotiation tracks in this
important year, in particular the post-2015 development
agenda. As was agreed in Addis Ababa, the post-2015
development agenda will be supported by the concrete
policies and actions outlined in the Agenda. I call on
all Member States to honour the agreements made in
Addis Ababa and refrain from renegotiating it on other
tracks. We should also take due care in integrating the
relevant parts of the Addis Ababa Agenda into the postdevelopment agenda, such as the follow-up mechanism.
Lastly, let me emphasize the importance of
ensuring a transparent and a rules-based procedure
on the budgetary aspects of all actions taken by the
Assembly. The substance of our discussion in this organ
is too important to risk any lack of implementation
through the United Nations. From that point of view,
budgetary aspects should be given due attention and the
timeline set in accordance with the relevant rules of the
Assembly.
Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): Let me
too start by expressing our heartfelt condolences to
the people and the Government of Djibouti and to the
family of our very dear colleague, Roble Olhaye, who
will be greatly missed by all those who admired his
exceptional professional and personal qualities.
Let me also take this opportunity, first, to express
a warm word of appreciation to the people and
Government of Ethiopia, who so generously hosted
the third International Conference on Financing for
Development in the lovely city of Addis Ababa two
weeks ago. We welcome the adoption of the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda by the General Assembly. I think
we must recognize the great contribution made not
only by Ambassadors Pedersen of Norway and Talbot
of Guyana, but also and very especially, too, by the
President of the General Assembly, Mr. Sam Kutesa,

A/69/PV.99

who exercised leadership and wisdom in the final
stages of the negotiation process.
Brazil aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the Permanent Representative of South Africa, our
colleague Ambassador Mamabolo, on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China. I would like to present the
following additional comments in our national capacity.
The third International Conference on Financing
for Development outcome document (resolution 69/313,
annex) constitutes an important first step on the way
to implementing the sustainable development goals
(SDGs) and the post-2015 development agenda as a
whole. The Addis Ababa outcome has mainstreamed
sustainable development into the financing for
development framework by recognizing the integration
among its three dimensions — social, economic and
environmental — in order to make it consistent with
the shared vision put forward by our Heads of State and
Government at the 2012 United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, a process that will culminate
in the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda
and the SDGs in September.
Financing for development has proved to be a
valuable, independent process with a scope and challenge
of its own, and has made a significant contribution to
the implementation of the sustainable development
goals. As such, the Addis outcome supports goal 17 and
other means of implementation of the SDGs, as stated
in its paragraph 19. They complement the existing
goal-specific means of implementation, as well as
stand-alone goal 17, which are integrated and should
be preserved as they are, as essential elements of the
framework of goals and targets of our universal agenda.
The dedicated and integrated follow-up and review
of the Addis outcome is another positive result of the
Conference and will also contribute to the overall
follow-up and review of implementation of the post-2015
agenda as a whole. The establishment of a technology
facilitation mechanism, in addition to being one of the
concrete results of Addis, also constitutes an example
of constructive North-South dialogue that has helped us
make progress on an issue that is very relevant for most
and still sensitive for some.
Allow me to recall that Member States have
agreed that the entire text of paragraph 123 of the
Addis outcome will be inserted into the post-2015
development agenda, and that agreement needs to be
honoured now. The Addis outcome poses the right

15-2316613/18

A/69/PV.99

questions. We need to make sure that we are able to
articulate the right answers to them. In that context, we
reaffirm the importance of the mobilization of new and
additional resources for development in a way that not
only strengthens our commitment to the implementation
of the Addis outcome, but also promotes greater
ambition in mobilizing new and additional means of
implementation for the sustainable development goals.
Notwithstanding the progress in Addis, we
regret that there was no consensus to upgrade the tax
committee to an intergovernmental body, as proposed
by the Group of 77 and China and widely supported by
civil society, renowned economists and policy-makers
around the world, not to mention the media. As we look
beyond Addis and to the process that is still ongoing
during this important year for the United Nations, we
are encouraged by the acknowledgement in the political
declaration of the post-2015 agenda of the interlinkages
with the financing for development, and we reaffirm
our strong determination to continue to contribute to
building “the future we want”.
Ms. Mikkelsen (New Zealand): The Government
of New Zealand welcomes the outcome of the
third International Conference on Financing for
Development. We commend the efforts of all those
who worked relentlessly over the last month to
reach agreement on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
(resolution 69/313, annex). We thank the Government
of Ethiopia and co-facilitators Norway and Guyana for
their leadership in coordinating a wide range of views
to reach agreement and to bring the Conference to a
successful outcome.
The Addis Ababa Action Agenda is a historic
global commitment. It creates a framework that
harnesses the diverse range of sources available to
finance development, end poverty and ensure that no
one is left behind. It makes landmark commitments
to empowering girls and women to participate as
equals in decision-making. New Zealand welcomes the
agenda’s recognition of the constraints that small island
developing States face in attaining their development
aspirations and the commitment of the global
community to addressing these constraints.
The Addis Ababa Action Agenda represents a strong
global commitment to development, but our work is
only beginning. Now is the time to set aside remaining
differences and tackle long-standing obstacles to
poverty reduction. One example is reform of the
international trading system. A successful conclusion
14/18

27/07/2015

to the Doha Round and reforms to improve agricultural
market access and eliminate export subsidies could
have a transformative impact on developing countries.
New Zealand reaffirms its commitment to turning
the words of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda into
actions that have meaning. We will ensure that our
policies, investments and efforts deliver strong results
to developing countries within this new framework for
development in financing. We look forward to working
in effective, transparent and impactful partnerships
towards our common goal to end poverty, build
resilience and improve shared prosperity across the
globe.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to offer my sincere condolences on
the passing of the dean of the diplomatic corps, the
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Djibouti
to the United Nations. As many who have spoken before
me have said, he played a very important role for us. He
was the first person who met us and gave us advice. I
express my most heartfelt sympathy to his family and
the people and the Government of Djibouti.
I am grateful for the timely convening of this meeting
to take action on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
(resolution 69/313, annex) of the third International
Conference on Financing for Development. I thank
President Sam Kutesa for his exemplary leadership in
bringing us to the adoption of the agenda; of course,
I am grateful to the people and the Government of
Ethiopia for their hospitality and the organization of
the Conference. George Talbot of Guyana and Geir
Pedersen of Norway played key roles in negotiations. I
thank them both.
We support the statement made by Ambassador
Mamabolo of South Africa on behalf of the Group of
77 and China.
Colombia welcomes the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda as the basis for building the framework for
the financing necessary to effectively support the
implementation of the new agenda. We believe that the
Addis Ababa document complements all of the means
of implementation for the post-2015 development
agenda. That complementary element is very
important because, while we recognize that the Addis
Ababa outcome document contains very important
components, it neither includes nor exhausts all of the
tools and mechanisms needed for the implementation of
the new agenda.

15-23166

27/07/2015

Allow me to highlight some of the elements that
are of great importance to developing countries,
such as the mandate for the establishment of a global
infrastructure forum that will make it possible to close
existing gaps; the mandate to establish a technology
facilitation mechanism; the creation of an Economic
and Social Council forum to follow up on the
process of financing for development, with universal
intergovernmental participation; the call on the United
Nations development system to respond appropriately
to the challenges facing middle-income countries; the
recognition of the needs of countries in conflict and
post-conflict situations; and, of course, the appeal to the
United Nations to develop transparent measurements
of sustainable development that go beyond those of
per capita income and recognize poverty in its many
dimensions and structural gaps that hinder sustainable
development. My country believes that we must respect
the integrity of the post-2015 development agenda as
well as the financing for development process, which
are two completely different processes in terms of
scope and purpose.
The results of the third Conference for Financing for
Development, which we have just endorsed, represent
a major step forward in revitalizing and strengthening
the global alliance for development. We are also
convinced, however, that we must continue to work to
achieve an ambitious transformative framework that
will be commensurate with the current challenges and
allow us to close the major technological, economic and
social gaps that, despite the major progress that we have
made, persist at all levels.
It has not been an easy process. Despite the
differences and the difficult negotiations, I am convinced
that the path we are on — and which will continue with
the endorsement of the post-2015 development agenda
and the Conference of Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change — will
establish a basis for sustainable development and the
well-being that our countries deserve and need.
Mrs. Ravilova-Borovik (Russian Federation)
(spoke in Russian): We wish first to join in the words
of condolence and support offered to the family and
friends of the late Ambassador of Djibouti.
The Russian Federation attaches particular
importance to the challenge of ensuring that the new
post-2015 development agenda enjoys the necessary
resources for its implementation. The Russian delegation
actively contributed to preparing the outcome document

A/69/PV.99

of the third International Conference for Financing
for Development (resolution 69/313, annex) and fully
supports its adoption by the General Assembly today.
The Addis Ababa Action Agenda represents an
important step towards improving the effectiveness
of mobilizing resources for attaining the sustainable
development goals. We believe that the implementation
of the programme will help to strengthen the catalyst
role of official development assistance, stimulate the
mobilization of private and public domestic financing,
give impetus to development investment financing and
improve long-term financing mechanisms.
We believe that as a result of the enormous amount
of work carried out, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda is
robust and ambitious and warrants inclusion in the post2015 development agenda. I this opportunity to thank
the people and the Government of Ethiopia for their
hospitality and their efficient organization and hosting
of the third International Conference on Financing for
Development.
In conclusion, I underscore that our delegation is
prepared to cooperate and engage in a fruitful exchange
of opinion on different aspects of the implementation
of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda so as to ensure an
optimal return from its implementation, especially in
the context of the post-2015 development agenda.
Mr. Erdman (United States of America): I would like
to take this opportunity to again thank the Government
and the people of Ethiopia for being wonderful hosts
for the historic and important third International
Conference on Financing for Development. We
especially want to thank Prime Minister Desalegn and
Foreign Minister Ghebreyesus for personally helping
shepherd us to a final agreement on the important text
before us (resolution 69/313, annex). My Government
thanks the Secretary-General, the Under-SecretaryGeneral, the President of the General Assembly and the
financing for development secretariat for their support
of the Conference.
We also want to give special thanks to the
co-facilitators, Ambassador Pedersen and Ambassador
Talbot, for their strong leadership throughout this
process. They ably guided this negotiation over the
past eight months, helping to build consensus on an
ambitious framework that will help us towards our
goal of eradicating extreme poverty and achieving
sustainable development. We came together to deepen
our collective commitment to ending extreme poverty,
promoting inclusive growth and providing the means

15-2316615/18

A/69/PV.99

to implement our ambitious post-2015 development
agenda. We are happy to celebrate that achievement
with everyone today, and to work together with all
delegations to carry forward the momentum from
Addis Ababa to a successful conclusion of the post2015 negotiations.
Mr. Shcherbakov (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to express our most heartfelt sorrow and
sincere condolences upon the passing of the Permanent
Representative of Djibouti, Mr. Roble Olhaye.
I thank the people and the Government of Ethiopia
for organizing the third International Conference
on Financing for Development, and commend the
co-facilitators, Ambassadors Talbot and Pedersen,
for their leadership and arduous work throughout the
process.
In associating ourselves with the statement made
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and affirming
our complete commitment to all the causes shared by
all developing countries, Ecuador wishes to ratify its
rejection of the position whereby a State is considered
to be just another player in resource mobilization and
poverty eradication. We firmly believe that, on the
contrary, the State, given its intrinsic responsibility,
is the key actor in the global alliance for development
because it legitimately possesses the capacities to plan,
manage and oversee investments through public policy
to generate pro-development dynamics. But the global
alliance must also be joined by all States, and other
stakeholders will have to align themselves and act in
accordance with the policy guidelines that the States
issue.
Furthermore, my delegation wishes to reiterate the
reservations it expressed in its closing statement in the
discussions in Addis Ababa on paragraph 31 and the
first sentence of paragraph 113 of resolution 69/313, as
well as the explanations of our national positions that
were set out in writing and sent to the financing for
development secretariat prior to our statement in Addis.
Against that backdrop, we add a voice to the consensus
and welcome of the adoption of the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda by the General Assembly.
My delegation also wishes to express its concern
regarding the recording of Ecuador’s statement at the
close of the conference. In that regard, our delegation
clearly explained its lack of agreement and reservations
with the two paragraphs mentioned: paragraphs 31
and 113. In other words, Ecuador has two reservations

16/18

27/07/2015

regarding the Addis Ababa outcome document. There
are 17 paragraphs concerning which Ecuador explained
its national position on the interpretation of those
paragraphs or parts thereof.
(spoke in English)
That clearly means that our delegation listed 17
explanations of national position but has not expressed
reservations regarding these paragraphs and does not
oppose them. We believe that a reservation is clearly
different from an explanation of national position.
(spoke in Spanish)
For the aforementioned reasons, Ecuador expresses
its concern at the quality of translation at events as
important as that of Addis Ababa. We therefore call
upon the Secretariat to exercise greater vigilance
with regard to the expertise of the interpreters at such
meetings, especially when it comes to substantive
topics that may be very sensitive to Member States. We
also request that all the necessary corrections be made
at the communications portals of the United Nations.
A copy of this request will be given in writing to the
Secretariat, as well as the original statement of 16 July,
both in Spanish and English, in order to facilitate
interpretation.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): First of all, I wish to add my voice to
those who have expressed their condolences on the
passing away of our friend, Ambassador Roble Olhaye,
Permanent Representative of Djibouti. I also wish to
extend our condolences to his family, his friends and
the Government of Djibouti.
I would like to thank the President of the General
Assembly, His Excellency Mr. Sam Kutesa, for all
his efforts and leadership to achieve the success of
the third International Conference on Financing for
Development. We also wish once again to thank the
Government and the people of Ethiopia for their
hospitality and all their support to us. I also thank the
co-facilitators.
Nicaragua aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier today by the representative of South Africa on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China. In our national
capacity, we would like to take this opportunity to
explain our position.
Our country was extremely flexible during the
negotiations in Addis Ababa. Our Minister stayed
in constant contact with the Minister of Ethiopia.
15-23166

27/07/2015

We were, I believe, a very important part of the
consensus achieved in Addis Ababa. Nevertheless,
we must reaffirm some aspects of vital importance to
us, especially with regard to the current negotiating
process on the post-2015 agenda.
First, we wish to reiterate the importance of common
but differentiated responsibilities in the context of
the global alliance for development. That principle is
relevant as a basis for all international cooperation
aimed at sustainable development. That principle must
be an integral, central part of the post-2015 agenda. We
must keep the process of financing for development
separate from the post-2015 development agenda, but
we must strengthen the synergies between the two. That
process must continue until developed countries meet
their financial commitments to developing countries.
We would also like to clarify that many delegations
have asked for increases in official development
assistance in order to implement the sustainable
development goals. That request was approved at
Addis Ababa. If developed countries were to meet the
commitments they made in paragraphs 43 and 44 of
resolution 2626 (XXV), of 24 October 1970, which was
adopted by consensus, with a timeline for compliance
of October 1975, official development aid would more
than double, from the current 0.29 per cent of gross
domestic product to 0.7 per cent.
We also want to clarify that climate financing
is extra. At no time should it be classified as part of
official development assistance. We also want to stress
the fact that there is no single formula or set of measures
applicable to all countries when it comes to financing
for development. Countries should therefore safeguard
their political space to legislate, establish and apply
feasible or necessary measures and standards.
We must avoid coercive unilateral measures
that violate international law and are an obstacle to
the development plans of our countries, such as the
universally rejected blockade on our sister Republic of
Cuba. We would like specifically to mention countries
living under territorial occupation. Our country is in
solidarity with the struggle and cause of the Palestinian
people.
Mr. Cripton (Canada): At the outset, I would like to
join others in expressing our condolences to the people
of Djibouti on the passing away of their Permanent
Representative to the United Nations, who also served

A/69/PV.99

as the non-resident Ambassador of Djibouti to Canada.
We mourn his loss.
We would like to extend our congratulations to
the people of Ethiopia for their successful stewardship
of the third International Conference on Financing
for Development. We would also like to convey
our sincerest appreciation to the co-facilitators,
Ambassador Pedersen of Norway and Ambassador
Talbot of Guyana, for their tireless efforts to bring us to
consensus. We would also like to thank our partners for
the spirit of cooperation and flexibility that enabled us
to conclude the Addis Ababa Action Agenda.
The Addis Ababa Agenda provides a framework
for the mobilization of resources from all sources for
the achievement of sustainable development and the
elimination of extreme poverty. It will provide us with
the means to implement the post-2015 development
agenda and the sustainable development goals. The
measures set out in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
have the potential to transform the lives of billions and
to allow us to attain the future we want.
Inevitably, however, in a document of this nature,
there are some points where language could benefit
from greater precision. While I will not repeat what
we stated at the closing of the Conference in Addis
Ababa, we will draw other delegations’ attention to
our explanation of position, particularly with regard to
paragraphs 64 and 117.
In conclusion, I would like to once again
congratulate the people of Ethiopia, who contributed to
the achievement of this historic outcome.
Mrs. Özgür (Turkey): At the outset, we would like
to join previous speakers in extending our condolences
to the Government and the people of Djibouti on the
passing away of a master, the Permanent Representative
of Djibouti.
We would like to again extend our gratitude
to the people and the Government of Ethiopia for
their hospitality. Thanks to their warm welcome and
excellent organization, the Addis Ababa Conference
became not only a memorable event, but also a
successful meeting in this year of historic significance
for sustainable development. We also would like to take
this opportunity to once again express our appreciation
to the co-facilitators, the Permanent Representatives
of Guyana and Norway, Ambassador Talbot and
Ambassador Pedersen, for the leadership and tireless

15-2316617/18

A/69/PV.99

efforts, as well as the dedication, transparency and
constructiveness they displayed during the negotiations
in New York.
Addis Ababa has set an important precedent
for the United Nations summit to adopt the post2015 development agenda, to be held in New York
from 25 to 27 September, and the Paris 2015 United
Nations Climate Change Conference, to be held from
30 November to 11 December. We are continuing to
establish the framework of the global development
agenda for the next 15 years, including even this week,
during which we hope to finalize the draft outcome
document of the sustainable development summit.
Turkey is glad that the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
offers a comprehensive and transformative approach
that encompasses different dimensions of the global
development agenda with specific deliverables, such as
the technology facilitation mechanism.
Lastly, the reference made in the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda to the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea, to which Turkey is not party, cannot
be construed as a change in the established legal and
political position of the Republic of Turkey with regard
to that instrument.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): My delegation would like to
say how immeasurable our loss of Ambassador Roble
Olhaye is. We have lost a teacher, an adviser and a
friend.
Let me express the heartfelt satisfaction of my
Government for the honour and privilege bestowed
upon Ethiopia to host the third International Conference
on Financing for Development. I would like to thank
all the delegations that took the floor to express kind
words to my Government. My delegation would like
to take this opportunity to thank His Excellency
Mr. Sam Kutesa, President of the General Assembly,
for his decisive contribution during the negotiations
to bring the process to a conclusion. By any measure,
what the President did went beyond the call of duty,
and we sincerely express our gratitude. We would
also like to express our appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral and to Under-Secretary-General Wu Hongbo
and his colleagues in the Department of Economic
and Social Affairs. My delegation would like to pay
tribute to the two co-facilitators, Ambassador George

18/18

27/07/2015

Talbot of Guyana and Ambassador Geir Pedersen of
Norway, for the outstanding leadership they exhibited
in guiding the process, and we profusely thank them for
their tireless efforts to bring the process to a successful
conclusion. Our appreciation also goes out to the Group
of 77 and China and our development partners for their
constructive engagement and for the contributions
they made for a successful outcome in Addis Ababa.
My delegation would also like to thank the Secretariat
and all those involved in making the Addis Ababa
Conference a success. The Government and the people
of Ethiopia are very grateful and remain indebted for
the support.
Although it first appeared an impossible task, the
spirit of a win-win approach finally prevailed, making
it possible at Addis Ababa to go beyond Monterey. That
should be the spirit that needs to be brought to bear
on the intergovernmental negotiations on the post-2015
development agenda. The tone was set in Addis Ababa,
and we are confident that we will bring our work on the
post-2015 development agenda to fruition in a similar
fashion.
The President: I should now once again like to
express my gratitude to the Government of Ethiopia
for successfully hosting the third International
Conference on Financing for Development and for its
able stewardship of the deliberations through the Main
Committee, which brought the process to a successful
conclusion. I would also like to express my sincere
appreciation to Ambassador George Wilfred Talbot of
Guyana and Ambassador Geir Pedersen of Norway for
accepting to undertake the roles of co-facilitators and
for so ably and patiently conducting the discussions
and complex negotiations in the informal consultations.
Those consultations contributed immensely to the
positive outcome of the Conference. Finally, I would
like to thank all Member States for their valuable
contributions to the successful completion of the
process. I am sure members of the Assembly join me in
extending our sincere appreciation to the Government
of Ethiopia and to the co-facilitators.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 18.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

15-23166
