S/PV.8593

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8593

rd meeting
Wednesday, 7 August 2019, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wronecka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mrs. Cedano
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-24739 (E)
*1924739*

S/PV.8593

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

detention are not accessible to the United Nations or
international monitors.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Security Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; Dr. Hala, of Syria Bright Future;
and Ms. Amina Khoulani, of Families for Freedom.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: I thank you, Madam President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on
the crucial issue of detainees, abductees and missing
persons in Syria. I would like to welcome Dr. Hala and
Ms. Khoulani to today’s briefing.
In June this year, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2474 (2019), on missing persons
in armed conflict. The resolution establishes a clear
link between solving the issue of missing persons and
resolving conflicts. In conversations with us, many
Syrians see resolution 2474 (2019) as a glimmer of hope.
Given the continued lack of access to places of
detention and to detainees in Syria, the United Nations
has no official statistics on those detained, abducted
or missing. What we know comes from accounts recorded
and corroborated by the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic,
mandated by the Human Rights Council and human
rights organizations, since the start of conflict in 2011.
While the United Nations is not able to verify,
reports suggest that more than 100,000 people have
so far been detained, abducted, disappeared or gone
missing, largely, but not only, at the hands of the Syrian
Government. Many families have no information on the
fate of their loved ones. Detainees, including women
and children, are held without due process or access
to legal representation or their families. Places of
2/22

07/08/2019

Records from hospitals or burial sites are not public.
Some families have been forced to pay enormous sums
of money in the hope of obtaining information — often
in vain. Deaths in detention centres have continued to
occur, many allegedly as a result of torture, neglect or
inhumane conditions. For the families of detainees, their
tragedy is compounded by the difficulty of obtaining
death certificates or remains. Even if they obtain the
certificates, the real causes of death remain hidden.
Women, besides being direct victims, are also
impacted when their husbands or male relatives
disappear. Syrian women risk losing legal rights,
including their housing, land and property rights. That
happens if they cannot explain their husband or male
relative’s whereabouts and lack legal documentation
or a death certificate. Many women under those
circumstances carry the heavy burden of sustaining
their entire families. For refugees and the internally
displaced, those challenges are multiplied.
In paragraph 12 of its report, entitled Detention
in the Syrian Arab Republic: A Way Forward, the
Commission of Inquiry has documented since 2011
how the Syrian Government has,
“[p]erpetrated the crimes of extermination, murder,
rape or other forms of sexual violence, torture, and
imprisonment in the context of its widespread and
systematic detentions of dissidents, as well as those
perceived to be sympathetic to armed groups”.
Perhaps the most prominent evidence of torture
and ill-treatment of detainees in Government detention
centres is the more than 50,000 photos smuggled out
of Syria by a military defector and made public in
2014. Those photos show nearly 7,000 dead bodies
bearing marks of torture. Following the Government’s
reassertion of control in some areas previously held
by armed groups, the United Nations has continued
to receive reports of civilians arbitrarily detained or
disappeared, including in areas subject to so-called
reconciliation agreements. Human rights organizations
have reported cases of detention and enforced
disappearance of refugees who return to Syria or
internally displaced persons who return to their places
of origin. Surveys by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees indicate that fear
of detention is among the factors preventing refugees
from return.
19-24739

07/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Those abuses are not limited to the Government
forces. According to the Commission of Inquiry, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham, both designated by the Council as
terrorist organizations, have committed heinous abuses.
Armed groups affiliated with the opposition have
also committed serious abuses. They have allegedly
established makeshift places of detention in different
areas under their control where captured Government
soldiers, suspected collaborators with the Government
or members of opposing armed groups were held and
sometimes executed. Reporting from human rights
organizations indicates that armed opposition factions
currently controlling Afrin have conducted arbitrary
detention, torture and the abduction of civilians. The
Syrian Democratic Forces have also conducted arbitrary
detentions, including the arrest of men attempting to
evade forced conscription.
The Government of Syria claims that the number
of those detained by armed groups is estimated at
16,000. However, without access to all detention
centres in Syria, the United Nations cannot verify the
accuracy of this information. Justice and accountability
for those abuses must be ensured, regardless of the
perpetrators. The United Nations is also concerned
that thousands of foreign nationals — many women
and children who are family members of alleged ISIL
members — are currently being detained in the Al-Hol
camp. We call on Member States to ensure that their
nationals are repatriated for the purposes of prosecution,
rehabilitation or reintegration, as appropriate, and in
line with international law and standards.
Special Envoy Pedersen has prioritized the case
of detainees, abductees and the missing. Meaningful
action on this file would build confidence and move the
political process forward. The Special Envoy continues
to seek progress within the working group on this issue,
in which the United Nations is a member, together with
the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Russian Federation and
the Republic of Turkey. The International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) is an observer. Since it was
established in December 2017, the working group
has facilitated four exchange operations, including
one last week. The releases of detainees so far, while
welcome, are insufficient in scale and nowhere near
commensurate with the magnitude of the problem.
Only 109 have been released so far.
We stress the need for the parties to move beyond
one-for-one exchanges. All sides should engage in

S/PV. 8593

unilateral releases in the true spirit of resolution 2254
(2015). Furthermore, meetings of the working group
should occur regularly and with more frequency. I
urge the working group to also adopt the procedures
on missing persons that have been submitted by the
United Nations, and I reiterate the invitation of the
United Nations to host the next meeting of the working
group in Geneva.
In its resolutions 2139 (2014), 2254 (2015) and
2165 (2014), the Council called for the release of those
arbitrarily detained, particularly women and children.
These calls must be heeded especially by those with
influence on the Syrian parties. The United Nations
stands ready to provide all necessary support. The
parties must fulfil their obligations under international
law to unilaterally release all the arbitrarily detained or
abducted, and most urgently, women, children, the sick
and the elderly. They must collect, protect, and manage
all relevant data and documents on detainees, abductees
and missing persons, and establish a mechanism with
the ICRC to manage this information in coordination
with the Office of the Special Envoy. Furthermore,
they must provide families with information, identify
the dead and return remains, wherever possible, to
their relatives. Lastly, they should provide, without
delay, and through appropriate channels, a list of all
places in which persons are being detained and arrange
for immediate access to such locations by a neutral
third party.
Accountability
for
serious
violations
of
international humanitarian law and human rights is
central to achieving and maintaining durable peace in
Syria. In that regard, all parties to the conflict must
cooperate fully with the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and the
Commission of Inquiry.
Finally, I reiterate the Secretary-General’s call for
the situation in Syria to be referred to the International
Criminal Court.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Dr. Hala.
Dr. Hala: I thank you, Madam President, for
inviting me and my colleague Ms. Amina Khoulani to
speak here today.

19-247393/22

S/PV.8593

The situation in the Middle East

My name is Hala. I am a doctor and a co-founder of
the Families for Freedom movement, which campaigns
for freedom and justice for Syria’s detainees. I
left Syria at the end of 2011 after my husband was
detained. He has since been released, but my brother
and father-in-law, together with seven of my cousins,
were detained in 2013 and remain missing. Many of
my medical colleagues have also been detained by the
Syrian Government for helping wounded protesters.
Some of them have been killed while undergoing torture
in detention. It is in memory of them and the hundreds
of thousands of disappeared and murdered Syrians that
I appear before the Security Council today.
Although it is an honour for me speak here, I
cannot help but feel deep frustration at the people in the
Chamber for their inaction to end the sorrow of Syrian
detainees and their families. We are in the eighth year of
the Syrian conflict and at least 100,000 people remain
missing, many suffering abuses, deprivation and torture.
Syrian families, mine included, need to know what has
happened to their loved ones, and those responsible for
our suffering need to be held accountable.
The pain Syrian detainees have to endure has
been well documented by colleagues in Syrian and
international human rights organizations. Since 2011,
I have personally met dozens of survivors of detention
and torture and documented their stories, while
providing psychological care. Detainees in Syria face
physical and sexual abuse, torture, starvation and
extremely difficult living conditions. They are often
crowded into small, dark cells and some are forced to
live for months in solitary confinement rooms the size
of a coffin. Sometimes detainees are left for days in a
cell with dead bodies and develop serious psychological
issues, as well as physical problems, as a result. Female
detainees have been subjected to sexual and genderbased violence at a high rate.
My husband often speaks to me about his own
experience, which left him deeply traumatized. He was
subjected to routine beatings. His cell was so tiny that
he did not have space to sit down. It was very cold and
damp. He and his cellmates were allowed to go to the
restroom only once a day.
As families whose loved ones have been forcibly
disappeared, we live in a constant state of uncertainty,
not knowing where our relatives are or what has
happened to them. Mothers in my country take
dangerous trips to courthouses and detention centres
4/22

07/08/2019

every day. They stand for hours waiting for an answer.
They often come back home broken with nothing new,
yet they make that trip again and again. Families want
graves to mourn their loved ones — even that simple
right is something we have to ask for today.
As families, we have suffered enough. I am here
today to urge the Council to act. The Council must adopt
a resolution to put pressure on the Syrian Government
and all warring sides to immediately release a list
of names of all detainees, along with their current
locations and status, and immediately stop torture and
mistreatment. In the case of the death of a detainee,
a death certificate is not enough; a report on the real
cause of death and burial location must be presented to
the families.
International humanitarian organizations and the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic must be allowed
unconditional access to detention facilities. Medical
organizations must be allowed to examine the health
situation of detainees and provide medical services
to those who need it. Those detained must be allowed
routine contact with their families. The resolution
must demand the immediate and unilateral release of
those who have been arbitrarily detained. A timetable
must be set for identifying and releasing all detained
individuals as part of any peace process, monitored by
an international independent body. We do not accept
prisoner exchanges arranged between military sides as
a replacement for a real solution to the detention crisis
in Syria. Exceptional courts, — especially field, war
and counter-terrorism courts — must be abolished and
fair trials guaranteed under United Nations supervision.
A new, peaceful Syria cannot be built while people
are still being tortured and executed. We cannot
move on without answers about our loved ones. If the
Council fails in delivering what I have called for here,
it will again fail the Syrian people and we will hold
it responsible.
The President: I thank Dr. Hala for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Khoulani.
Ms. Khoulani (spoke in Arabic): I thank you,
Madam President, for inviting me to speak here today.
My name is Amina Khoulani and my story is one
shared by hundreds of thousands of Syrian families
who have endured the pain of having their loved
19-24739

07/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

ones snatched from them and disappeared in brutal
underground dungeons.
Eight years ago, three of my brothers were taken
by the Syrian regime. Their only crime was peacefully
protesting for a free and democratic Syria — a vision
shared by millions across the country. For years, my
family and I hoped that my brothers would one day be
released but, sadly, that was not to be. When photos
of murdered, tortured detainees were leaked by the
military defector Caesar, the first image I saw was of
my brother Mouhamad’s body. Mouhamad was not only
my brother, but my best friend and the person closest
to my heart. His wife was pregnant at the time that he
disappeared. He never got the chance to see his son, and
his son will never have the chance to know his father.
In July last year, the Syrian regime began releasing
death notices for people who died in its jails. Four years
on from learning of Mouhamad’s death, I learned that
my other two brothers, Majd and Abdulsattar, had also
been killed in detention. I do not have enough words
to describe how it felt. Hope was wrenched from me
yet again. I could not stop imagining how they might
have endured before leaving this world. According to
the death notice we received from the regime, they were
both sentenced to death on the same day, at the same
minute, on 15 January 2013.
I myself was imprisoned for six months, after being
arrested by the Air Force Intelligence branch for my
peaceful activism. My husband was detained for two
and a half years. We were both lucky to survive, but
many others were not as lucky.
Today I am one of the founders of Families for
Freedom — a women-led movement launched in 2017
by families whose loved ones have been detained
and disappeared. The women in our group come
from diverse backgrounds, but we are united in one
mission — to demand an end to the crime of arbitrary
detention and forced disappearance, demand justice for
the disappeared and their families and ensure that those
responsible for their suffering are held accountable.
As I address the Council today, approximately
100,000 Syrian men, women and children remain
missing. The majority are detained by the Syrian
regime, but armed opposition groups and extremist
groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
are also guilty of detention and disappearance. The
people detained may be sick, injured or dying. Many
endure barbaric torture on a daily basis. Some may be

S/PV. 8593

scheduled for execution. Hardly any of them will have
had a fair trial. The Council can save their lives if it
chooses to act today.
As I speak here today, the cases of detention, forced
disappearance and torture in Syria are on the rise. I
am not telling Council members anything new. They
will no doubt have seen Caesar’s photos and read the
reports issued by Syrian international organizations
with regard to the crisis of forced disappearance in
Syria and the brutal practice of torture. In spite of those
efforts, disappearances have continued to take place to
this very day, including to persons who tried to return
to Syria.
The Security Council has utterly failed Syrian
detainees and their families. It is its responsibility to
protect Syrians from a system that kills, tortures and
illegally detains its own citizens, in systematic violation
of international law, as concluded by the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic and other relevant bodies. The Council
has let vetoes and excuses get in the way of what is right
and just. It bears the responsibility of finding a way to
end impunity and stop that horror.
Today, I therefore ask the members of the Council,
for the Syrian families who have lost their loved ones,
to make the issue of detention and forced disappearance
in Syria a priority, to adopt a new resolution to pressure
not just the Syrian regime but armed opposition groups
as well for the names and whereabouts of all those in
detention and to allow humanitarian organizations
to visit the detention centres, especially the military
prison Sednaya. We further call on it to urge the Global
Coalition to Defeat the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS) and the Syrian Democratic Forces to
uncover the fate of the disappeared by ISIS and give
answers to their relatives, so that those of us whose
loved ones have been executed or tortured to death can
know the location of their burial sites so that we can
grieve them properly.
The crimes of arbitrary detention and forced
disappearance have plagued my country for decades,
and they have become epidemic in the last eight years.
They are a horror that have impacted the lives of
millions of people, shattering them forever. The first
step towards sustainable peace and justice is truth, an
end to arbitrary detention and forced disappearance
and the release of the thousands of civilians arbitrarily
detained and denied their freedom.

19-247395/22

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.8593

The President:
her briefing.

I

thank

Ms.

Khoulani

07/08/2019

for

and guarantees that regime officials responsible for
such practices will be held accountable for their actions.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements

In addition to the moving testimony of our speakers
and the thousands of other Syrians who have bravely
spoken out against the regime, as well as the photos that
have been mentioned, there is exhaustively researched
data demonstrating the scale and severity of the crimes
committed against innocent civilians in regime prisons.
The Al-Assad regime’s attempts to silence dissent and
erase its crimes have failed, thanks to the courageous
acts of bravery of Syrians like Caesar, Dr. Hala and
Ms. Amina Khoulani.

Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
I offer a warm welcome to Dr. Hala and Ms. Amina
Khoulani. I thank them for sharing their stories, and
we applaud their extraordinary courage for speaking
out about the abuses that they, their families and their
fellow Syrians have endured at the direction of Bashar
Al-Assad and his military and intelligence commanders.
The issue of detainees and missing persons
in Syria is one of the great tragedies of the Syrian
conflict. In 2011, as peaceful protesters took to the
streets of Damascus to seek modest political reforms
and increase social freedoms, Syrians also sought an
end to the fear of torture and arbitrary arrest by Syrian
intelligence services. It is difficult to find any Syrians
who have not been affected by that systematic practice.
In August 2013, a military defector known by the
codename Caesar smuggled over 53,000 photographs
out of Syria of over 6,700 victims of torture who had
died in Syrian regime custody. Those photographs have
been independently verified and represent damning
evidence of the systematic torture that is present in
Al-Assad’s prisons.
We have heard again and again from Syrian civilians
that the fate of those who disappeared at the hands of
Al-Assad is foremost on their minds when considering
both the prospect of a return to Syria for those who
fled the country and the vision for a political solution.
Syrians deserve to know the truth about what happened
to their family members, receive justice for what they
have endured and gain assurances that they and future
generations of Syrians can live without the fear of
being arbitrarily detained, tortured or disappeared by
their own Government. That is why we called for this
meeting today.
There is both a humanitarian and a political
imperative for improving transparency and access to
regime prisons and securing the release of the Syrian
civilians who have been arbitrarily detained by the
regime. The issue of detainees is central. Resolution
2254 (2015) calls for the release of any arbitrarily
detained persons, particularly women and children.
There can be no political solution and no stability in
Syria without the reversal of those abhorrent practices
6/22

Since 2011, Syrian documentation groups estimate
that as many as 215,000 persons, including 35,000
prisoners of conscience, have been detained, the vast
majority by the regime, and that 14,000 have been
killed as a result of torture, including 177 children.
Nearly 128,000 people are currently detained by the
Syrian regime, including doctors, humanitarian aid
workers, human rights defenders, journalists and
others, including women and children. Those numbers
have been widely documented by the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic and other reputable organizations.
We have seen reports of specific detention centres,
including military intelligence branch numbers 215,
227, 235 and 251; the air force intelligence investigation
branch in Mezzeh military airport; and the Sednaya
prison, and the names of some of the senior regime
officials who were responsible for murder, rape, torture
and other mistreatment at such centres. We cannot
come to the political solution described in resolution
2254 (2015) until those practices end.
Today, the United States therefore calls for the
immediate unilateral release of civilians, including
women, children and the elderly, who are being held
in Al-Assad regime prisons, in an effort to pave for
the path forward for the implementation of resolution
2254 (2015). That is an achievable confidence-building
measure that would help advance Special Envoy
Pedersen’s efforts to relaunch the political process, as
well as create momentum for the Al-Assad regime and
the Syrian opposition to work together.
As part of that effort, we also urge the Al-Assad
regime to grant the United Nations and other impartial
and independent international entities immediate
access to Syrian detention centres, particularly those
where numerous credible reports of torture and abuse
19-24739

07/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

have been documented, including by the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic. United Nations access to those
facilities is imperative to ensure that conditions in
regime detention facilities are in line with appropriate
international legal standards.
We are asking the Al-Assad regime only to abide by
its own laws and fulfil its obligations under international
human rights and humanitarian law to expedite the
release of arbitrarily or unlawfully detained persons,
including persons detained due to political beliefs.
The Syrian Constitution prohibits arbitrary detention,
outlaws the use of torture and humiliation, requires the
State to inform the incarcerated of the reasons for his
or her arrest and guarantees incarcerated individuals
access to legal counsel, a fair trial and due process.
The United States appreciates Special Envoy
Pedersen’s continued interest in galvanizing progress
on the detainee file. Parallel tracts have not produced
concrete results to date, and it is time now to consolidate
all work on the detainees and missing persons file under
the Special Envoy’s offices in Geneva and to regularly
include updates on progress towards that aspect of
resolution 2254 (2015) in monthly Council meetings
on Syria.
Unfortunately, efforts to negotiate the release of
detainees under the auspices of the Astana guarantors
have focused on one-for-one prisoner exchanges
between the regime and Syrian armed opposition forces,
largely ignoring the plight of the many thousands of
Syrian civilians who represent the vast majority of
individuals held by the regime. And even those efforts
have been undermined, as the regime has detained
hundreds of former fighters in the past year who had
signed so-called reconciliation agreements brokered by
the Russian Federation. We ask our Russian partners,
on behalf of the Astana guarantors, to consolidate
the efforts of its working group, under the leadership
of United Nations Special Envoy Pedersen, and to
renew their commitments to negotiating the release of
victims, pressing for an end to the regime’s detention
practices and strongly supporting mechanisms for truth
and accountability.
Progress on Syrian detainees is essential to the
success of any political solution, in line with resolution
2254 (2015). In a show of good faith to reinvigorate
the political process, we strongly urge the Al-Assad
regime and its supporters to take the concrete steps

S/PV. 8593

that I have outlined to address that issue. To Amina
Khoulani, Dr. Hala and the hundreds of thousands of
Syrians affected by the Al-Assad regime’s practice of
arbitrary detention, torture, disappearance and killing,
the United States stands with them in their pursuit of
justice and will spare no effort to bring the regime’s
torture to a halt. The Syrian people deserve an end to
their suffering, a pathway to justice and a chance to live
in peace.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): The
Syrian regime’s use of torture, arbitrary arrest and
detention and enforced disappearances dates back
to long before the 2011 uprising. Those abuses have
always been a distinctive feature of the regime, and in
a push to eliminate all forms of opposition, they have
reached an unprecedented scale during the eight years
of conflict, with their widespread and systematic use
by security forces. The testimonies we heard today
illustrate that poignantly. The victims are political
opponents, peaceful activists, intellectuals, artists and
ordinary Syrians — victims of merciless methods. The
settlement of the issue of detainees and missing persons
is inextricably linked to the search for a political
solution to the Syrian crisis, which, at its core, is a crisis
of massive violations of human rights. It is therefore
essential that the Security Council remain seized of
the issue. In that regard, I would like to highlight three
imperatives
The first imperative is truth. All information on the
massive human rights violations committed in Syria by
all actors must be brought to light. In that connection,
France commends the invaluable contribution of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic, whose impartial and
independent reports reflect the reality of the Syrian
tragedy. In particular, we welcome the report on
detentions that was published and presented to the
Security Council during an Arria Formula meeting in
November. The Council must continue to hear regular
briefings on this issue. That was the thrust of the joint
statement issued by France, the United Kingdom and
the United States at an event held during the highlevel week in September in the presence of Families
for Freedom and other Syrian non-governmental
organizations (NGOs).
The second imperative is justice. Crimes committed
by the regime must not remain unpunished. The evidence
of those crimes will not disappear. The International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the

19-247397/22

S/PV.8593

The situation in the Middle East

Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011, established by the General Assembly, will see
to it. It is essential that all Member States, NGOs
and international organizations cooperate with the
Mechanism. The evidence is intended to be presented
before the appropriate national or international courts
to ensure that justice is done to victims, including
victims of arbitrary detention, enforced disappearances
and torture. Thanks to the Caesar file, delivered to the
French courts and containing photos of thousands of
bodies of hungry and tortured detainees, international
arrest warrants were issued by a French examining
judge against three senior officials of the repressive
Syrian apparatus. They have been charged with torture,
forced disappearances and crimes against humanity.
While that is an essential first step in the fight
against impunity, I also recall the importance of
ratifying the International Convention for the Protection
of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance in order to
combat impunity for this crime. I also reiterate that the
death certificates issued by the Damascus regime do
not exempt it from its obligation to ensure justice. Nor
are they the dignified answer that the victims’ families
and loved ones expect in order to properly grieve. They
have the right to the truth.
The third imperative is the safety of people. The
situation in Syria cannot be normalized without
creating a safe environment on the ground for
civilians — a precondition for any credible political
settlement in Syria and what Syrians, including
refugees and displaced persons, expect. We note that the
regime’s systematic use of such practices is responsible
for the departure of thousands of people from Syria
and continues to prevent them from returning. Creating
a safe and neutral environment means, first and
foremost, a change in the regime’s behaviour. That will
require putting an end to such practices and allowing
immediate and unfettered access of neutral parties to
all detention centres. Security Council resolutions have
explicitly called for this since 2011.
In view of the scale of the arbitrary detentions and
enforced disappearances, it is clear that any progress on
this issue will require the unconditional releases of all
persons detained for political reasons. France calls on
the allies of the Syrian regime to pressure it to do so. It is
a simple confidence-building measure that the Special
Envoy rightly pointed out. It is within the context of its
8/22

07/08/2019

mediation that this issue must be addressed, through
discussions led by the United Nations in Geneva, in
consideration of the whole problem and not only certain
categories of detainees or the exchange of a limited
number of prisoners.
At the heart of the Syrian tragedy is an unnamed
cruelty. Giving freedom to the thousands of arbitrarily
detained prisoners and recreating the conditions for
a safe and dignified life in Syria for all is not only a
moral obligation, it is a political necessity. As we all
know, there can be no lasting and inclusive peace in
Syria unless justice is rendered and a credible political
solution is reached, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015).
Mr. Schulz (Germany): First, I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her
briefing, as well as Ms. Amina Khoulani and Dr. Hala
for sharing their moving stories with us. The losses
and heavy blows of fate they and your families have
suffered stand for thousands of other Syrian families
who have lost loved ones in Syrian prisons or are still
left in the dark about their fate or whereabouts.
We welcome that Special Envoy Pedersen has made
concrete action on the issue of detainees, abductees and
missing persons one of his five priorities. We support
his efforts and his engagement with the Syrian parties
and all the relevant States. We hope that his efforts will
soon result in meaningful and tangible progress on this
issue. We agree with his assessment that progress on
this issue would be an important confidence-building
measure. Resolution 2254 (2015) is very clear. It calls
on the parties to immediately release any arbitrarily
detained persons, particularly women and children.
But today’s meeting on detainees and missing
persons in Syria reminds us that, eight years after
the beginning of the conflict and five years after the
publication of the Caesar photos, the situation in Syrian
prisons is still unbearable. For example, according to
the Syrian Network for Human Rights, at least 140,000
individuals are still detained or have disappeared at the
hands of the main parties to the conflict in Syria. It is
important to note that it is reported that Syrian regime
forces account for around 90 per cent of those cases.
More than 14,000 have allegedly died due to torture.
And this gruesome practice is still ongoing. According
to estimates by the Syrian Network for Human Rights,
around 1,700 persons were arbitrarily arrested and
more than 140 persons died from torture in the Syrian
19-24739

07/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

regime’s prisons this year alone. The Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic has called this systematic pattern of
mass arrests and enforced disappearance by the Syrian
regime a widespread and systematic attack against the
civilian population.
The Syrian regime continues to arbitrarily detain
thousands of innocent Syrians merely because they
dare to make use of their freedom of expression. It has
tortured thousands of innocent Syrians to death merely
because they dared to ask for political reforms and
freedom in Syria. We are talking about ordinary people
and engaged citizens. Calling them terrorists in order to
create a pretext for their arrest and torture is scandalous
and extremely cynical.
The crimes committed against detainees in the
Syrian regime’s prisons are broadly documented. The
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
has rightfully named such crimes war crimes.
Arbitrary arrests, torture, sexual violence, enforced
disappearances and executions in Syrian prisons must
stop immediately. While we welcome the four prisoner
exchanges facilitated by the Astana working group on
detentions and abductions in the Syrian conflict, given
the high estimates of detained and missing Syrians,
those reciprocal low-level exchanges are clearly
insufficient. Considering that the majority are being
detained by the Syrian regime, the regime’s insistence
on reciprocal exchanges is unacceptable.

S/PV. 8593

their loved one’s fate only adds to the abominable
crimes committed by the regime in its prisons.
The crimes and atrocities committed on all sides
during the Syrian conflict, including horrific accounts
of murder, torture and sexual violence in Syrian
prisons, must be investigated and the perpetrators
brought to justice.
National reconciliation and lasting peace in
Syria will not be possible without accountability. The
International Impartial and Independent Mechanism
has become a central repository of information and
evidence of the crimes committed in Syria. It therefore
has a crucial role to play in the prosecution of crimes
committed during the Syrian conflict. We will continue
to support the work of the International Impartial
and Independent Mechanism and of the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic and to pursue accountability in order to
achieve justice for the victims and eventually enable
national reconciliation and sustainable peace.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo
for her valuable briefing. I would also like to thank Dr.
Hala and Ms. Amina Khoulani for their participation
and for their moving testimonies, which shed light
on the scale of the suffering and pain of thousands of
Syrian families who do not know the fate of their loved
ones, whether detained, missing or abducted.

The Syrian regime must immediately release all
political prisoners and arbitrarily held detainees. It
must agree to a timetable for identifying and releasing
all detained individuals. It is crucial that the Syrian
regime publish a comprehensive list of the names of
all detainees and inform the families of the tens of
thousands of missing persons about the fate of their
loved ones.

Nine years into the conflict in Syria, questions have
surfaced regarding the fate of detainees and missing
persons. According to independent international
investigative committees, there are thousands of
detainees and missing persons in Syria who remain
unaccounted for. Given the long-term impact of that
humanitarian issue, the State of Kuwait has joined
other countries in calling for this meeting.

As we heard this morning during the briefing,
the regime simultaneously issued thousands of death
notifications for detained and missing persons — listing
heart failure or stroke as the cause of death. Often,
groups of people detained in the same facility share
death dates, making summary executions seem likely.
That must be further investigated.

Let us remember that this issue is first and foremost
a humanitarian one and the release of detainees is
called for in a number of Security Council resolutions
on Syria, particularly resolutions 2254 (2015), 2401
(2018) and 2449 (2018). Progress on the issue would
move forward the political track and would be one of
many confidence-building measures among the parties.

The Syrian regime should also provide families
with notifications of the burial sites of all detainees,
abductees and missing persons who have deceased. Not
even allowing families to grieve and to know about

In that regard, we reiterate our support to Special
Envoy Pedersen, and we take note of the efforts made by
the Astana working group. We welcome any agreement
reached within that mechanism on exchanging detainees

19-247399/22

S/PV.8593

The situation in the Middle East

07/08/2019

and prisoners and we call for stepping up efforts to
accelerate the release of more detainees and prisoners.

and comprehensive peace in Syria cannot be achieved
without justice.

This year we mark the seventieth anniversary of
the four 1949 Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols and the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of the first Security Council resolution on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We must align our words
and actions with the principles and standards in the
resolutions adopted to address the issue of detainees,
missing persons and prisoners of war. As the Council,
our demands must therefore be in line with such
resolutions and we must address the issue in terms of
its humanitarian context with clarity and transparency.
We would like to stress the following demands.

We are all too familiar with the human and social
suffering linked to the issue of detainees, prisoners and
missing persons given our bitter experience in 1990.
We know that the issue cannot be settled instantly. For
example, Iraqi-Kuwaiti joint efforts continue to locate
the remains of missing persons and detainees, whether
they are Kuwaiti or third-country nationals, even three
decades after they went missing. We stress the need to
ensure close cooperation with all relevant parties and
coordination with international mechanisms, including
the ICRC, which has extensive experience in that regard.

First, we call on the Syrian authorities and all
parties to the conflict to immediately stop all inhumane
practices in prisons and detention centres, which are
in violation of international law and international
humanitarian law, as reaffirmed by a number of reports
issued by independent international parties.
Secondly, we call for the release of women, children,
the elderly, the sick and people with disabilities.
Thirdly, we call for allowing families to ascertain
the fate of their loved ones and their whereabouts and
to allow them to visit their loved ones, in cooperation
with all relevant parties, including the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
Fourthly, we call for the provision of health care,
food, water and all basic necessities to detainees.
Fifthly, we urge the parties to the conflict in Syria
to take all appropriate measures to locate persons
reported missing without discrimination, while
creating the appropriate channels to communicate with
their families.
Sixthly, we call on all parties to the conflict,
particularly the Syrian authorities, to report the
numbers of the deceased and to identify them, while
locating their burial sites and returning their remains,
where possible, to their families, in line with their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
We call those responsible to be held accountable for
such heinous crimes, which run counter to international
law. We stress the need to avoid impunity for the most
heinous crimes committed in the Syrian crisis since
2011. We once again underline the fact that lasting
10/22

The Security Council adopted unanimously
resolution 2474 (2019) on missing persons in armed
conflict. That issue is truly a hidden tragedy in all
conflicts. The resolution must be translated into action
and its provisions implemented in all conflict areas,
including the conflict in Syria.
In conclusion, we call on the Syrian parties to
cooperate with the Special Envoy, Mr. Pedersen, and
his team in order to ensure progress on the release
of detainees and on locating, or ascertaining the fate
of, missing persons in Syria. That would represent a
confidence-building measure between parties as part
of the Special Envoy’s efforts to resume the political
process in Syria in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and
the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the
Under-Secretary-General and the two briefers from
civil society.
We join other speakers in welcoming the fact that
this long-overdue subject is now being debated in the
Security Council. It is worth recalling that the arbitrary
detention of civilians by the Syrian regime is one of
the factors that catalysed protests in 2011. As others
have noted, more than eight years later, that repressive
practice is still ongoing. Tens of thousands of Syrians
have been detained, tortured, subject to sexual violence
and killed in detention centres by the regime since the
start of the conflict. That is not to underplay what Da’esh
has done. We agree that there is a very clear need for
those who have committed appalling crimes for Da’esh
also to be brought to justice. But today’s debate is about
a Government’s persecution of its own people.
This year, after waiting for years, thousands of
families were informed that their loved ones had died
19-24739

07/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

in the detention centres with no explanation and no
accountability. Many more are still waiting to find out
if their relatives are alive or dead, which is unbelievably
cruel. Other speakers have made reference to resolution
2474 (2019). In line with that resolution, the families
must be informed of what has happened to their
loved ones.
So I would like to echo the appeal of the United
States representative today in calling for the release of
all those arbitrarily detained. That is quite a dramatic
step. It is important for it to happen soon. It is an
important element of any political process.
I want to pick up on the calls from the civil
society briefers for a step that the Syrian authorities
take straightaway: they could agree to give the United
Nations and the Commission of Inquiry access to
detention facilities and agree to provide a list of names
of all the detainees and their locations. Those are easy
steps. I look to the representative of Syria to undertake to
transmit those requests to his Government, and I would
suggest that he let you, Madam President, on behalf
of the Security Council, obtain an acknowledgement
from his Government this week that those lists will
be provided. I would like to include access to burial
grounds on that list.
The United Kingdom is the penholder for the
Human Rights Council resolution on Syria. We will
continue in the Human Rights Council in Geneva to
call for the release of the detainees and for access by
independent monitors to detention facilities. I would
like to use this occasion to also pay tribute to the work
of the United Nations Commission of Inquiry and the
brave journalists and non-governmental organizations
that continue to document the violations and abuses.
A number of people have mentioned the importance
that the Special Envoy attaches to this issue, and we
too support all his efforts. We welcome the continued
facilitation by Turkey and Russia of prisoner swaps
between regime and opposition armed groups, including
those released ahead of the Astana meeting on 1 August.
However, that is by no means the same as the wholesale
release of arbitrarily detained persons that the Council
that has demanded in various resolutions.
I would like to make a broader point, if I may.
Delivering justice for the families of those detained
is not only the right and moral thing to do, but it is
also a necessary if we are to tackle the drivers and root
causes of Syria’s conflict. A credible, substantive and

S/PV. 8593

genuine political settlement will need to address the
issue of political detainees. All Syrian citizens need to
be able to live free from fear of arbitrary arrest, torture
and execution. As we have said several times in the
Security Council, if Syria cannot resolve the issues that
led to the original conflict in 2011, it has no hope of
rehabilitation and reconstruction within the country
and no hope of reintegration into the international
community of nations.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes the holding of this briefing on
the issue of persons who are victims of enforced
disappearance or who are detained in conditions that
do not comply with international standards in this
regard, particularly in the Syrian Arab Republic. We
congratulate Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Dr.
Hala and Ms. Amina Khoulani, members of civil
society, for their thorough briefings.
In my country’s view, this issue is all the more
important given that formulating adequate responses
to the plight of detained or missing persons is an
integral part of the crisis resolution and peacebuilding
processes. In the absence of appropriate responses, in
accordance with international humanitarian law and
human rights law, the situation of detained or missing
persons contributes to fuelling resentment, and is
therefore an obstacle to the conduct of any post-crisis
and peacebuilding process. It thereby carries the seeds
of the resurgence of conflicts. Accordingly, it seems
necessary that this important dimension be taken into
account in the ongoing peace efforts to resolve the
crisis in Syria.
Even if, according to Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director for
Operations and Advocacy of the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, there
are no reliable statistics, the International Committee
of the Red Cross has received about 10,000 requests
for information on missing persons. These figures
challenge the Council to consider the seriousness of the
problem and take action to provide appropriate answers
to this question, which comes in addition to the already
worrisome humanitarian situation. In that regard, my
delegation urges the Council to contribute further to the
implementation of the relevant provisions of resolution
2474 (2019), on missing persons in armed conflict.
The resolution represents a significant step forward
in the normative framework and concrete measures,

19-2473911/22

S/PV.8593

The situation in the Middle East

taking into account the issue of persons detained or
disappeared during conflicts. It aims to
“contribute to the process of confidence building
between parties to armed conflict, expediting
peace negotiations and settlement, transitional
justice processes, reconciliation, peacebuilding
and sustaining peace” (resolution 2474 (2019),
para. 16).
My country also believes that international law
relating to the fate of persons detained and disappeared
during conflicts should apply to all warring parties
in Syria. It is therefore incumbent upon the Syrian
Government and the rebel groups to take all the
necessary measures to ensure the protection of
civilians, but also to ensure that detained persons are
treated with dignity and in strict compliance with
international standards in this regard. Similarly, it is
their responsibility to fully contribute to investigations
to identify and locate missing persons. Accordingly, my
delegation believes that the registration of detainees, the
appropriate training of the armed forces, the production
and distribution of adequate means of identification,
including to members of the armed forces and the
establishment of grave-registration services and death
registers will contribute to better management of the
situation of detained or missing persons.
My country welcomes the reciprocal release of
detainees in Syria on 31 July, under the fourth project
of the working group on the release of detainees/
abductees, handover of bodies and identification of
missing persons, as provided for by the Astana process.
This operation, designed to strengthen trust between the
conflicting parties, is in addition to the first exchanges
of detainees on 24 November 2018 and 12 February and
22 April 2019. My delegation therefore encourages the
parties concerned to pursue these initiatives, which will
enable families in particular to mourn and contribute to
the return of peace and stability in Syria.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire urges the warring
parties in Syria to respect international humanitarian
law, particularly with regard to the fate of detainees
and missing persons. We also call on them to cease
hostilities and give priority to a political solution, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of resolution
2254 (2015).
Mrs. Cedano (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me to reiterate the Dominican
Republic’s commitment to a comprehensive, credible
12/22

07/08/2019

and inclusive political process in the Syrian Arab
Republic that will open the doors to sustainable peace
in that country once and for all.
We are grateful for today’s briefings, including that
of Ms. DiCarlo’s, which confirm to us that when we
consider the future of the Syrian Arab Republic, it is
essential to address the issue of detainees, abductees
and missing persons resulting from the conflict in
the country. In addition to having a humanitarian
dimension, we consider it essential to building the
population’s trust in the political process, as family
reunification after a conflict touches the deepest
fibres in society. First and foremost, the parties to
the conflict have an obligation to ensure the physical
safety and psychological dignity of persons detained, in
accordance with international humanitarian law. In that
context, we would like to highlight a few points.
To begin with, it is paramount to immediately halt
all arbitrary detentions in the Syrian Arab Republic.
It is also fundamental and an obligation of the parties
to prevent disappearances resulting from hostilities
or following any arrest. The unilateral release of
detainees, particularly women, children, the elderly
and persons with disabilities, must take place without
delay, and all forms of protection and access to basic
education and health services that they require must be
restored to them.
As principally responsible for the protection of the
civilian population, the Syrian Government must first
and foremost establish preventive measures that will
enable it to account for persons immediately after their
disappearance and thereby minimize the uncertainty
and vulnerability of the families that they leave behind,
particularly women, children and the elderly.
Secondly, it must facilitate the impartial and
independent establishment of the causes and conditions
by and in which thousands of Syrians lost their lives
after being detained or abducted, including making
the results of such investigations accessible to their
families, including the dignified handling of their
remains. We believe that both the families and civil
society organizations can and should play a significant
role in such matters to safeguard the credibility of the
process, which will undoubtedly take years.
The Dominican Republic shares the genuine
aspiration of the families of the disappeared to find out
the truth concerning the whereabouts of their relatives,
which we believe to be a right. Psychological, legal,
19-24739

07/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

economic and protective support for those families is
crucial to the process of healing and reconciliation.
Failure to address those needs and respect the human
rights of those released and their families will result in
perpetuating feelings of resentment and exclusion for
decades to come.
In conclusion, I reaffirm the importance that, in
every individual case, once those responsible for the
violations perpetrated have been identified, they must
answer for their actions. If we aspire to achieving
sustainable peace, the hundreds of thousands of wounds
must be closed. Impunity is not a viable option.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
I thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing. I also thank Ms. Amina Khoulani and
Dr. Hala for their moving testimony. We can only be
inspired by their courage and dedication.
As we have already stressed many times, and will
not cease from doing, there is no military solution
to the conflict in Syria. A political solution through
dialogue is the only way to achieve a stable and lasting
peace. Such dialogue requires trust among the parties
to the conflict. Creating such trust will therefore
remain impossible in the absence of a horizon of justice
and accountability.
In that regard, we continue to fully support the
Special Envoy in his pursuit of undertaking concrete
actions and confidence-building measures for the
benefit of detainees, abductees and disappeared. We
have taken note of the prisoner exchanges in recent
months. The road ahead, however, remains long, as
highlighted by Ms. DiCarlo and many of my colleagues
who spoke before me.
Ms. Khoulani and Dr. Hala just joined their
voices to those of the thousands of Syrians whose
close relatives have been arbitrarily detained in
inhumane circumstances, most of whom by the Syrian
Government. They also echoed the thousands upon
thousands of Syrians who continue to wait for a sign of
life from their loved ones. Human rights, international
humanitarian law and the relevant Security Council
resolutions impose clear obligations, which are being
violated daily. Failure to comply with those obligations
cannot be allowed to continue unanswered.
Justice must be done. We have established tools to
that end. Belgium continues to support the work of the
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the

S/PV. 8593

Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 and the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic.
Tens of thousands of people have been arbitrarily
and illegally detained. They are detained without
respect for their human rights, due process or access to
a lawyer or their families, in inhumane conditions and
while subjected to torture and sexual and gender-based
violence, to name only a few examples. Women and
children are disproportionately affected, All the parties
to the conflict must ensure respect for the dignity and
physical and psychological integrity of detainees.
We call on all Member States to use their influence
on the parties to the conflict to promote the release
of those arbitrarily and illegally detained. We call
on all parties to exchange information concerning
their detainees. We call for the United Nations to be
provided with free and unconditional access to all
places of detention. Victims and their families have
the right to justice and reparations, which also means
that the Syrian authorities provide them with the
necessary documentation for that purpose, including
duly completed death certificates.
Many families are living in uncertainty with
regard to the fate of their loved ones. The impact
of disappearances on individuals, families and
communities is one of the most devastating and lasting
consequences of armed conflict. We are convinced that
reconciliation and peace efforts will be put in jeopardy
if entire families are left completely in the dark with
regard to the fate of their loved ones, with no prospect
of reparations, while impunity for the disappearances
is allowed to prevail. We recall resolution 2474 (2019),
which was recently adopted by the Council. Families
have a right to information that must be respected by all
parties to the conflict.
In our role as members of the Security Council, the
fate of persons detained, abducted or reported missing
must call us to action. Uncertainty and the search
for answers can last for several generations, thereby
marking the history of entire communities and risking
the creation of new conflicts. Instead of sowing the
seeds of discord, let us plant the seeds for achieving a
just, stable and lasting peace.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, my delegations
wishes to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo,

19-2473913/22

S/PV.8593

The situation in the Middle East

Dr. Hala and Ms. Khoulani for their briefings, which
provided insight on this very important issue. Indonesia
wishes to highlight three points.
First, we agree that the progress on the issue of
detainees and missing persons is indeed important and
could send a positive signal to the Syrian people and
the international community. Indonesia appreciates the
determination of the Astana guarantors to advancing
their efforts within the context of the relevant working
group, of which the United Nations is also a member.
The working group is indeed needed to build confidence
and trust among the Syrian parties, and we hope that
the Group will generate more concrete results on this
particular issue.
Secondly, since this is already a complex issue,
Indonesia believes that we should genuinely improve
the ongoing efforts without complicating the situation.
Certainly, we should also avoid politicizing the issue,
as that would lead us nowhere. A constructive approach
based on enhanced communication and dialogue is key
in that regard.
Thirdly, it remains Indonesia’s view that the
international community should strengthen its efforts
to achieve and support a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
political process with full respect for the sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab
Republic. We will always support a comprehensive
settlement to the Syrian issue through negotiations and
peaceful means.
In the same vein, I wish to recall the legal obligations
of all parties under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, as well as all relevant
decisions of the Security Council, and, of course, the
need for every country to promote the human rights of
its citizens.
We also take note of the briefing by UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo with regard to the efforts
of Special Envoy Pedersen to prioritize the situation
of detainees, abductees and missing persons, as well
as the activities of the working group on this issue.
Although the work of the working group is still limited,
we believe that we are moving in the right direction and
need to nurture that development.
In conclusion, let me also reiterate my delegation’s
full support for Special Envoy Pedersen’s mandate in
advancing the political process in Syria and leading the
14/22

07/08/2019

way to a peaceful resolution of the conflict, based on
resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing on developments in the Syrian
Arab Republic. We listened carefully to the briefings
made by Dr. Hala, head of Syria Bright Future, and
Ms. Amina Khoulani of Families for Freedom.
We were perplexed by the initiative taken by our
Western colleagues to call for today’s meeting. The
thoughts it evokes are not the most positive. Instead
of reliable information, we have once again heard
speculation based on unverified and extremely biased
information regarding the situation in Syria. The
sources of such information have lied time and again.
We view steps to exacerbate and distort the situation in
and around Syria as part of an attempt to continue to
hinder the political settlement process in the country.
I will be frank. We were very disappointed about
the statements made by our Western colleagues, in
particular that of our American colleague. Since the
United States and States that support it have initiated
today’s meeting on the topic, we expected them to
finally provide us with information on the situation in
the territory of Syria that they de facto occupy. What
are the laws governing the lives of its people? How is
justice being administered? That is the big question.
In whose interests are large armed groups and law
enforcement bodies — if they can even be called
that — being prepared? How many people are detained
or missing? Regrettably, we have not received any
answers to those questions today.
The information we receive from human rights
organizations is, frankly, horrifying. We have
repeatedly stated that politicizing humanitarian and
human rights issues is unacceptable. However, we
have again heard accusations being levelled against
only one of the parties — the official authorities in
Damascus — while outright terrorists, who, let me
remind the Council, have introduced the practice of
public executions and torture in that country, are being
presented as innocent victims. We are convinced that
the international community should instead, not only
in word but in deed, help Syria recover after the very
serious crisis, which, incidentally, was fuelled and
exacerbated by outside forces, including by some of
those who now express concern about the humanitarian
situation in the country. Nonetheless, action should not
19-24739

07/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

fan the flames of scandal but consistently strengthen
Government bodies and the justice system, assist
economic recovery and repair broken connections
among the people of the country.
Allow me to inform the Council that the thirteenth
international meeting on Syria in the Astana format
was held in Nur-Sultan on 1 and 2 August. As the
Council knows, as part of the process, we have a
successfully functioning working group on detentions,
abductions and missing persons, which is comprised of
representatives of Russia, Iran, Turkey and experts from
the United Nations and the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC). That unique mechanism
has demonstrated its effectiveness in restoring trust
among the Syrian parties. Last week, on 31 July, the
fourth operation to liberate detainees took place and
an exchange of prisoners was conducted on a 14-for-15
basis. In this way, the total number of persons released
thanks to the Astana working group is in excess of 110
people. Similar operations took place in November
2018 and in February and April this year. In addition,
it is important to recall the common practice of the
local exchange of prisoners in Syria, which occurs
almost daily.
The group is also focused on the issue of missing
persons. Together with experts of the United Nations
and the ICRC, we are in the process of developing
procedures and modalities for compiling databases of
people who are considered by the Syrian Government
and the opposition to be missing, as well as for further
action in that area. At the same time, we must recall
that such issues are extremely sensitive. We count on
our Security Council partners to understand that it is a
humanitarian issue that should not be publicized, much
less politicized. We have serious concerns about the
fact that addressing the issue in the Security Council
could have the opposite effect and disrupt the very
complex process of establishing trust among the parties
to the conflict. We would hope that no one is interested
in such a negative development. We would also like
to ask our Western colleagues who support the armed
Syrian opposition to help the international community
determine what happened to the thousands of people
who were forcibly held by militants in eastern Ghouta,
Homs and south-western Syria and are currently
reported to be missing. It is obvious that those questions
should not be posed to Damascus.
All those present here, as well as the representatives
of interested organizations, have had the opportunity to

S/PV. 8593

familiarize themselves with the most recent report of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
on the humanitarian situation in Syria. The maps
show locations where humanitarian activity is being
conducted at both the domestic and international levels.
The area beyond the Euphrates river is a blank spot on
the map and not because the situation is fine there. On
the contrary, the north-east is in ruins. According to
information from our military, more than 300 terrorist
acts took place in June and July alone. According to
Western non-governmental organizations, more than
1,200 people — most of them civilians — died as
a result of mass coalition air strikes in Deir ez-Zor
province just in the first quarter of 2019 alone.
The situation in the internally displaced persons
(IDP) camp in Rukban remains complex. However,
thanks to the efforts of the Russian Centre for the
Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab
Republic and of the Government of Syria, more than
17,000 people have been able to leave Rukban. We will
continue to work with the United Nations to address
the issue of returning refugees and ensure they have all
they need.
The situation in the Al-Hol camp is truly
catastrophic. Half of the camp’s residents are women
and children. If preserving the status quo in the camp
and spreading jihadist ideology are not goals in and of
themselves, then it is high time to consider transferring
that territory to Syrian control in order to address the
IDP issue. However, for the time being, we are under the
impression that the Al-Hol camp, where 11,000 of the
73,000 residents are foreign citizens, and the jails in the
north-west that are not under the control of Damascus
are just one big concentration camp.
We are also concerned about the situation in the
Al-Tanf area. With regard to the territories that have
been listed, we recall once again that the occupying
Power bears responsibility for the people in the occupied
territories, in accordance with the Geneva Conventions.
In conclusion, I would like to pause to underscore
that, although we listened to our United States colleagues
regarding the humanitarian and human rights aspects
of the situation in Syria, that does not mean that the
ongoing illegal American military presence in that
country is legitimate in the eyes of Syrians or the entire
international community. Based on the conflicting
statements of American leadership, it would appear that
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has been

19-2473915/22

S/PV.8593

The situation in the Middle East

defeated in Syria and Iraq, whereas combating ISIL was
the initial goal announced for the American presence in
the area. However, continued American presence leads
us to believe that there are other goals that are not in
line with the principles of respecting the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic,
For its part, Russia will continue providing the
necessary assistance to help the Syrians overcome their
difficulties and reach political agreements regarding
a political settlement, the humanitarian situation and
post-conflict recovery. We will do that both nationally
and in multilateral formats in cooperation with the
interested parties. We call on all forces of good to join
those efforts.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing. I
also listened to the statements made by Dr. Hala and
Ms. Khoulani.
The United Nations attaches great importance to
addressing the issue of detainees and missing persons
in Syria. The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, Mr. Pedersen, told the Security Council that
he had five priority objectives to achieve, the second of
which is making progress on detainees, abductees and
missing persons. For some time now, Special Envoy
Pedersen has conducted good offices and maintained
a positive and cooperative relationship with all Syrian
parties, including the Syrian Government. China
supports Special Envoy Pedersen in his continued
dialogue and consultation with all Syrian parties and
encourages all parties to build mutual trust through
measures such as the exchange of prisoners.
The Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2474 (2019) in June, on the subject of missing
persons in armed conflict; it should be implemented
in earnest. Recently, with the efforts of the relevant
working group under the Astana framework, the Syrian
Government and its opposition simultaneously released
some prisoners. Good progress has therefore been made
in that regard. The working group has committed to
pushing all Syrian parties towards making progress on
releasing prisoners of war, detainees and abductees,
handing over bodies and identifying missing persons.
That is an effective and necessary mechanism that will
lead to increased mutual trust among all Syrian parties.
China supports the working group in continuing to play
its constructive role.
16/22

07/08/2019

China is concerned by the overall humanitarian
situation in Syria and the livelihood of the Syrian
people. Years of conflict have resulted in a tremendous
need for humanitarian assistance in Syria, and economic
sanctions further erode the living conditions of the
Syrian people. The international community should
continue to provide monetary and material assistance
to the Syrian people and support the rebuilding efforts
of the Syrian Government and people.
The international community, in carrying out
its humanitarian work in Syria, should fully respect
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria; strictly follow Security Council
resolutions, the United Nations humanitarian assistance
guidelines and the relevant provisions of international
law; adhere to the principles of neutrality, fairness and
non-politicization; and strengthen communication and
coordination with the Syrian Government.
A political solution is the only way to settle the
Syrian issue. The international community should
support the United Nations in playing its main role of
offering its good offices and support Special Envoy
Pedersen in his effort to advance the political process,
in accordance with the Syrian-owned and Syrian-led
principle and resolution 2254 (2015).
Syrian parties should proceed by taking into account
the future of the country and the fundamental interests
of its people, defuse differences through negotiations,
advance national reconciliation and gradually find a
political solution, in line with the reality of Syria and
the legitimate concerns of all parties.
The international community should encourage
the Syrian parties to voluntarily adopt measures that
are conducive to reconciliation and continuously build
mutual trust. Moreover, efforts should be undertaken to
continue to support the role of the Astana process, with
a view to assisting all Syrian parties in engaging in full
dialogue and consultation.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this meeting and thank the
speakers for their enlightening briefings.
We would like to begin by underscoring the
importance of the topic that brings us together today,
in particular the high levels of human suffering, the
economic impact and the breakdown of the society that
lead to the detention and disappearance of persons in
19-24739

07/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

conflict situations, which is especially dire in the case
of Syria.
We must remember that international humanitarian
law provides us with a mandatory minimum basis for
limiting unacceptable practices that violate the dignity
of individuals and, therefore, of the international
community as a whole. Consequently, Peru regrets
and condemns any kind of excess and abuse of that
international norm, as such practices only hinder and
undermine peace in Syria.
Making progress in that area would therefore
represent a gesture of humanity that has the courage to
attend to the open wounds and ease tensions, both of the
families concerned and of Syrian society. That would
also help to create a better climate of understanding
in order to advance the process of political dialogue,
accountability and reconciliation. Peru commends the
work done in that regard by the Astana group, which
is achieving auspicious results, including the release of
dozens of detainees since November 2018.
The severity and scale of the problem, however,
require even greater efforts. As Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen noted in April,
“there is considerable room for improvement in
terms of the procedures to be followed during
future release operations” (S/PV.8520, p.3).
In that vein, we welcome the ongoing engagement
and proactive role of the United Nations and the
International Committee of the Red Cross in the
sessions of the Astana group and in the implementation
of release operations on the ground.
We also believe that it is crucial to have more
accurate records of information on the situation of
detained or disappeared persons, which will require
the implementation of more efficient data collection,
management and protection systems, and a more fluid
exchange among the parties. That also entails the
development and adoption of national laws to ensure
the protection of detainees before, during and after
their release, as well as the minimum coverage of the
material, psychological and legal needs of the families
of the disappeared.
In that regard, we highlight the main role that the
international community can play in those matters,
whether through the adoption of a set of best practices
and technical standards, the provision of financial
resources or the positive influence that some States can

S/PV. 8593

exert on the parties to the conflict. Particular attention
should be given to the cases of missing Syrian children,
given the extreme situation of vulnerability to which
they are exposed.
As noted, it is crucial that the Syrian Government
and the opposition focus on broader solutions that
transcend the current schemes of the individual and
reciprocal exchange of prisoners and consider the
simultaneous release of groups of people, based on the
necessary political will.
I conclude by underscoring the importance of
resolution 2474 (2019) for those purposes, as well as
the renewed sense of urgency that we must accord the
settlement of the drastic situation in Syria, the victims
of which include numerous innocent families.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We join previous delegations in conveying our
appreciation for the convening of this meeting. We also
thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Dr. Hala and Ms. Amina
Khoulani for sharing their moving and regrettable
testimonies and briefings on the issue before us today.
Although the humanitarian situation in Syria
remains difficult, the issue of detainees and missing
persons must remain a core issue, of which the Security
Council must continue to accord its useful consideration.
It should be recalled that this issue is one of the five
priority objectives, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015), and that it is not only necessary to building
confidence between the parties to the conflict but
would also ease tensions with the millions of refugees
in neighbouring countries who lack information on
the whereabouts and well-being of their families who
are allegedly detained or missing, including women
and children. Recent reports on this issue are clear
and unambiguous. While arbitrary detentions across
the country continue to be perpetrated by all warring
parties, nowhere has the phenomenon been more
widespread than in areas under Government control.
In that context, the parties should take all possible
measures to account for persons reported missing as
a result of hostilities and provide their relatives with
any information they have about their whereabouts.
Moreover, we recall that resolutions 2254 (2015) and
2258 (2015) urge all parties to the conflict to release
any person arbitrarily detained, especially women and
children, and call on the Government authorities to
immediately release any individual whose continued
detention cannot be legally justified. We also believe

19-2473917/22

S/PV.8593

The situation in the Middle East

that the families of victims of enforced disappearances
have the right to know the truth about the circumstances
of the disappearance and fate of the victims and to
recover the remains of their relatives who allegedly
died while detained or were executed.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea commends the
work of the working group on detainees, abductees,
the handover of bodies and identification of missing
persons, with the participation of the United Nations,
and encourages them to spare no effort to secure the
combined release of as many people as possible. In that
regard, we welcome the recent prisoner exchange in the
framework of the Astana process and we agree with
other delegations that all detainees must be released.
On several occasions, the Secretary-General has
noted in his reports the situation of the personnel of
United Nations agencies, programmes or funds who
have been arrested or have disappeared in Syria. We
therefore call on all parties to take all measures to
ensure that they are released and allowed to continue
their humanitarian work.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that progress
in reaching a political agreement and enduring peace in
Syria cannot be made without urgently addressing the
need to deliver justice to Syrian victims and survivors,
as well as their families. Accordingly, the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea supports initiatives to establish
a national reparations mechanism in the Syrian Arab
Republic to assess damages, hear complaints and award
appropriate individual or community reparations and
other suitable remedies, financial or otherwise.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Allow me to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing. I also thank the civil society briefers,
Dr. Hala and Ms. Khoulani, for their statements
this morning.
Since the creation of the United Nations in 1945
from the vestiges of the brutal and devastating Second
World War, the United Nations and its Member States
have had to acknowledge and address the challenges
of missing and detained persons as a result of conflict.
Today, in a world of seemingly endless conflicts, the
question of missing and detained persons prevails in
all parts of the world — in Iraq, Syria, Yemen, Libya,
Afghanistan, Palestine, Western Sahara, Colombia and
other trouble spots worldwide.
18/22

07/08/2019

And since the colonial subjugation of Africans
and the slave trade of centuries past, many Africans
have perished in the Atlantic and Indian Oceans. Four
hundred years after we were first forcefully removed
from Africa as slaves, we are still waiting for full
accountability for the persons who went missing during
those years.
The long-term impact of being unable to account
for missing persons in armed conflict extends beyond
the victims themselves and, as we have heard here
today, has lasting and prolonged consequences for
affected families, friends, communities and countries
as a whole. In that regard, all parties to a conflict, be
they an occupying Power, a State or a non-State actor,
must be cognizant of and respect their legal and moral
obligations to ensure that the people within their
borders, areas of control or occupation are protected
and that detailed records are kept of those detained.
We would also like to highlight the importance of
addressing the return of mortal remains to families as a
way to begin the healing process.
From our own history and experience of national
reconciliation, I would like to highlight the importance
of truth, justice and accountability in solidifying
the peace process, bringing closure to families and
beginning the process of reconciliation and integration.
The ultimate goal is long-term peace, stability and
prosperity for all — victims and the State alike. In that
regard, my delegation would like to welcome the efforts
of the Astana group and the United Nations that resulted
in the recent prisoner swap on 31 July between the
Syrian Government and the opposition parties in Abu
Al-Zindeen, in northern Aleppo. South Africa urges all
parties to agree to additional prisoner exchanges and to
move away from one-to-one exchanges in favour of the
release of larger numbers of detainees by both parties
to the conflict.
In order to continue to build on that positive
momentum, South Africa calls on all parties to
make every effort to release civilians — particularly
women, children, the elderly, the sick and those with
disabilities — from detention as a gesture of good
faith and confidence-building among the parties
to the conflict. No child should be kept in detention
indefinitely, under any circumstances.
In the meantime, and in order to enhance
accountability to our own societies and communities,
let us make efforts to welcome and receive our nationals
19-24739

07/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

into our countries from Syrian refugee and detention
centres. That would support Mr. Geir Pedersen’s role
in facilitating political dialogue, particularly on the
matter of prisoners and missing persons, among the
various stakeholders in the Syrian conflict
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate South
Africa’s position that the only way to achieve long-term
peace and stability in Syria is through an inclusive
Syrian-led and -owned political dialogue, facilitated
by the United Nations, on the basis of resolution 2254
(2015). In order to continue to make progress on the
matter of missing persons and detainees, progress must
be made in the political process.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo’s for her comprehensive briefing. I
would also like to thank the civil society representatives,
Dr. Hala and Ms. Amina Khoulani, for their valuable
briefings today. Poland will continue to support all
efforts aimed at the creation of a peaceful, sovereign,
democratic, independent and integral Syria. However,
strong support for the United Nations-led process in
Geneva and the Special Envoy for Syria is not enough.
We need practical steps, and Special Envoy Pedersen
indicated them in his five-point plan presented to the
Security Council earlier this year (see S/PV.8475). In
that framework, there is the extremely important issue
of detainees, including abductees and missing persons
in Syria.
Eight years of war have brought unspeakable
suffering to the once peaceful country. Thousands of
people remain in arbitrary detention, where many are
subjected to various forms of ill-treatment, including
torture and rape. At the same time, thousands remain
missing, with their relatives deprived of any information
of their fate.
Poland calls for the release of all arbitrarily held
detainees, particularly children, women and the elderly.
Progress in that area would help to raise the level of
confidence between the parties and would greatly
contribute to the efforts to reach a lasting peace in
Syria. It is one of the most important, if not the most
important confidence-building measure between the
parties to the conflict. Work on that particular issue
should be implemented now as a priority and further
steps should swiftly follow. We strongly believe
that this could be one of the first steps in enabling a

S/PV. 8593

negotiated political transition process. It requires the
full and constructive engagement of all the parties to
the conflict to participate in the negotiations in good
faith and without preconditions.
In conclusion, continued efforts to build confidence
between the parties, including endeavours on the issue
of detainees and missing persons, remain high on the
list of priorities to contribute to the political process. It
is also a matter of respect for the fundamental human
rights standards with which all sides are obliged to
fully comply.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, my country, the Syrian Arab
Republic, rejects and denounces the systematic
practices, as seen on the part of the permanent
delegations of the United States of America, France
and the United Kingdom. Those practices exploit the
Chamber provided by the Security Council in order to
denigrate the Syrian Government. Those delegations
have no legal, or indeed moral, legitimacy to call for
the holding of a meeting that focuses on humanitarian
issues in my country, Syria, because to date those
Governments have been involved in the direct
military aggression visited upon my country. Those
Governments have harboured armed terrorist groups,
killed thousands of Syrians, destroyed their property,
abducted, displaced them and stripped them of their
homes and property. Those Governments have also
imposed unilateral coercive economic measures on the
Syrian people.
Those Governments have the responsibility to
ensure the maintenance of international peace and
security. However, they have not really shown an
interest in human rights, the well-being of people
or the sovereignty of countries. For centuries those
Governments have behaved immorally. They have
distorted noble humanitarian goals for their own
agendas. They have manipulated the principles and
provisions of international humanitarian law and the
Charter of the United Nations to implement an ongoing,
hostile colonial agenda that legitimizes foreign
interference and seeks to topple legitimate regimes by
force, thereby destabilizing countries along sectarian

19-2473919/22

S/PV.8593

The situation in the Middle East

and religious lines. The list of examples of such conduct
is long and one of which all members are aware.
My Government does not oppose in principle
the convening of meetings on the situation in Syria,
including all aspects, when the sole purpose of such
meetings is to exchange points of view and opinions
in a transparent, professional and sincere way in order
to assist my country and to find genuine solutions that
will restore security and stability, as well as prosperity,
for all Syrian citizens without exception. Those citizens
have been worn down and are exhausted by the terrorist
war imposed on them for nine years now.
I call on the Security Council to seriously consider
what has been spent by the Governments of the United
States of America, the United Kingdom and France,
along with other countries in the region, in terms of
budget, efforts and weapons to ultimately harm Syria,
its land, its people and its Government and to settle new
and old scores with that Government. In so doing, they
are risking the lives, wealth and civilization of Syria
and its people. We are deeply concerned that those
Governments continue to impose their positions and
policies in many areas of the work of the United Nation
and on some of its civil servants so as to ultimately
sow a campaign of disinformation and to distort the
truth about what is taking place in Syria. They work
on the basis of dubious information and they use sly
and cunning terms in their reports and statements in
order to mislead international opinion and conceal
the suffering of civilians and the misdeeds of armed
terrorist groups. For the past nine years, those groups
have used civilians as human shields in the regions that
they control. They have attacked hospitals and schools
and turned them into military facilities and detention
centres for abductees. Those terrorist groups have
bombarded civilian areas with indiscriminate bombs
of hatred.
The Security Council remains unable to find
the means to really make it possible to tackle the
primary cause of the suffering of the Syrian people,
namely, terrorism and those who support it, owing to
the hostile positions adopted by many Governments
towards my country, Syria, including by the leadership
of the Governments of the United States of America,
the United Kingdom and France. Those Governments
refuse to combat terrorism, which plagues many
regions of Syria, in particular the north-western part
of the country, in order to protect the Al-Nusra Front
terrorist group. Those very Governments supported
20/22

07/08/2019

armed terrorist groups that exfiltrated abductees
from Aleppo and rural Latakia to Turkey. Their fate
is still unknown. Those terrorist groups also abducted
thousands of civilians and put them in Al-Tawba prison,
in eastern Ghouta. Representatives will remember
the video recordings that were disseminated by the
terrorists when they controlled that region. The video
recordings showed the cruelty of those groups when
they handcuffed women and children and threw them
into cages and out into the street in heart-breaking and
horrific scenes, which recalled the very worst of the
darkest times of slavery.
To deliberately ignore referring to the fate of
thousands of missing persons and detainees at the
hands of terrorist groups and the suffering of their
families affirms once again the policy of double
standard that we see being adopted by a number of
United Nations mechanisms and countries in dealing
with humanitarian issues. The information that has
been gathered following the freeing of eastern Ghouta
and the eastern sections of Aleppo, as well as many
other regions of Syria, shows that terrorist groups had
assassinated thousands of Syrians and buried them in
mass graves. Every village town and region in Syria
that has been the victim of terrorism has its own tale of
the scandalous acts perpetrated by those Governments
that have supported religious and extremist terrorists,
financed and armed terrorists. and afforded them
political and media coverage while characterizing them
as “the moderate Syrian opposition”, when what we are
actually talking about is terrorist groups that include
thousands of foreign terrorist fighters.
Some people are determined to exhaust the Council
by weighing down its agenda with meetings. At the same
time, the Government of my country is dealing with the
issue of detainees and missing persons from a purely
humanitarian perspective, setting aside any political
manipulation of humanitarian issues. The working
group on the release of detainees/abductees, handover
of bodies and identification of missing persons has been
established as part of the Astana process. The working
group is responsible for dealing with the issues of
missing persons — in terms of providing clarification
around their fate — and of the release of detainees. It
is also responsible for dealing with prisoner swaps. My
Government is approaching the issue constructively
and believes that the working group is also functioning
constructively. Practical measures have been put in
place, the most recent of which was was an exchange
19-24739

07/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

of prisoners last week, with the participation of the
Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria. We commend this work. This humanitarian
issue is being exploited for improper purposes, which
casts a shadow on the work and endeavours of this
mechanism, just as it casts a shadow over the positive
measures that have been put in place.
We would also say that the initiatives for national
reconciliation and the efforts of the Syrian Red Crescent
have borne fruit and made it possible to develop
significant measures on this issue. We affirm that
relevant legal authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic
are exercising their privileges and competencies in
addressing this issue, pursuant to the Constitution
and the substantive rules and procedures provided
for in civil and criminal law, including the code of
criminal procedure.
My country is participating in serious and
determined efforts undertaken with the Iranian
and Russian guarantors of the Astana process and
cooperating with the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral’s work in order to achieve a Syrian-owned
and Syrian-led political process, without foreign
interference of any kind. In Syria, we are committed to
finding a national political Syrian solution that is lasting
in nature. We are committed to destroying hotbeds of
terrorism in our country. We are also committed to
removing all occupying foreign forces, whose presence
is an attack on the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Syria. We will not accept the
blackmail practiced by some parties in the Security
Council or on Syrian territory.
In conclusion, over the past eight years the Security
Council has heard many provocative statements against
the Government of my country. Many of these statements
lack all credibility and are based, in the majority of
cases, on absolutely unreliable information. What we
are seeing is an attempt to provide disinformation. We
hope that, now that these eight years have elapsed, the
Council will be able to adopt an objective approach by
listening to the testimony of families whose members
have been subject to the worst forms of torture at the
hands of those whom the countries that have called for
the convening of this meeting call the “armed moderate
opposition” — a moderate opposition that has gone so
far as to throw abductees alive into ovens. We do not
want to see parties invited to these meetings that are
close to the intelligence services of Governments that

S/PV. 8593

have supported and financed the terrorism responsible
for the worst possible crimes against the Syrian people.
The President: The representative of the
United Kingdom has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I will be brief. I
just want to say for the record that the Security Council
can discuss any issue it wants relating to international
peace and security. The representative of Syria might
like to know that nine countries called for this meeting
and not a single country objected, so it absolutely is a
valid subject for the Council to discuss, and it would be
better if he used his remarks to actually engage with the
issue at hand, rather than to insult the Council.
It was interesting to hear about the prisoner
swaps, but we are also very interested in the issues
of the detainees — ordinary people arbitrarily
detained — which a number of speakers, including
the civil society briefers, addressed this morning. I
therefore repeat my request: I would ask the Syrian
authorities to kindly provide a list of who is detained,
where they are detained, and for those people who have
died their burial sites. I would also ask that they allow,
if not the Commission of Inquiry, then the International
Committee of the Red Cross access to the detention sites.
Notwithstanding the parallel universe that the
Syrian representative described, there is a war in
Syria because the Syrian Government is attacking
its own people, pure and simple. The way out of that
is to cooperate with the Special Envoy in ensuring a
sustainable peace process and allowing the United
Nations to have humanitarian access and help civilians,
as it has been trying to do since 2012.
The President: The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): In response to what the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom has said today,
which is similar to what she has said in previous
meetings in which the situation in Syria has been
discussed, I would like to reaffirm yet again that asking
questions is the right of all parties concerned as long as
the sole purpose is to reach serious solutions based on
the Charter of the United Nations and the resolutions of
the Security Council, all of which have stipulated the
need to respect the sovereignty, independence, unity

19-2473921/22

S/PV.8593

The situation in the Middle East

and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic as
well as the need to eradicate terrorism, putting an end
to it in all its forms, including the support for it.
I would therefore like to ask the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, as well as the
representatives of Governments that have an illegal
military presence in my country, Syria, to inform the
Security Council of the date when they will end their
aggressive and illegal military presence and activities
on Syrian soil. I would also ask that they inform the
Council when they intend to put an end to the unilateral
coercive economic measures imposed on the Syrian
people through which they are seeking to undermine
the reconstruction process and the return of refugees
and internally displaced persons to their homes. I would
also like them to inform the Council of when they intend
to put an end to their interference in a political process
that is supposed to be Syrian-led and Syrian-owned,
without any foreign interference whatsoever. Most
importantly, I would ask that these countries inform
the Security Council of their position with respect to
the terrorist activities of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and
the Al-Nusra Front in Idlib and other areas in northwestern Syria. Together with other terrorist groups,
comprised in part of thousands of foreign terrorist
fighters, the Al-Nusra Front is using crossing points
along the border with Turkey to smuggle terrorists and
weapons and funds into Syria.
The President: The representative of the
United Kingdom has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I am sorry,
but I cannot let some of the preceding statements
go unchallenged.
The United Kingdom and its partners do not
support terrorism. We fight terrorism wherever we see
it. The Syrian representative’s last remarks were quite
unjustified and wholly without foundation and I invite
him to withdraw them. We do not support terrorists. It
is that simple.
On the other issues concerning the deadline, it is in
Syria’s hands. When there is a viable political process in

22/22

07/08/2019

Syria, the rehabilitation of Syria and its reconstruction,
financed by Western money, can start. But until there
is a viable political process brokered by the United
Nations, we will not be able to start the reconstruction.
We have made that abundantly clear in the Council. The
way forward lies in Syria’s hands, and nothing that we
have said today about the detainee issue contravenes
the sovereignty, territorial integrity or unity of Syria.
People in Syria simply want to know where their family
members are.
I note that he has not answered the question. We
would like him to go and transmit to his authorities
requests from the Council to provide information about
the detainees and to allow the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) access to them. That is a very
simple request. It does not trample upon sovereignty.
Other people allow the ICRC access to their detention
facilities in their countries. We are simply asking for
the same.
The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Frankly, I did not want to take the floor once
again, but after listening to the two statements made by
my United Kingdom colleague, I cannot help thinking
that she wants to demonstrate that there is unity within
the Council on the issues that she just brought up,
whereas her communication with the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic was more akin to what a
prosecutor says to an accused person. We believe that
to be unacceptable.
In our own statement, we raised a number of
questions that she and her Western colleagues have yet
to answer. If we are to turn this meeting into a court
proceeding, as she is attempting to do, then the ones
who should be on trial are those who caused the country
to end up in its current state through their external
interference. I ask that this be borne in mind.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

19-24739
