S/2020/953

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 September 2020
Original: English and French

Letter dated 28 September 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by His
Excellency the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres; as well as the statements
delivered by Their Excellencies Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou, President of the Niger;
Mrs. Kersti Kaljulaid, President of Estonia; Mr. Matamela Cyril Ramaphosa,
President of South Africa; Mr. Kaïs Saïed, President of Tunisia; Mr. Wang Yi,
Special Representative of President Xi Jinping, State Councillor and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of China; Sir Louis Straker, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs, International Trade and Regional Integration of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines; Mr. Pham Binh Minh, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam; Mr. Philippe Goffin, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Belgium; Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation;
Mr. Niels Annen, Minister of State in the Federal Foreign Office of Germany;
Mr. Mahendra Siregar, Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia; Lord Tariq
Ahmad of Wimbledon, Minister of State for South Asia and the Commonwealth of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland; and by the representatives
of the Dominican Republic and the United States of America, in connection with the
video-teleconference on “Maintenance of international peace and security: global
governance after COVID-19”, convened on Thursday, 24 September 2020.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the
briefing and statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Abdou Abarry
President of the Security Council

20-12789 (E) 011020 051120

*2012789*

S/2020/953

Annex I
Statement by the Secretary-General
I thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to address the subject of global
governance as it relates to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
A microscopic virus is now the number one threat in our world. The COVID-19
pandemic is a full-blown crisis in itself, unfolding against a backdrop of high
geopolitical tensions and other global threats in unpredictable and dangerous ways.
The pandemic is a clear test of international cooperation — a test that we have
failed. It has killed nearly 1 million people around the world, infected more than
30 million and is out of control. That was the result of a lack of global preparedness,
cooperation, unity and solidarity.
The seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations reminds us of the
achievements of our founders and calls on us to live up to their ambitions. We urgently
need innovative thinking on global governance and multilateralism so that they are fit
for the twenty-first century. First and foremost, we need a networked multilateralism
based on strong links and cooperation between global and regional organizations,
international financial institutions and other global alliances and institutions.
Since I became Secretary-General, I have prioritized our strategic partnership
with the African Union. Our relations are characterized by shared values, mutual
respect and common interests. The partnership between the African Union (AU) and
the United Nations is a model that we should emulate in our relationships with other
regional organizations.
We now have a strong AU-United Nations framework on peace and security
on the continent. I urge the Security Council to deepen our engagement by creating
strong, formalized links and regular communications with the AU Peace and Security
Council. That would enable the most effective division of labour, allowing for AU
peace enforcement and counter-terrorism operations, backed by Security Council
mandates, with predictable funding guaranteed by assessed contributions. That is
the only way in which we will build the coalition that we need to beat terrorism on
the African continent and fulfil the African Union’s flagship initiative to silence
the guns.
We at the United Nations also have a responsibility to improve the effectiveness
of global governance. Our focus on prevention, our efforts to enhance the peace
and security architecture, the Action for Peacekeeping initiative in partnership with
Member States and our drive to end sexual exploitation and abuse across the United
Nations system are all aimed at meeting that challenge.
I welcome resolution 2532 (2020), adopted in July, in support of my appeal for
an immediate global ceasefire. We now need a united effort, led by the Council, to
silence the guns around the world by the end of this year. The primary responsibility
for making global governance work lies with Member States, including those on
the Council.
Reform of global governance cannot be a substitute for collective action by
Member States to confront common challenges. Conflict, human rights abuses,
humanitarian crisis and stalled progress on development reinforce each other and
are interlinked.
But our global response is more and more fragmented. We are not keeping
pace with the world as it is. The institutions of global governance should work
together in coordination to contain, mitigate and reduce risks of all kinds. Networked
2/32

20-12789

S/2020/953

multilateralism must extend beyond peace and security, encompassing the Bretton
Woods institutions, development banks, trade alliances and more.
The pandemic is heightening risks across the board. Humanitarian needs are
growing, decades of progress on sustainable development are at stake and social
unrest is increasing. Many of the countries in the global South have been left
hanging, without financial and practical resources. Some middle-income countries
face a crushing debt burden as they try to respond.
From the start, I have advocated for a comprehensive global response package
and for coordinated action on debt through the mobilization of all partners. We
need the World Bank Group and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to support
member countries through enhanced access to facilities and tools, and we need
greater resources for the IMF and enhanced support for the World Bank Group and
other financial institutions and bilateral mechanisms.
In May, together with the Prime Ministers of Canada and Jamaica, I brought
Heads of State and Government, leaders of international organizations, representatives
from the private sector and civil society together to launch an initiative on financing
for development. That initiative focuses on areas that are critical to survival and to
building a strong recovery, including global liquidity, financial stability and debt
vulnerability, and I look forward to its conclusions next week.
But we cannot continue with such ad hoc solutions to systemic, foreseeable
global risks. The pandemic is a wake-up call for even more catastrophic challenges
that may arise, starting with the climate crisis. If we meet those challenges with the
same disunity and disarray that we have seen this year, I fear the worst.
We need global governance that is resolute, coordinated, flexible and ready to
react to the full range of challenges that we face. In a world of interconnected threats,
solidarity is self-interest. Many of the cross-border challenges that we face today,
from the climate crisis to rising inequality and cybercrime, involve interest groups,
businesses, organizations and entire sectors that are outside traditional concepts of
global governance.
Such challenges cannot be addressed effectively by States alone. We need to
broaden our idea of global governance to take in businesses, civil society, cities and
regions, academia and young people.
International conventions are not the only way to reach binding agreements
for the common good. We need flexible mechanisms in which different stakeholders
come together, adopt protocols and codes of conduct, define red lines and create
conditions for successful cooperation.
Global governance must also recognize our responsibilities to our planet and to
future generations. Civil society movements, particularly those led by young people,
are global leaders on these issues. Let us face it: global governance mechanisms
until now have been exclusive, and the largest group left out in the cold is women —
half of humankind. Women watching this week’s general debate have a perfect right
to feel that they are not represented and that their voices are not valued.
The COVID-19 pandemic has proved what is obvious — women’s leadership
is highly effective. We cannot hope to turn the climate crisis around, reduce social
divisions or make sustained peace without the full contributions of all of society.
Reformed global governance is about approaches and institutions, which
must be reformed and strengthened. We need more, and better, multilateralism that
works effectively and delivers for the people we serve. We need more, and better,
global governance, based on national sovereignty and expressed through our shared
20-127893/32

S/2020/953

ideals, eloquently expressed in the Charter of the United Nations. The pandemic has
illustrated beyond dispute the gaps in our multilateral system.
As countries go in different directions, the virus goes in every direction. A
rational and equitable approach to vaccination would reduce preventable deaths
by prioritizing front-line workers and the most vulnerable. But we have struggled
to mobilize the resources needed to ensure that a vaccine is a global public good,
available and affordable to all.
We urgently need multilateral institutions that can act decisively, based on
global consent, for the global good. We need multilateral institutions that are fair,
with better representation of the developing world, so that all have a proportional
voice at the global table.
The General Assembly Declaration on the Commemoration of the Seventyfifth Anniversary of the United Nations has created space for a process of reflection
on the future of multilateral cooperation and the post-COVID-19 world. I will
report back with analysis and recommendations, guided by a common thread of
solidarity within and between societies at the national and international levels and
with future generations.
Our world is no longer bipolar or unipolar; it is moving towards multipolarity.
We experienced polarization and fragmentation without effective mechanisms of
multilateral governance 100 years ago. The result was the First World War.
COVID-19 is casting a dark shadow across the world, but it is also a warning
that must spur us to action. We have no choice. Either we come together in global
institutions that are fit for purpose, or we will be crushed by divisiveness and chaos.

4/32

20-12789

S/2020/953

Annex II
Statement by the President of the Republic of the Niger,
Mahamadou Issoufou
[Original: French]
I would like to warmly thank all present for their constructive participation
in this high-level meeting. As President of the Security Council, I am honoured to
have this opportunity to discuss what post-coronavirus disease (COVID-19) global
governance should look like. It is said that only a crisis that is, or is perceived to
be, a crisis produces real change. We missed the opportunity for real change during
the financial crisis of 2008. Are we going to miss the opportunity provided to us by
COVID-19 to rebuild global governance? What are the challenges of our time and
what governance is needed to respond to those challenges?
The first challenge that I want to address is global political governance. In
that regard, at the seventy-fourth session of the United Nations General Assembly, I
already reaffirmed the need to support the Secretary-General in his efforts to reform
our Organization with a view to establishing a more democratic multilateral system
(see A/74/PV.4).
What was valid 75 years ago is no longer valid today. The functioning of
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the Security Council
must reflect to the current world situation. With regard to particularly the Security
Council, where we are proud to sit, all regions of the world, including Africa, must
be fairly represented. The number of permanent seats must be increased and the
right of veto must be abolished or expanded to the new permanent members in order
to establish democracy and equality. Moreover, Africa has a common position on
this issue, which is expressed through the Ezulwini Consensus. As for the General
Assembly, the ongoing demand of Member States is that of a rebalancing of power
between it and the Security Council.
The second challenge concerns the issues of peace and security. In view of the
perceived shortcomings of the concept of peacekeeping, there is an urgent need to
return to the concept of collective security and give more weight to United Nations
peacekeeping operations under Chapter VII of the Charter of the Organization.
As the nature of conflicts changes, the mandates of United Nations forces must
also adapt. The greatest current threat to global peace and security comes from
non-State criminal groups. The demand for a return to the concept of collective
peace cannot be met with a right of veto, as no State should have the right to block
the decisions of the international community in the face of a common threat on
the basis of its own interests or friendships. Moreover, the risk of a confrontation
between States, particularly between major Powers, is not zero. The possibility that
one or other of those Powers may fall into the Thucydides Trap cannot be ruled
out. The international community must work to prevent such an outcome, including
through the denuclearization of our planet.
The third challenge concerns the deepening of inequalities — inequalities
among and within countries. “The difficulty lies not so much in developing new
ideas as in escaping the old ones”, said a leading economist. That is why the world
always reforms after shocks. The current model dates from the aftermath of the two
oil shocks of 1973 and 1979. Its complete supremacy has even made people believe
in "the end of the history". But it has produced inequalities such that the world is, in
that respect, in the same position as it was at the end of the nineteenth century. The
gap between the richest and the poorest is widening and the middle class, one of the
foundations of modern democracy, is weakening. The gap between the richest and the
20-127895/32

S/2020/953

poorest is greater today than it was in ancient Rome, where the economy was based
on slavery. All specialists agree that this trend will increase in the current context of
low economic growth and high returns on capital. Such escalating inequality is the
greatest threat facing the global economy.
I recall article 1 of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen of 1789:
“Men are born and remain free and equal in rights. Social distinctions
may be founded only upon the general good.”
These inequalities are not always justified by merit, so they are not based on
common good. They are incompatible with the principles of social justice that are
the foundation of democratic societies. Experience shows that the invisible hand
of the market cannot correct them. Reducing inequality requires not only massive
investment in education and training, but also the design and implementation
of expansionary economic policies and the introduction of a tax on financial
transactions, or even a progressive global tax on capital, which would also put an end
to the tax competition that States are engaged in today. The fight against inequality
requires an in-depth reform of the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and
the World Trade Organization.
The fourth challenge concerns the fight against poverty. The time has come
to build a world free of poverty. “A world free of poverty” is the motto of the World
Bank. Furthermore, let me recall article 25 of the 1948 Universal Declaration of
Human Rights:
“Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health
and well-being of himself and of his family, including food, clothing, housing
and medical care and necessary social services, and the right to security in
the event of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, old age or other
lack of livelihood in circumstances beyond his control.”
To guarantee this right, a total war must be declared on poverty. We produce
enough wealth in the world to eradicate it. We can defeat the two horsemen of the
apocalypse — hunger and disease. Nothing must stop us in this fight, because
poverty destroys freedom and dignity. It is a breeding ground for terrorism and
organized crime. That is why there must be an unbiased discussion of universal basic
income for all individuals. Experiences have shown that this does not encourage
laziness and idleness. We have evidence of this in the Niger with the unconditional
money transfers that we provide for the benefit of the most vulnerable populations.
The fight against poverty, in particular unemployment, requires a better
sharing of working time. It also requires reform of global financial and economic
institutions. It also demands that we put an end to this globalization that accepts
the free circulation of capital, goods and services but refuses the free circulation
of people. In fact, only 3 per cent of the world’s people lives outside their country
of origin.
The fifth challenge relates to climate change. Since the beginning of the
industrial era, we have had development models that attack nature. Nature is taking
revenge on us through extreme weather events. The many hurricanes and storms,
floods, droughts, melting glaciers, rising sea and ocean levels, coastal erosion, the
appearance of new diseases, damage to biodiversity and so forth are clear signs
of this. Moreover, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has regularly
drawn attention to global warming. Our production model is generating ecological
damage, with serious consequences for the planet. The World Wildlife Fund for
Nature estimates that more than 50 per cent of vertebrates have disappeared in the
past 40 years. The global population of wild animals has decreased by more than
6/32

20-12789

S/2020/953

68 per cent. The new post-COVID paradigm must take this into account and call for
the full and urgent implementation of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.
Therefore, it is clear that the instruments put in place in the aftermath of the
Second World War are no longer sufficient to address the challenges of poverty,
social inequality, climate change, terrorism, organized crime and cybercrime, the
peaceful coexistence of peace and global security.
The COVID-19 pandemic undoubtedly marks the end of an era. It underscores
the urgent need to rethink our collective security system. It has shown the reality of
our humankind and of all the countries of the world, which have all been equal in the
face of suffering, be they big or small, rich or poor, weak or powerful.
It is up to all of us to work together to draw the necessary lessons and reflect on
the essential reforms of global governance. We must create a post-COVID-19 world
of peace, solidarity and prosperity for all, a world of solidarity, dignity, equality,
justice and freedom.

20-127897/32

S/2020/953

Annex III
Statement by the
Kersti Kaljulaid

President

of

the

Republic

of

Estonia,

It is great to be with the Security Council and discuss the post-coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) governance in our global world. First of all, I would like to
reiterate Estonia’s support for Secretary-General Guterres’s call for a global ceasefire
and call on everybody to support it by the end of the year.
COVID-19 has changed our world and, true to Estonian colours, I would like
to point out that technological development is the area that helps us to maintain the
coherence of our world and to continue to cooperate with each other. In addition,
this pandemic has shown us that our world of work, education, communication and
services has radically changed. What do we need to do now?
We need to adapt our global governance model to what we are seeing in the
real world. This is also true if we wish to make this global opportunity a golden
opportunity potentially for those countries that are looking to leapfrog and for those
people who have the skills to participate in the global services market, but who
happen to come from the countries where it is difficult to offer their services to the
rest of the world and for those in world, notably women and people with disabilities,
who have found it very difficult to participate in the job market previously. Now, in
this post-COVID world, it has been proven that you do not have to be where you are
working. This is a golden opportunity for the weaker sectors of our society.
We have to understand that we have to give our children and adolescents
the opportunity to learn the skills necessary to participate in this new world of
technology. Finally, we do not need national or regional governance structures, such
as the European Union, but rather a global governance structure that will create a
legally permissive environment for all these developments, including, of course, the
necessary cyber security.

8/32

20-12789

S/2020/953

Annex IV
Statement by the President of the Republic of South Africa,
Matamela Cyril Ramaphosa
Allow me to begin by congratulating the Republic of the Niger on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council. It can be assured of South Africa’s full
support and cooperation.
The threat to lives, livelihoods and social stability posed by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic has significant consequences for global peace and
security. Situations of instability and conflict have the potential to worsen, and there
is a possibility of new forms of social unrest emerging. Vital gains made in political
processes towards peace are under threat.
It is our collective expectation as the international community that the
Security Council will continue to play a key role in ensuring that this pandemic does
not undermine international peace and security. It is imperative that the Security
Council continue to work closely with regional organizations in this regard, including
with the African Union.
We must coordinate our efforts and strengthen multilateralism if we are to
contain the damage that this pandemic could cause. South Africa and the African
Union support the call by the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire and the scaling
up of humanitarian assistance to vulnerable societies.
South Africa calls on all parties to armed conflict to use this opportunity to
work towards peaceful resolution, all the while addressing the humanitarian needs of
their populations. We further support the call for the waiving of unilateral punitive
measures, such as sanctions, during the pandemic to enable affected countries to
secure much-needed supplies and support.
To maintain peace and security, we need a Security Council that better reflects
and represents the United Nations membership in keeping with the principle of the
sovereign equality of all States. This will ensure that the interests of a few will not
undermine efforts at finding solutions to emerging crises that are global in nature.
As we look to the post-COVID era reconstruction, we have to address the
economic, social, humanitarian and environmental needs of countries. We have to
act with urgency to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. As the international
community, let us choose cooperation above unilateralism, let us choose solidarity
above isolation, let us choose unity of purpose above narrow self-interest, let us
emerge from this great adversity strengthened and even more united.

20-127899/32

S/2020/953

Annex V
Statement by the President of the Republic of Tunisia, Kaïs Saïed
[Original: Arabic]
Allow me, at the outset, to congratulate the Niger on its successful presidency
of the Security Council in September. I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important Security Council summit and for your pertinent choice
of theme, namely, global governance after the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
This theme reflects the shared conviction that the Security Council has a central
role to play in addressing the implications of this epidemic for international peace
and security.
I should also like to take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General
for his valuable briefing and to reaffirm the unwavering support of Tunisia for his
constructive initiatives to escalate the Organization’s involvement and mobilize
international efforts to help States and peoples cope with the COVID-19 pandemic
and contain and mitigate its effects.
I also wish to extend my thanks to the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for his remarks, and to express my appreciation for the continued
efforts of the Commission and the African Peace and Security Council to silence
the guns across our continent and strengthen the capacity of African countries to
respond to this pandemic.
In the nine or so months since the epidemic began, it has spread to all corners
of the globe, and its repercussions for every country and people, without exception,
have become more dire. The international community has gradually come to accept
that the pandemic has grave repercussions for international peace and security not
only in conflict zones, where the pandemic has compounded many existing crises,
humanitarian disasters and other volatile situations, but also in every corner of the
globe. This pandemic has overshadowed economic, political and social issues, as
well international relations.
The repercussions of this pandemic may persist for generations and will
not disappear when the virus does. They also threaten to exacerbate tensions
between international Powers, destabilize regional equilibrium and weaken the
multilateral system.
In that regard, we completely agree with the Secretary-General’s
characterization of the current crisis as “the gravest test the international community
has faced since the founding of the United Nations”. Tunisia was one of the few
countries that strove to draw international attention to the danger that the pandemic
posed to humankind, and to its destructive impact on peace and security and, indeed,
on all aspects of life.
Let us therefore adopt a new approach to international security, one that is
based on strengthening cooperation among States and peoples, because we believe
that no nation, however powerful, can confront this invisible enemy that knows no
borders, that we have a shared destiny and that the security and safety of all are
linked to the security and safety of each individual without exception.
In keeping with that belief, Tunisia, in coordination with France, proposed
a draft resolution to the Security Council. In the adopted resolution 2532 (2020),
the Council underscores that combating the pandemic requires greater international
solidarity and a joint, coordinated and comprehensive response under United
Nations auspices, and calls for an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire and a
humanitarian truce in various conflict zones in order to enable the safe, unhindered
10/32

20-12789

S/2020/953

and sustained delivery of assistance, and for special measures to be taken to protect
vulnerable groups.
I once again express my gratitude and appreciation to all members of the
Security Council for unanimously adopting resolution 2532 (2020), in July 2020. I
would now like to stress how important it is to comply with that resolution and follow
up its implementation by the various stakeholders, especially as the humanitarian
repercussions of the pandemic in many conflict areas grow more dire.
The immediate, direct repercussions of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global
health situation should not obscure its negative economic and social ramifications, as
all available data indicate that the world economy will experience a sharp contraction
of 5.2 per cent, which will inevitably weaken national economies and drive millions
more people towards poverty and unemployment.
These repercussions will undoubtedly be felt more acutely in developing
countries, particularly among vulnerable groups, whose poverty and suffering will
deepen. According to the most recent estimates from the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the economic recession will force at least
132 million more people into the ranks of the hungry, who currently number
690 million people worldwide.
It is no secret that these and other repercussions will further fuel tensions and
conflict in the world and trigger a series of mutually reinforcing crises, presenting
the Security Council and international actors responsible for maintaining peace with
additional challenges.
The gravity and complexity of these shared challenges compel us to think about
driving the Organization to go beyond the traditional concept of security, which does
not encompass all threats to humankind, and address the non-traditional security
threats that the world is experiencing today, such as epidemics, environmental
disasters, climate change and cybercrime. The urgent need to push for greater
solidarity and strengthen international cooperation becomes all the more evident.
Tunisia once again calls on the international community to continue to
provide the necessary support to the African continent and to help it to assess its
promising potential and enhance its development prospects, thereby contributing to
realizing the greater security and stability and sustainable development to which its
peoples aspire.
The changes in international relations wrought, and yet to be wrought, by
the COVID-19 pandemic, and which some believe may establish a new global order
with different concepts and innovative mechanisms for action, invite us to reflect
on the future of global governance, which will be different from what it was before
the pandemic.
We therefore call for action in order to deepen a shared awareness among the
members of the international community that is based on humanitarian concerns,
and in order to build a more just global order. We must make a collective effort
to use this crisis as the impetus for a new beginning and the creation of different
systems of governance that are capable of dealing with contemporary challenges.
This can be achieved only by drawing upon lessons learned, rethinking the priorities
of our societies and clinging to the values of solidarity to confront crises and rise
to challenges.
To conclude, I wish to reiterate the conviction of Tunisia that joint action
is vital. Tunisia is determined to contribute to developing a renewed vision of
cooperation that all parties can agree on, in order to address the pandemic’s
immediate effects and contain its spread, as well as to achieve the goals set forth in
20-1278911/32

S/2020/953

the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It will thus be possible to preserve
human dignity and enable the world’s peoples to harness their efforts and energies to
achieve comprehensive development, communication and solidarity.

12/32

20-12789

S/2020/953

Annex VI
Statement by the Special Representative of President Xi Jinping and
State Councillor and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the People’s
Republic of China, Wang Yi
[Original: English and Chinese]
As the world commemorates the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations, the Security Council is holding this summit debate, proposed by President
Mahamadou Issoufou, to discuss post-coronavirus disease (COVID-19) global
governance. China welcomes and supports this initiative.
Earlier this week, President Xi Jinping spoke at the high-level meeting to
commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations and the general
debate of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session (see A/75/PV.4, annex
IV). Reviewing the global situation and the trend of the times, President Xi addressed
a series of key questions from a strategic, long-term and historical perspective. What
kind of world will humankind live in? What kind of country will China look like? And
what kind of United Nations is needed for the world? The answers, as President Xi
underlined, lie in the steadfast commitment to the path of multilateralism and to the
United Nations-centred international system, and joint efforts to build a community
with a shared future for humankind and a new type of international relations. Many
leaders have also recalled the founding missions of the United Nations, expressed
strong support for multilateralism and displayed a shared aspiration for defeating
COVID-19 with solidarity and pursuing peace and development.
The world today is undergoing once-in-a-century changes, which are
accelerated by COVID-19. Global threats and challenges continue to rise, whose
solution urgently requires improved global governance and closer coordination and
cooperation. Meanwhile, the collective rise of developing countries and the trend
towards a multipolar world — one of the contemporary features of international
politics — need to be reflected in the global governance system. If we are to promote
global development in the light of the changing needs, we need better top-level
design and a reformed, stronger global governance system. To this end, China would
like to propose the following five points.
First, we need to act on the principle of extensive consultation, joint
contribution and shared benefits. All countries, big or small, are equal members
of the international community. Major risks and challenges respect no borders and
impact the future of each and every country alike. To tackle them requires strong
synergy supported by a global pooling of resources and wisdom. Global affairs
must be discussed and decided by all, governance systems built by all and benefits
of governance shared by all, so that every country is a participant in, contributor
to and beneficiary of world peace and development. Developing countries face
greater difficulties. There is every need to make sure that their voices are heard,
their concerns respected and their rights and interests safeguarded, which is an
embodiment of international justice.
Secondly, we need to jointly tackle non-traditional security threats. The first
two decades of the twenty-first century have seen the onset of numerous global
risks and challenges, from the 11 September attacks to the global financial crisis
to COVID-19. Traditional and non-traditional security threats should be managed
holistically. Public health security and climate change should be given greater priority
on the international agenda. Non-traditional security threats, often multifaceted, can
be tackled effectively only with comprehensive, well-calibrated efforts to address
both the symptoms and root causes. That is where the Security Council needs to
20-1278913/32

S/2020/953

play a bigger role pursuant to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Thirdly, we need to enhance coordination and cooperation among major
countries. Global governance will be strengthened when major countries set
an example of acting on the Charter of the United Nations, provide more global
public goods and step up their efforts for world peace and development. In such a
challenging moment, major countries are even more duty-bound to put the future
of humankind first, discard the Cold War mentality and ideological bias and come
together in the spirit of partnership to overcome the difficulties.
Fourthly, we need to uphold international law and rules. A sound global
governance architecture must be undergirded by respect for law and rules. All must
adhere to the basic norms governing international relations, such as those of sovereign
equality, non-interference in internal affairs and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Rules must be followed and commitments kept. Unilateral sanctions and long-arm
jurisdiction need to be opposed in order to safeguard the authority and sanctity of
international law. Laws and rules need to keep pace with the changing times. The
international community needs to establish rules in frontier areas such as the deep
sea, polar regions, cyberspace and outer space, to regulate their development and
ensure equitable benefits to all countries.
Fifthly, we need to bring the role of the United Nations to bear. The major global
risks and challenges we face are crises with compounding effects, which cannot
be addressed separately. As the most universal, representative and authoritative
international institution, the United Nations is better positioned and capable to play a
leadership role than any country or any other international organization . Meanwhile,
the Organization needs to evolve with the times, increase the representation and
voice of developing countries, enhance its efficiency and emergency preparedness
and build an up-to-date governance system and capability.
The Security Council, the centrepiece of the collective security framework,
is part and parcel of the global governance system and tasked with the primary
responsibility for international peace and security. Under the new conditions,
the Council needs to effectively fulfil the duties conferred upon it by the Charter
of the United Nations, contribute to the maintenance of world peace and the
stability of international order, ensure security for all peoples and bring hope to
global governance.
China will continue to work with countries around the world to improve the
global governance system and build a community with a shared future for humankind.

14/32

20-12789

S/2020/953

Annex VII
Statement by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs, International Trade and Regional Integration of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Sir Louis Straker
At the outset, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines extends our compliments to
the Secretary-General of the United Nations, António Guterres, and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat. We thank them both for
their insightful remarks, and we commend the Republic of the Niger for convening
this important and timely discussion.
The overlapping health, socioeconomic, political and security risks
precipitated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic have converged to
present our multilateral system with its most complex challenge since the Second
World War. This pandemic will claim more than 1 million lives, as it destroys the
livelihoods of millions more globally. Given these profoundly altered conditions for
life, living and production, our world will never be the same again. It is therefore of
critical importance that we adapt our systems of global governance to this extremely
challenging contemporary reality.
Turbulent times bear disproportionately on the vulnerable — on refugees,
displaced persons and those made stateless due to painful cycles of violent conflict;
on women and children, who shoulder an unequal share of the social and political
burdens; on the communities and families that become fractured due to instability
and unrest; and on conflict-affected countries that struggle to safeguard their social
contracts as emerging threats such as COVID-19, and existing risk multipliers such
as climate change, present themselves in novel ways posing unprecedented security,
humanitarian and political challenges.
COVID-19 has laid bare the undisputable fact that today’s complex challenges
will not be solved by military strategies. Nor can they be effectively addressed in
siloes. Moreover, this pandemic has presented incontrovertible proof that, in our
increasingly interconnected world, the uneven development of economies, healthcare systems and governance institutions produces vulnerabilities that affect us all.
We can protect ourselves only by protecting each other. In this regard, we can, and
we must, do better to build capacities for the most vulnerable among us, and to
promote inclusivity, peace and resilience in accordance with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. This remains the primary blueprint for a peaceful, just
and secure world.
In order to tackle the root causes of insecurity and ensure that conflictaffected countries are able to restore trust in public institutions, repair their social
fabrics and advance political processes to achieve national unity and reconciliation,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines emphasizes the need for predictable and reliable
development financing. We reiterate our calls to developed countries to honour their
overseas development assistance commitments.
We also reiterate that a lack of meaningful action by some States to curb
their emissions and to set and honour ambitious pledges for climate adaptation
and mitigation serves to perpetuate climate-driven security risks in many fragile
contexts. To those that suffer the effects of climatic hazards, this failure by major
emitters is an act of hostility. From Haiti to the Horn of Africa to the Middle East,
the peace and security implications of climate change must be comprehensively
acknowledged and robustly addressed.
As we embark on the decade of action to accelerate progress towards the
Sustainable Development Goals, integrated and coherent strategies that bring together
20-1278915/32

S/2020/953

all United Nations organs and specialized agencies, within their respective mandates,
are urgently needed. Only through a renewed multilateralism that places people at its
centre, considers the needs and perspectives of all Member States equally and fully
respects the guiding principles of international law can we effectively address the
challenges of the twenty-first century.

16/32

20-12789

S/2020/953

Annex VIII
Statement by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Viet Nam, Pham Binh Minh
I thank you, Mr. President, for personally presiding over this important
debate on post-coronavirus disease (COVID-19) global governance. Also, I thank
Secretary-General Guterres and the African Union Commission Chairperson for
their insightful briefings.
Since my last statement (see S/2020/799, annex 5), at the debate on pandemics
and the challenges of sustaining peace, just one and a half months ago, COVID-19
has infected more than 10 million and claimed the lives of over 200,000 people
globally. Yet that is just the tip of the iceberg. Many more, particularly those in
vulnerable conflict and post-conflict situations, have been, and will be, severely
affected due to the lingering impacts of this unprecedented crisis.
The pandemic has laid bare the fragility of our world and “risks ignored for
decades: inadequate health systems; gaps in social protection; structural inequalities;
environmental degradation; the climate crisis”, as assessed in the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the work of the Organization (A/75/1, para. 5). Equally serious,
faltering multilateral cooperation, excessive nationalism, political tensions and even
the use of the pandemic to trigger discrimination and hatred have hampered our
common response. It is important that we stand together against these obstacles and
strengthen our commitments towards sustainable recovery from the pandemic and
resilience in the face of possible future crises.
Experience in many countries and regions, including Viet Nam and other
members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), has demonstrated
that good governance is the linchpin to cope with interconnected dimensions
of COVID-19, particularly through a whole-of-government and people-centred
approach, decisive and early response, social unity and cohesion and innovative
financing for development.
Viet Nam believes that good global governance should aim to deliver for all
rather than a few. International efforts should prioritize economic recovery, with a
special focus on assistance for developing countries, addressing inequalities and root
causes of conflicts and protection and support for vulnerable groups such as women,
children, refugees and internally displaced persons. We call for more intensified
political and financial commitments, particularly from developed countries, to assist
the most vulnerable people and countries in need.
As no one wins until everyone wins, how the world emerges from the pandemic
will depend on each and every nation’s ability to build trust, nurture commitments
and work together to champion multilateralism, with the United Nations as the
coordination centre and regional organizations playing a more active role.
Multilateral institutions, for their part, should seize this critical moment to
spearhead concrete reform measures to adapt their relevance and efficiency to the
evolving international context.
The Security Council is no exception. To fulfil its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security, the Council needs to show
the highest level of cooperation, while improving its responsiveness, adaptability
and efficiency. To respond in a timely manner to global security challenges and
non-traditional security challenges that can aggravate vulnerable political and
security situations, it is important that the Council make the best use of available
tools, particularly preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention, peacemaking and
peacekeeping mandates.
20-1278917/32

S/2020/953

Viet Nam supports the implementation of resolution 2532 (2020) and urges
all warring parties to earnestly heed the Secretary-General’s call for an immediate
global ceasefire.
On 8 August, ASEAN Foreign Ministers issued a joint statement reiterating
commitments to maintaining South-East Asia as a region of peace, security,
neutrality and stability, and strengthening peace-oriented values in the region,
in line with international law. Subsequently, at the fifty-third ASEAN Foreign
Ministers’ Meeting, held on 9 September, ASEAN members reaffirmed their
resolve to expeditiously develop a comprehensive recovery framework to move
forward ASEAN’s COVID-19 recovery efforts and underscored the importance of
strengthening cooperation with a view to mitigating the profound impacts of the
pandemic. As 2020 ASEAN Chair and a member of the Security Council for the term
2020-2021, Viet Nam is strongly committed to joining global efforts to fight our
common challenges and prevent them from undermining regional and international
peace and stability.

18/32

20-12789

S/2020/953

Annex IX
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium,
Philippe Goffin
[Original: English and French]
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for drawing the Security Council’s attention
to the issues before us today.
In recent months, we have witnessed unprecedented needs and challenges.
School closures on a massive scale have deprived children of safe learning spaces.
Lockdown measures have exposed women and children to increased levels of
domestic violence. Past epidemics have shown us the cost of deprioritizing publichealth services. Vaccination campaigns are being disrupted, and children are at
risk of dying because of a lack of regular vaccinations. In addition, mistrust and
misinformation are undermining the effectiveness of the response. Hate speech and
fake news stigmatize and fuel violence against civilians and health workers.
Armed groups are taking advantage of the health crisis to strengthen their
grip on civilian populations. In areas of protracted conflict, we see women, men,
children, refugees and internally displaced persons being pushed to the brink of
starvation. The pandemic has highlighted global challenges and served to exacerbate
inequality, fragility and the human cost of conflict.
That is why we share your concerns, Sir, about the implications of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) for almost every aspect of our lives, for our
international cooperation and for global governance.
The global challenges facing our world — conflict, poverty, climate change,
natural disasters and now COVID-19 — are a stark reminder of the true raison
d’être of the United Nations and of the simple and obvious need for enhanced
multilateral cooperation.
We therefore fully support the leadership of the Secretary-General and his
call for a global ceasefire and other initiatives to address the consequences of the
COVID-19 pandemic. We welcome the efforts of the United Nations system to
address the crisis on the ground and to implement resolution 2532 (2020).
We continue to support the World Health Organization (WHO) in its
transparent leadership of the global response to the health crisis. We call on all
Member States to share comprehensive and accurate surveillance data with WHO to
ensure the effectiveness of our collective response.
We support the humanitarian system and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in their work, their guidance across the sector and their tireless
efforts to support the most vulnerable individuals. Belgium contributes €22 million
to this multifaceted response and has contributed €5 million to the Coalition for
Epidemic Preparedness Innovations.
The European Union (EU) and its member States have spared no effort: as
part of the Team Europe package, the EU has mobilized more than €36 billion to
support partner countries in the fight against the pandemic and its impact. It intends
to mobilize up to €400 million to support WHO’s COVAX facility, which aims to
accelerate vaccine development and ensure fair and equitable access for every country
in the world. Indeed, in the words of the Secretary-General, “vaccinationalism” is
toxic, because no one is safe until everyone is safe. Solidarity is equal to self-interest.
Our discussion today must not be overshadowed by finger-pointing or
accusations. The world today cannot afford a geostrategic divide. A coordinated
20-1278919/32

S/2020/953

global response is the only way forward in the fight against these multiple
crises. This response must be based on trust and political will; fuelled by respect
for the principles and values of multilateral cooperation; and accelerated by
innovative approaches.
This also requires a Council that is “future-proof”. We lost too much time
last March and April discussing digital working methods for the Council to meet
the challenges posed by the pandemic. We took too long to reach an agreement on
resolution 2532 (2020).
What applies to working methods also applies to the means available to the
Council to implement its decisions, especially peacekeeping operations. Belgium
welcomes the fact that most of those operations have shown a great deal of flexibility
and ingenuity in continuing to carry out their mandates, despite all the restrictions,
including physical restrictions, imposed on them by COVID-19.
However, here again the Council will have to address the issue of the adaptability
of peacekeeping operations to future scenarios that are highly restrictive, such as the
one we are facing today. Otherwise, Council resolutions — or even the Council in its
own right — risk becoming less consequential.
All of us — every individual, every community, every country, every
Government and every part of the United Nations — must learn together from the
effects of the pandemic. There is no doubt that COVID-19 has changed the world and
has had an impact on everything from the way we live to the way we work. This is
not just a health or humanitarian crisis. It is an economic crisis, a security crisis, a
health crisis, a hunger crisis, a protection crisis and a human rights crisis.
These challenges only demonstrate that we need to do more, and we need to do
it together. Belgium stands ready to assume its responsibilities to this end.

20/32

20-12789

S/2020/953

Annex X
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation, Sergey Lavrov
[Original: Russian]
I should like at the outset to express my gratitude to the President of the
Republic of the Niger, Mr. Issoufou, for having organized today’s Security Council
debate on the very topical topic of global governance after the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19).
The novel coronavirus pandemic has acted as a catalyst for the transformation
of international relations. It is not only States and integration associations that
are being tested for strength but also global governance mechanisms, primarily
the United Nations. It is important to learn from current developments in a timely
manner and to draw the right conclusions in order to ensure a peaceful, secure and
stable future for all humankind.
The most important issue that the current crisis has highlighted is the
interdependence and interconnectedness of all States without exception in all spheres
of public life. Russia has long drawn attention to the transboundary nature of modern
threats, including international terrorism, the threat of the uncontrolled proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, cybercrime, drug trafficking and many more. Now
that those threats include pandemics such as the one we are experiencing today, our
calls for the development of joint responses to global challenges are becoming ever
more relevant.
This year’s events have shown that no one can simply fence themselves off
from such threats. The coronavirus disease has affected everyone, which means
that it is also necessary to jointly overcome its consequences, setting aside our
fleeting differences.
Unfortunately, our common misfortune has not smoothed out the differences
between States, but on the contrary has exacerbated many of them. The moments of
crisis that we had observed in international relations have resurfaced. A number of
countries are increasingly tempted to look abroad to assign responsibility for their
internal problems. Obvious attempts are being made by individual States to use the
current situation to promote self-serving, fleeting interests and to settle scores with
unwanted Governments or geopolitical rivals.
Despite all this, the practice of imposing unilateral, illegitimate sanctions
persists, which undermines the authority and prerogatives of the United Nations.
We have repeatedly drawn attention to the need to lift restrictions that in the context
of the pandemic hit vulnerable groups especially hard and limit their access to food
and health care. Secretary-General Guterres also called for the suspension of such
measures given current conditions. We strongly support his initiative.
The proposal by the President of the Russian Federation, Vladimir Putin, on
the introduction of so-called green corridors free of sanctions and trade wars, which
he advanced at the Group of 20 Summit in April, remains on the table. It is regrettable
that those States that apply policies of illegal sanctions continue to turn a deaf ear
to our arguments, and even more regrettable that they ignore the basic needs of
ordinary people throughout the world.
I am firmly convinced that international efforts to overcome the crisis must be
coordinated and carried out with the United Nations playing a central coordinating
role. The world Organization remains a universal and single platform for dialogue,
and its importance in the global architecture amid the pandemic has only increased.
20-1278921/32

S/2020/953

In that regard, we consider the increased attacks on the United Nations system
as a whole and its specialized agencies to be absolutely unjustified. This applies
primarily to the World Health Organization (WHO). The overwhelming majority of
countries believe that WHO acted professionally at all stages of the crisis, taking
timely and effective proactive steps in close coordination with all Member States.
Of course, the capacity of the international health-care system must be
strengthened and taken to a new level. Russia has made a significant contribution to
those efforts, as it was the first to develop and register the Sputnik V coronavirus
vaccine. We reiterate our willingness to cooperate in the epidemiological field with
all interested States and international organizations. The day before yesterday,
President Putin, in his address to the General Assembly (A/75/PV.4, annex VIII),
offered free vaccinations to United Nations personnel. That is our response to
the appeals of our United Nations colleagues. Russia, as President Putin stressed,
could not remain indifferent to those appeals. He also suggested convening a videoteleconference with all countries that are developing and producing a coronavirus
vaccine. That proposal remains on the table.
The current pandemic has turned out to be a global shift, a kind of black
swan, that has presented us with a choice: to close down and blame others for our
troubles or to emerge from the crisis together and deploy common efforts to ensure
a prosperous future of all countries and peoples. And although the choice is obvious,
the second path requires maximum political will and strategic thinking.
We believe that it is worth starting with an honest and open dialogue, primarily
among the permanent members of the Security Council, which, under the Charter of
the United Nations, bear special responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. In that vein, Russian launched an initiative to convene a summit
with the participation of those five countries, as President Vladimir Putin noted
in his statement before the General Assembly. An in-person discussion among
leaders about the principles underlying interaction among States as well as ways to
resolve the most pressing problems facing humankind would be an important step
towards strengthening collective principles in international affairs and restoring
global strategic stability during the post-pandemic period. We strongly believe that
such a meeting should be held as soon as possible, the international epidemiological
situation permitting.
It is important to reinforce existing formats for communication on the basis
of equality, cooperation and consensus, including cooperation within the Group of
20; the BRICS group, that is, Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa; and
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. We are convinced that the future of global
governance lies with those organizations that can provide flexible responses to
emerging challenges without prejudice to the United Nations-centred character of
the international architecture.
In October, the work of the Security Council will be presided over by Russia.
We will make every effort to ensure that the work of this principal organ of the United
Nations is coordinated and effective, involving constructive interaction among all its
members, and based on international law and, above all, the purpose and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.
Once again, I thank the Nigerien presidency for this very useful initiative.

22/32

20-12789

S/2020/953

Annex XI
Statement by the Minister of State in the Federal Foreign Office of
Germany, Niels Annen
I thank you, Mr. President, for having convened today’s open debate on
the issue of global governance after the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and for
providing us with an opportunity to build on the discussions held during the past
months, including during the German presidency of the Security Council.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. António
Guterres, and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, for their insightful briefings.
We are at a critical moment for the rules-based multilateral order. We need
to refocus on the positive potential of cooperation instead of on putting our own
countries first. If one of us fails, we all fail. We need to cooperate across our
regions and continents if we want to successfully fight today’s problems. In order
to mitigate and prevent the heavy impact of global crises such as COVID-19, strong
institutions and multilateral cooperation are needed. We must ensure the vitality of
those institutions.
Reform is an important aspect of these efforts. The founding principles of the
United Nations need to be upheld, including the Charter’s call on all Members of
the Organization to refrain from the threat of the use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any State. Many of the Charter’s principles are
timeless. At the same time, we must not be complacent; we need to be innovative so
that our institutions are capable of tackling today’s challenges.
The Security Council has a central role to play in bringing to life the value
of international cooperation. As we all know, the Charter endows the Council with
special stature, powers and responsibilities. Its functioning is essential not just for its
own reputation but for the reputation of the United Nations overall. The Council has
lost trust because it was not able to find clear words on a joint approach to COVID-19
over a period of months, and to date progress in implementing resolution 2532 (2020)
has been insufficient.
Let me be very clear: when the Council is exclusively seen as a gallery for
the great Powers, we all lose. It is up to all of us, permanent members and elected
members alike, to keep the Security Council relevant and functional. It has become
glaringly obvious: the Council needs to be reformed. Only then can we ensure its
authority and legitimacy.
Mention has been made of the World Health Organization (WHO), which is
a central coordinating element of the multilateral system. Comprehensive global
health protection, including pandemic preparedness and response, is possible only
if WHO is strengthened in a sustainable manner. We should see the COVID-19
pandemic as an opportunity to address existing challenges for WHO in general and
in the area of health protection in particular. At the moment, our expectations exceed
the capacities of WHO.
Innovation is also needed when it comes to dealing with emerging threats to
international peace and security. We must do more on crisis prevention and on how
to address catalysts of conflict such as human rights violations, the effects of climate
change and threats to global health. We need to advance a more preventive agenda.
And of course, for Germany, the future of multilateralism also requires a
strong role for the European Union (EU). As the EU, we have taken some important
steps in the response to the pandemic. We set up the Access to COVID-19 Tools
20-1278923/32

S/2020/953

Accelerator together with civil society partners. We launched the Coronavirus
Global Response initiative. Germany has been at the forefront of the global fight
against the pandemic, showing solidarity through practical support and as a donor.
Rest assured that we will continue to do so.
Germany unequivocally supports the United Nations and advocates a joint
approach for the international community in tackling global challenges. That is our
only chance of success. Through the framework of the Alliance for Multilateralism,
we seek to enhance the search for joint solutions. We strive to support the existing
multilateral framework when it is challenged. Tomorrow, at the invitation of Foreign
Minister Heiko Maas, foreign ministers will meet under the theme “Our Commitment
and Contribution to Building Back Better”, where initiatives in the fields of climate
change and health among others will be presented.
Let me conclude by reaffirming that my country is convinced that in this
interconnected world, multilateral cooperation is the foundation of peace, security,
prosperity, equality and justice. To uphold and strengthen this multilateral order, we
have to nurture it and invest in it. We have to invest in its legitimacy.

24/32

20-12789

S/2020/953

Annex XII
Statement by the Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia,
Mahendra Siregar
First, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for their comprehensive briefings.
This meeting is timely, for at least two reasons: the world continues to suffer
from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the United Nations is
marking its seventy-fifth year. As the Secretary-General highlighted in a previous
debate of the Security Council, COVID-19 impacts our lives in profound ways. The
pandemic may prolong existing conflicts and risk creating new ones, perpetuate poor
humanitarian conditions and insecurity and create economic and social disruptions,
thus triggering relapses of conflict.
We also see worrisome trends in the broader geopolitical reality, such as
escalating political rivalries that, at times, seem to paralyse international institutions
and emerging powers asserting their leadership in regional contexts.
Against that backdrop, I would like to reiterate three points.
First, I wish to highlight the role of the Security Council. Since the outbreak of
the pandemic, the United Nations has utilized all the tools at its disposal to respond
to it, such as the call for a global ceasefire, the COVID-19 Global Humanitarian
Response Plan, and United Nations missions on the ground. In addition, the Security
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2532 (2020), which contains important
provisions to fight COVID-19.
Moving forward, the Council should continue to play an important role. It
must continue to monitor ceasefire commitments; support the efforts of United
Nations missions on the ground in assisting host countries; ensure the delivery of
humanitarian assistance; and ensure, along with other bodies like the Peacebuilding
Commission, that peacebuilding progress is not reversed.
Secondly, beyond that role, the Security Council must respond to potential
changes in the security environment in the aftermath of the pandemic. The COVID-19
pandemic has shifted the world’s preoccupation with security threats to existential
threats. The United Nations system, including the Security Council, must rise to
that task.
It must be noted, however, that the Security Council is not the only United
Nations organ with the competence to tackle this issue. We must enhance coordination
and coherence with all United Nations bodies and organs, while leveraging individual
advantages and expertise. Synergy and the division of labour based on individual
mandates and competencies are crucial if we are to avoid overlapping and working
in silos. We must ensure that the Security Council remains responsive, adaptable and
action-oriented.
Thirdly, the pandemic is likely to accelerate the fragmentation and
recomposition of the global world order. While a coordinated international response
is more urgent than ever, power frictions could, unfortunately, reinforce factors that
render many United Nations bodies dysfunctional. That, in turn, could result in the
further erosion of trust in global institutions. Some might even argue for a total
overhaul of the principles and commitments to the global governance system.
Nevertheless, there is currently no alternative structure to help us coordinate
a better global response to the pandemic or other global calamities. A more realistic
approach is to look for room for improvement.
20-1278925/32

S/2020/953

To that end, Indonesia is of the view that it is important for the United Nations
to remain fit for purpose and enhance its relevance. That means, inter alia, better
representation to ensure inclusiveness and enhanced effectiveness, transparency,
and accountability.
The United Nations system must also move past rhetoric and deliver results.
In the short term, we must focus on facilitating access to affordable vaccines and
treatment. But, we must also develop a long-term, comprehensive strategy to recovery
and resilience. We should also continue to plan for an unpredictable future. That
requires far-sighted leadership, adaptability and a strong early warning capacity.
Lastly, the COVID-19 pandemic serves as a stern reminder that the future
demands far better international cooperation, stronger collective leadership and more
decisive action. The pandemic exposes the shortcomings of the multilateral system
and, at the same time, shows what we all can do to overcome those weaknesses.
The post-pandemic global governance that we wish to see is one in which
everyone works together with a renewed sense of global solidarity, unity and
responsibility, for the benefit of all.

Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
I am sorry to take the floor again. I wish to reiterate our appreciation to the
Niger for convening this meeting.
I would simply like to add, in addition to the statement of the Indonesian
delegation, made by the Indonesian Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs, and in the
context of today’s discussion on the COVID-19 pandemic, to draw the attention of
all Council members to the statement delivered on 22 September, the first day of the
Assembly’s high-level general debate, by President Joko Widodo.
Specifically, I would like to conclude as he did:
“A healthy world, a productive world, needs to be our priority. All of these
will only be achieved if all of us continue to work together, work together and
work together. Let us solidify our commitment and consistently carry out our
commitment to work together.” (A/75/PV.5)

26/32

20-12789

S/2020/953

Annex XIII
Statement by the Minister of State for South Asia and the
Commonwealth of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Lord Tariq Ahmad of Wimbledon
I thank President Issoufou and the Nigerien presidency for convening this
very important meeting. May I first join others in thanking the Secretary-General
for his valuable insights and commending his efforts at leading us through this global
pandemic. I also wish to thank Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat for his contribution and
the specific focus and insight he brings from Africa, as well as for the response of
the African Union.
If I may, I want to start with positives. As we face challenges, we often
forget what has truly been achieved. The United Nations system, particularly the
World Health Organization, has responded quickly to health, humanitarian and
socioeconomic needs and has deployed around the globe in places that are home
to some of the world’s most vulnerable communities. The World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund have adapted their instruments to the macroeconomic
challenges posed by the pandemic, and have worked diligently in partnership with the
United Nations. The Group of 20 moved swiftly to suspend debt-service payments
for the world’s poorest countries so that those nations are supported in their direct
efforts to protect lives first and to alleviate economic and financial crises. And,
as Minister for the Commonwealth, I note that the 54 Commonwealth Heads of
Government issued a joint statement setting out a full range of international priorities
in response to the pandemic and a commitment to work to mitigate its effects. I also
acknowledge Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, to which the United Kingdom recently
pledged over $2 billion — an organization that has seen nations come together in
search for a solution to protect people with diseases.
These examples show the international community and the global response at
its best, working together and meeting our collective needs through multilateral and
good faith efforts, with full cooperation among the States Members of the United
Nations. Yet, as much as this crisis has brought us together, there have been times
when it has driven us apart. At times, geopolitics have dampened cooperation and
hindered our agility. The pandemic has tested the international system like never
before. It is therefore in our collective interest to ensure that the multilateral system
does not just survive this crisis, but rather emerges from the COVID-19 pandemic
stronger and more united in order to cope with future challenges.
There will be a time to reflect on the lessons of this pandemic and how we
can better prepare for the next challenge. The United Nations reforms implemented
over the past two years have been shown to work, and we must continue them and
strive to improve all our international organizations. But now is not the moment to
reject international institutions. The principles that emerged from one of the darkest
periods of human history, as the Secretary-General reminded us, are needed once
again to bring us out of the lockdown and back into the light.
Preventing the indirect effects of this pandemic may prove harder still,
with implications for international peace and security. We know, for instance,
that hundreds of millions of people around the world face food insecurity. Sadly,
that will get worse. Global cooperation is therefore both critical and necessary to
avoid catastrophe. That is why the United Kingdom made a call to action to prevent
famine, with $150 million of new funding, on top of the $1 billion we have already
contributed to the international response. We also appointed a new Special Envoy
for Famine Prevention and Humanitarian Affairs, Nick Dyer. We urge all Member
States to support our collective efforts.
20-1278927/32

S/2020/953

In conclusion, let me assure all colleagues, partners and Member States that
the United Kingdom firmly stands by the values of the Charter of the United Nations.
We believe strongly in its principles of peaceful international cooperation and,
particularly, respect for human rights. This year, as we commemorate the seventyfifth anniversary of the United Nations, we should all reaffirm our commitment
to those valuable principles and, in doing so, rebuild, equip ourselves and renew
our support to ensure that we can come together to tackle challenges and seize
opportunities that lie ahead.

28/32

20-12789

S/2020/953

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
I thank Secretary-General António Guterres and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, Mr. Faki Mahamat, for their comprehensive briefings.
As we commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, we
reflect on the complex challenges facing the world, including the greatest crisis since
the establishment of the United Nations in 1945.
The coronavirus disease pandemic is a threat to international peace and
security. It has brought the world to a general halt and deepened social and economic
instability, threatening to exacerbate old and create new conflicts. It is jeopardizing
hard-won development and peacebuilding gains, and is instilling fear.
The aftermath of the pandemic has shined light on the obstacles to collective
action in conflict situations through a series of global challenges such as climate
change and famine, and has made more evident the structural flaws in the system of
global governance.
The costs of inaction have been alarming. The Council must serve as a
fundamental guarantor of global stability. The crisis calls for stronger unity to
bolster resolution 2532 (2020) with concrete actions while prioritizing global health.
The holding of this debate is therefore very timely, and we thank the Niger and
President Issoufou for their leadership.
Responding to the pandemic and its consequences requires effective and
inclusive multilateralism. A coordinated, comprehensive and people-centred response
based on solidarity, with a special focus on the most vulnerable and marginalized,
is therefore essential. Its absence would undermine efforts to mitigate the pandemic.
In that regard, we congratulate the Secretary-General and the World Health
Organization on their efforts to coordinate a global response, and pledge the support
of the Dominican Republic.
Achieving a stable balance between economic growth and social well-being
requires collective and multi-level leadership. Governments, regional organizations,
international institutions and civil society must act together in the spirit of
cooperation, driven by a coherent and integrated approach. That includes SouthSouth and triangular cooperation and working in the context of the humanitariandevelopment-peace nexus.
The pandemic has revealed the structural inequalities within and among
societies, as well as unequal access to basic services, such as education. Children,
women, refugees, migrants, internally displaced persons and people affected by
conflict are among the most vulnerable. In addition, gender-based violence, including
domestic violence, is increasing.
It is therefore essential to support vulnerable populations and to build
resilience in communities. In that regard, intercommunal violence and other forms
of insecurity deserve our urgent attention. Working directly with communities and
local peacebuilders will enable a more rapid and peaceful resolution of this crisis in
conflict-affected countries.

20-1278929/32

S/2020/953

However, there is no doubt that domestic policies alone are not the way
forward. Despite a climate of political polarization and the challenging geopolitical
dynamics, multilateral reform must prevail.
In the quest for socioeconomic revitalization in the midst of the pandemic, we
must address the humanitarian situation, strengthen the rule of law, ensure the full
and meaningful participation of women and youth in decision-making processes,
and invest in development.
In addition, global governance is needed to achieve a secure cyberspace.
The increase in cybercrime strengthens the links between terrorists and criminals.
Cyberspace requires unprecedented international collaboration to prevent the
expansion of recruitment and training activities.
The Security Council must strengthen its relationship with other organs
and entities of the United Nations system. It must be more agile, inclusive and
representative, and it must restore people’s trust — specifically the trust of those
living in conflict situations.
Global governance must be more sensitive to risk, and a change in international
power relations is critical. Channels of accountability through existing Council
mechanisms are urgently needed to ensure and monitor the implementation of the
ceasefire, in line with resolution 2532 (2020). Implementation is not yet a reality in
many situations, such as those in Syria, Yemen, Libya, Afghanistan and the Sahel.
We must ensure not only that more resources are mobilized but also that
debt is repaid, so that countries can emerge from the crisis. International financial
institutions, the private sector and donor countries are key partners in providing
rapid assistance to countries affected by conflict.
We take this opportunity to call for support for the United Nations-coordinated
humanitarian response plan in order to reduce the likelihood of the pandemic
generating the dangerous consequences we fear so much, namely, increased
instability and conflict in the years ahead.
This is the time for unity, for embracing our common humanity and for
building back better for the collective good. We are safe only if everyone is safe.

30/32

20-12789

S/2020/953

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I thank Secretary-General Guterres and President Issoufou for hosting this
important conversation.
You know, shame on each of you. I am astonished and disgusted by the
content of today’s discussion. I am actually quite ashamed of the Security Council,
in particular the members of the Council who took this opportunity to focus on
political grudges rather than the critical issue at hand. I can only say “my goodness”.
Moreover, I am disappointed on behalf of the people you are trying to reach,
by squandering this opportunity for political purposes. President Trump has made it
very clear that we will do whatever is right, even if it is unpopular, because — let
me tell members of the Council what — this is not a popularity contest. Having said
that, I intend to make my remarks today responsible and responsive to the content of
the topic at hand today.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) remains a threat to the daily lives and
livelihoods of billions around the world, and every life lost, every family harmed,
every school closed and every business shuttered is a reason for sorrow. We, as a
global community, must continue the battle and keep our sights focused keenly on
the return of better days.
The United States has been unrelenting in its efforts to combat COVID-19,
both at home and abroad. As President Trump noted in his address to the General
Assembly at the general debate at its seventy-fifth session (A/75/PV.4, annex II), our
nation launched the most aggressive national mobilization since the Second World
War to address the pandemic. That has meant huge investments in treatment and care,
as well as activating a nationwide vaccine-development effort. Those actions have
saved countless lives and hold the prospect of bringing the pandemic to a swift end.
To date, we have also allocated more than $20 billion to benefit the international
response, including commitments for vaccine development, therapeutics and
medical infrastructure. This funding, provided by generous American taxpayers,
is saving lives in more than 120 countries around the world. In addition, we are
actively supporting the Secretary-General’s call to provide resources for the United
Nations response. The United States has contributed more than $900 million to the
United Nations response, by far the most of any country to date, and let me just name
the most recent contributions of a few of those countries: the Niger, $4.6 million;
South Africa, $8.4 million; Indonesia, $5 million; Viet Nam, $9.5 million; and
Tunisia, $600,000.
However, as our spending continues to outpace available resources, it is not
sustainable for any country or handful of countries to meet the lion’s share of the
growing needs. The Trump Administration will continue to catalyse the international
response to this pandemic, and we encourage others to join us by devoting greater
resources to common objectives.
As we continue to mobilize resources, we must also reinforce the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal for a global ceasefire as expressed in resolution 2532 (2020), with
the understanding that legitimate and necessary counter-terrorism efforts will
continue. Faithfully implemented, ceasefires would provide a necessary respite
for women, children and men on the front lines of violence and conflict, who are
therefore particularly vulnerable to the virus.

20-1278931/32

S/2020/953

Unfortunately, early signs show a slipping of compliance in conflict zones,
and many countries are in fact now experiencing an escalation of violence. We
condemn in the strongest possible terms terrorist organizations that have taken
advantage of this difficult situation to escalate fighting and violence, and we call
upon State sponsors of terror, most notably the Islamic Republic of Iran, to finally
and completely cease funding and arming terrorists around the world.
As President Trump clearly stated in his speech before the General Assembly
on Tuesday, to chart out a better future, “we must hold accountable the nation
which unleashed this plague onto the world: China” (A/75/PV.4, p. 17). The Chinese
Communist Party’s decision to hide the origins of this virus, minimize its danger and
suppress scientific cooperation transformed a local epidemic into a global pandemic.
More importantly, those decisions have cost hundreds of thousands — hundreds of
thousands — of lives around the world.
The actions of the Chinese Communist Party prove that not all States Members
of the United Nations are equally committed to public health, transparency and
their international obligations. This fact should deeply trouble all of the responsible
nations of the world that are working in good faith to defeat COVID-19 and keep
future pandemics from emerging. We must all recommit to the full and rapid sharing
of public health data with each other; that is essential from both a containment
perspective and a moral perspective.
Equally troubling is the danger posed by corrupt international organizations.
The World Health Organization (WHO) was for many years considered a centre
of science over politics and of data over bias. That is why the United States was
always the single-largest funder. That reputation lies in tatters today after the WHO
assisted in the Chinese campaign to withhold cooperation and lie to the world. To
this day, the world’s scientists still do not have a complete understanding of the
origins, characteristics and spread of the virus — an understanding that only the
Chinese Communist Party can provide. Going forward, the international community
must place accountability and transparency at the centre of our efforts to address
threats to global health.
Its lack of independence, transparency and accountability is why President
Trump made the decision for the United States to withdraw from the WHO and why
we will continue to call for reform of the organization while we shift our global health
resources to support other, more credible partners and more credible countries.
This pandemic spares us little time to absorb its lessons, but we must try to
do so, nevertheless. The impacts of COVID-19 have been felt by all of us and must
be a source of unity, not division. Each of us must commit to working together in
transparency and in good faith.
The United States — the Trump Administration — will continue to lead the
way, as we always have done. We remain firmly committed to a safer and more
secure world.

32/32

20-12789
