S/2016/272

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 March 2016
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the twenty-fifth is submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of Security Council
resolution 2165 (2014), paragraph 5 of Security Council resolution 2191 (2014) and
paragraph 5 of Security Council resolution 2258 (2015), in which the Council
requested the Secretary-General to report, every 30 days, on the implementation of
the resolutions by all parties to the conflict in the Syria n Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on the data available to United
Nations agencies on the ground, from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic,
other Syrian sources as well as open sources. Data from United Nations agencies
on their humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the period from 1 to
29 February 2016. More recent data have been included when available.

II. Major developments
A.

Developments on the ground
3.
The statement adopted by the International Syria Support Group on
11 February 2016 in Munich and the adoption of resolution 2268 (2016) by the
Security Council on 26 February 2016, which outlined the terms of the cessation of
hostilities, resulted in some positive changes on the ground during the latter part of
the reporting period. Since 26 February, the establishment by the International Syria
Support Group of the task force on humanitarian access, on 12 February, has
underpinned a greater focus on access and reaching people in need. The United
Nations has delivered assistance to 150,000 people in 10 of the 18 besieged areas,
through the efforts of United Nations inter-agency convoys, plus tens of thousands
more in hard-to-reach areas. The cessation of hostilities, which started on
27 February, has held by and large. Various sources have reported that the number
of military activities and air strikes has decreased significantly. The Support Group
task force on the ceasefire continues to monitor the situation and take steps to
sustain the cessation of hostilities. The United Nations operations centre,

16-04510 (E)

240316

*1604510*

S/2016/272

established in support of the task force on the ceasefire, has received reports of a
broad range of incidents of non-compliance, from air strikes and ground offensives
to sporadic gunfire and exchange of mortars in isolated areas.
4.
In February, prior to the cessation of hostilities, widespread conflict and high
levels of violence continued throughout the Syrian Arab Republic. Indiscriminate
and disproportionate aerial bombings and ground attacks by Government forces,
supported by their allies, and indiscriminate shelling by non -State armed opposition
groups and designated terrorist groups 1 continued to kill, injure and displace
civilians. The conduct of hostilities by all parties was characterized by a widespread
disregard for the rules of international humanitarian law and the obligation of all
parties to protect civilians. The United Nations and partners received reports that
over 177,000 people were displaced across seven governorates in February.
5.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) documented attacks by all parties to the conflict, as well as unattributed
attacks that resulted in the killing of more than 470 civilia ns and injuring of
hundreds more during the reporting period. 2 These included air strikes and shelling
with the use of artillery, barrel bombs, mortars and rockets, as well as car and
suicide bombings in populated areas. Private property, civilian infrastr ucture and
protected structures, such as schools and hospitals, also continued to be damaged
and destroyed.
6.
Fighting continued throughout Aleppo governorate until the cessation of
hostilities went into effect. Government of Syria ground offensives in no rthern
Aleppo, backed by heavy aerial support by Syrian and Russian Federation air assets,
reportedly resulted in many civilian deaths in February, according to open sources.
In addition, over 63,000 people were displaced from eastern Aleppo city and
northern rural areas of the city, mostly to areas close to the border with Turkey.
Civilian infrastructure was also severely damaged. According to information
received by OHCHR, on 1 and 2 February, air strikes hit two clinics in Anadan,
rendering them out of service and killing eight civilians. On 15 February, air strikes
allegedly hit two schools in Atareb and Azaz, reportedly killing 15 people and
injuring many students, according to open sources. Meanwhile, Syrian Democratic
Forces also launched advances against non-State armed opposition groups in
northern Aleppo governorate. In southern Aleppo governorate, Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) temporarily seized the strategic town of Khanaser from
Government forces for several days; as a result, the main supply road was cut from
Homs into Aleppo province from 19 to 29 February.
7.
In Aleppo city and surrounding areas, fighting continued between Government
forces and their allies, non-State armed opposition groups and ISIL, resulting in
__________________
1

On 30 May 2013, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the Nusrah Front were
designated as terrorist groups by the Security Council in accordance with resolution 1267 (1999).
The two groups operate in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2
These figures are based on incidents documented by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) during the reporting period according to its human
rights monitoring methodology. It is not a full representation of all incidents that may have
impacted civilians during the reporting period. Despite repeated requests, the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic has not granted access to its territory to either OHCHR or the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic established by the Human
Rights Council.

2/17

16-04510

S/2016/272

death and injury. For example, OHCHR reported that on 7 and 8 February, two air
strikes hit residential areas of Aleppo city and Kafr Hamra village, reportedly
killing 38 civilians. Meanwhile, non-State armed opposition groups also continued
the shelling of Government-controlled neighbourhoods, including Suleimaniya and
Masaken al-Sabeel, reportedly killing over 40 civilians, including at least
12 children, and injuring nearly 50, according to open sources. On 24 February,
according to OHCHR, mortars fell on the predominantly Kurdish-inhabited area of
Sheikh Maqsoud, killing 19 civilians, including three children, according to open
sources. Fighting, including sniper fire, has reportedly continued in March between
the Kurdish People’s Protection Unit (YPG) forces and non -State armed groups
along the Castello route, one of the last remaining major routes into the eastern part
of Aleppo city. Meanwhile, the water supply to Aleppo governorate from
Al Khafseh water treatment facilities on the Euphrates River was restored on
3 March, after being cut in mid-January by ISIL, restoring services to 2 million
people.
8.
In Idlib governorate, towns controlled by non-State armed opposition groups
were subjected to air strikes by the Government and its allied forces, causing
destruction and civilian death and injury. On 15 February, according to OHCHR,
missiles allegedly fired by pro-Government forces hit two hospitals in Maarat
al-Numan, killing at least 15 civilians. According to OHCHR, on 24 February, air
strikes from unknown sources repeatedly hit a marketplace in Ariha, killing
13 civilians, including two children, and injuring 28 civilians. Civilian
infrastructure was also affected by the fighting. For instance, on 17 February, air
strikes reportedly hit a school in Taftanaz, killing a teacher and injuring several
students, according to open sources. Fighting across Idlib governorate displaced
over 12,000 people in early and mid-February.
9.
In Latakia governorate, fighting also continued between Government forces,
with Syrian and Russian air support, and non-State armed opposition groups. On
18 February, Government forces regained control of the town of Kansaba in the
Akrad mountains. The fighting has displaced over 3,700 people in Latakia
governorate, from Kansaba to Darkoush in Jisr al-Shoughur district, and from
Rabeea to Harim in Idlib governorate.
10. Fighting was also reported in Damascus and Rif Dimashq governorates.
Fighting between Government forces, backed by Russian and Syrian air support,
and non-State armed opposition groups, continued in and around Madimayet
Elsham and eastern Ghutah, as well as the Jobar district in Damascus. Information
received by OHCHR indicates that some 46 civilians were killed and dozens injured
as a result of multiple air strikes on the besieged town of Madimayet Elsham and
towns in eastern Ghutah during February. For example, on 1 February, a mortar
struck a school in Baqqin in Rif Dimashq, killing one student and injuring at least
three others, according to open sources. On 10 February, OHCHR received
allegations that cluster munitions were used on residential areas of Duma,
reportedly killing eight civilians, including five children, and injuring 24 civilians,
including five children. On 18 February, according to information received by
OHCHR, Government forces dropped barrel bombs on residential areas of Al -Marj
area in eastern Ghutah, reportedly killing eight civilians, including a child, and
destroying Al-Marj Hospital. On 19 and 26 February, OHCHR reported that
pro-Government forces carried out air strikes on Duma, including on residential
areas, killing 14 civilians, including six children, and injuring at least 27. On the

16-04510

3/17

S/2016/272

same day, OHCHR indicated that at least nine civilians were allegedly killed and
four injured when Government forces dropped scores of barrel bombs, and artillery
and missiles were fired on Darayya.
11. Non-State armed opposition groups and designated terrorist groups also
launched several attacks in Damascus and Rif Dimashq, with the city of Damascus
subjected to shelling and mortar attacks prior to the cessation of hostilities. OHCHR
reported that ISIL claimed responsibility for the explosion of a vehicle -borne
improvised explosive device on 9 February in the Masaken Barzeh area of
Damascus, killing seven civilians and injuring 15 others. ISIL also claimed
responsibility for a suicide bombing on a marketplace in the Sayyida Zeinab shrine
area in Rif Dimashq on 21 February, killing 83 civilians, including many women
and children, and injuring over 100.
12. Fighting was reported in the southern rural parts of Hama and northern
countryside of Homs during February, particularly around the towns of Hirbnafsah,
Hola, Talbiseh and Rastan. Humanitarian conditions in those areas reportedly
continue to deteriorate. In Homs city, civilian casualties and injuries were also
reported as a result of attacks by designated terrorist groups. For example,
information received by OHCHR indicated that on 21 February, two vehicle -borne
improvised explosive devices were detonated in the neighbourhood of Al-Zahra in
Homs city, killing at least 56 civilians and injuring over 100. The attack was
claimed by ISIL. The local agreement in place in Al Wa’er, Homs, also continued to
hold, despite reported violations of the agreement and the fact that some p rovisions
of the agreement remain to be implemented.
13. In Dayr al-Zawr governorate, on 2 February, ISIL reportedly fired mortars at
Joura in the besieged parts of Dayr al-Zawr city, resulting in the killing of three
children and injuring nine civilians, including two children. On 23 February,
according to information received by OHCHR, ISIL fired mortar rounds on Joura,
reportedly killing at least five civilians, including a child.
14. In Hasakah governorate, OHCHR received reports of air strikes from unk nown
sources hitting civilian infrastructure and killing at least 67 civilians. For example,
on 16 February, air strikes struck the only operating bakery in Al -Shaddadi town,
reportedly killing at least 18 civilians, including many women and children queui ng
for bread, and injuring at least 15. On the following day, air strikes hit southern
rural Hasakah, reportedly killing 36 civilians, including women and children, and
injuring 30 others.
15. Fighting continued in southern Syria during the reporting perio d. In Dar’a
governorate, Government forces backed by air support advanced further south by
seizing control of the towns of Atman and Sheikh Miskine. OHCHR received
reports of 25 civilian casualties as a result of heavy fighting, including from mortar
attacks. The Government of Syria informed OHCHR that on 3 February, mortar
attacks carried out by non-State armed opposition groups killed 17 civilians and
injured 101 people, including women and children, when civilians were heading to
their places of work and study. On 9 February, Médecins sans frontières announced
publicly that air strikes had hit a hospital supported by the organization in Dar’a
governorate, killing three people and wounding at least six, including a nurse. On
14 February, a school in Al-Balad was reportedly fired upon by unknown
perpetrators, severely injuring at least three children attending classes. In February,
over 50,000 people are estimated to have been displaced in Dar’a as a result of the

4/17

16-04510

S/2016/272

fighting. At the end of February, a local agreement was reportedly reached in Ibtta’a
and Da’el between Government forces and local community representatives.
16. The Russian Federation as well as the United States of America -led coalition
forces continued to carry out air strikes in Syria througho ut February, according to
reports received from official sources. While not providing data for the full month,
the Russian Ministry of Defence confirmed that it had carried out over 1,253
“combat sorties” in February, engaging 5,796 targets in the governor ates of Aleppo,
Hasakah, Raqqa, Dar’a, Dayr al-Zawr, Hama, Homs and Latakia. Meanwhile, the
United States Central Command confirmed that at least 189 strikes were carried out
by the coalition in the month of February against ISIL targets in the governorate s of
Aleppo, Hasakah, Raqqa and Dayr al-Zawr. OHCHR received numerous reports of
air strikes reportedly carried out by international actors in which civilians were
killed or injured, including in Aleppo, Raqqa, Dayr al-Zawr, Idlib and Hasakah
governorates. Some 113 people were reportedly killed and dozens more injured in
those air strikes. However, OHCHR was not able to adequately verify the origin of
the reported air strikes.

B.

Human rights
17. The scale and severity of violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law and human rights abuses, including abductions, summary
executions, degrading and inhumane treatment, and the recruitment of children,
remained grave during the reporting period.
18. The Office of the High Commissioner received reports that, on 12 February,
the police faction of the Kurdish People’s Protection Unit, the Assayish, raided the
house of an Arab lawyer, south of Tel Abyad in Raqqa governorate, and forcibly
detained him, allegedly for having been outspoken regardi ng abuses against
civilians committed by YPG forces. OHCHR also reported that on 5 February, YPG
forces demolished the houses of 41 civilians in the Al -Eghebish area of Tal Tamer,
Hasakah governorate, accusing the Arab owners of being ISIL supporters.
19. OHCHR received information that on 22 February, the Assayish allegedly
forcibly recruited a 14-year-old boy in the Al-Iskan neighbourhood of Tel Abyad in
Raqqa governorate. Additionally, OHCHR received information of at least 11 cases
of children aged between 12 and 16 being forcibly recruited into YPG and taken to
the Ain al-Batt camp in Aleppo governorate.
20. On 5 February, ISIL reportedly stoned a man to death for adultery in Albo
Kamal in Dayr al-Zawr governorate. On 6 February, ISIL allegedly shot a woman
and her son-in-law for blasphemy in Al-Mayadeen in Dayr al-Zawr governorate. On
7 February, in the same town, ISIL reportedly beheaded a man and woman for
blasphemy. On 10 February, ISIL released video footage showing the execution of
four men from Raqqa governorate, who were placed in a car filled with explosives.
A young child was shown detonating the explosives from a safe distance. The four
men had been arrested by ISIL approximately two months earlier on the grounds of
spying.
21. During the reporting period, according to information received by OHCHR,
ISIL allegedly released some of the civilians who were detained while fleeing an
ISIL attack on the besieged area of Al-Bghiliya, Dayr al-Zawr governorate in

16-04510

5/17

S/2016/272

January 2016. OHCHR also reported that on 22 February, ISIL freed the final group
of Syrian Assyrians it was holding. They were part of a group of least 200 Syrian
Assyrians that ISIL had detained in February 2015.

C.

Humanitarian response
22. In February 2016, United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners
continued to reach millions of people in need through all modalities from within the
Syrian Arab Republic and across borders pursuant to resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014) and 2258 (2015) (see table 1). Non-governmental organizations also
continued to deliver assistance to people, in line with the figures recorded in
previous months. The Government of Syria continued to provide basic services to
areas under its control as well as in many areas beyond its control.
Table 1
Number of people reached by organizations in February 2016
Organization

Number of people reached

Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations

– (procurement of inputs for
spring planting season)

International Organization for Migration

35 000

Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees

485 000

United Nations Children’s Fund

1 500 000

United Nations Development Programme

321 000

United Nations Population Fund

266 000

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East

336 000

World Food Programme

3 800 000

World Health Organization

810 000

Note: United Nations and International Organization for Migration figures only. No information
was received from national non-governmental organizations or from international
non-governmental organizations.

23. Cross-border deliveries continued during the reporting period. As at
29 February, the United Nations and its implementing partners had sent
283 shipments from Turkey and Jordan to the Syrian Arab Republic under the terms
of resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015), benefiting millions of
people. Map 1 contained in the annex to the present report provides more
information on United Nations cross-border convoys in February (see annex). In
line with Security Council resolutions, the United Nations notified the Syrian
authorities in advance of each shipment, including content, destination and number

6/17

16-04510

S/2016/272

of beneficiaries. No reports were received of any convoys being refused or found to
be irregular.
24. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism continued its operations in Jordan
and Turkey. In February, it monitored 27 United Nations humanitarian shipments
consisting of 709 trucks, confirming the humanitarian nature of each, and notifying
the Syrian authorities after each shipment. The Monitoring Mechanism continued to
benefit from excellent cooperation with the Governments of Jordan and Turkey.
25. In February and early March 2016, inter-agency convoys to the besieged and
hard-to-reach locations listed in table 2 below were completed, assisting almost
259,000 people in need (see also annex, map 2).
Table 2
Inter-agency convoys from February to mid-March 2016
Date

Location

Type of assistance

4 February

Al Wa’er (Homs)

Food, health, non-food items,
nutrition, water and sanitation
support and education supplies.
Medical supplies, including
surgical items and diarrhoea kits
were removed by Government
security forces

17 February

Madimayet Elsham (Rif
Dimashq)

First half of the intended food
and wheat flour, health and
nutrition supplies. Some health
materials were not allowed onto
the convoy

Foah, Kefraya (Idlib)

Food, wheat flour, medicines,
nutrition

Madaya (Rif Dimashq)

Food, wheat flour, medicines,
nutrition

Zabadani (Rif Dimashq)

Food, wheat flour, nutrition

Madimayet Elsham (Rif
Dimashq)

Second half of the intended food
and wheat flour, health and
nutrition supplies. A dialysis
machine and medicine were
permitted, but other health
materials were not allowed onto
the convoy

23 February

16-04510

7/17

S/2016/272

Date

Location

Type of assistance

Kafr Batna town, Kafr Batna
subdistrict (Rif Dimashq)

Food, medicines, medical and
nutrition supplies. A portion of
the planned medicines, medical
and nutrition supplies were
removed by the Ministry of
Health

29 February

Madimayet Elsham (Rif
Dimashq)

Water and sanitation support,
non-food items

2 March

Madimayet Elsham (Rif
Dimashq)

Portions of the previously
excluded medicine and medical
supplies

4 March

Ain Tarma, Hazzeh and Saqba, in
Kafr Batna subdistrict (Rif
Dimashq)

Food, medicines, medical and
nutrition supplies. A portion of
the planned medicines, medical
and nutrition supplies were
removed by the Ministry of
Health

7 March

Beit Sawa, Hammura and Jisreen
in Kafr Batna subdistrict (Rif
Dimashq)

Food, medicines, medical and
nutrition supplies. A portion of
the planned medicines, medical
and nutrition supplies were
removed by the Ministry of
Health

16 March

Boudan (Rif Dimashq)

Food, wheat flour, medicine,
medical, nutrition supplies and
non-food items

26. In February, United Nations agencies also undertook single agency deliveries
to cross-line and hard-to-reach locations. For example, the World Food Programme
(WFP), in coordination with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, reached 19,000 people
through cross-line deliveries in Tiba, Jirud and Raheiba, Rif Dimashq, as well as
Tleisiyeh in Hama. The World Health Organization (WHO), through its focal points,
sent 25 malaria diagnostic kits each to Dayr al-Zawr and Raqqa governorates. The
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) delivered assistance to some 40,000
people in the formerly besieged areas of Nubul and Zahraa in Aleppo governorate.
In response to the water crisis in Aleppo, UNICEF continued to tr ansport water into
western Aleppo, sufficient to meet the needs of 375,000 people on a daily basis. On
23 February, UNICEF commenced transporting water to parts of eastern Aleppo to
meet the needs of an estimated 30,000 people.
Humanitarian access
27. Notwithstanding the recent progress made in accessing some besieged and
hard-to-reach locations, the delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in need of

8/17

16-04510

S/2016/272

assistance in the Syrian Arab Republic remained challenging in many areas of the
country as a result of active conflict, shifting conflict lines and deliberate
restrictions by the parties on the movement of people and goods.
28. Access to the 4.6 million people living in besieged and hard -to-reach locations
remained of critical concern. During the reporting period, the United Nations
agencies and partners reached 48 of the 154 hard-to-reach locations (31 per cent).
Details of assistance to people in hard-to-reach areas in February 2016 are contained
in table 3 below. Nearly half of the people in hard -to-reach areas are in areas
controlled by ISIL, in which the United Nations has extremely limited access.
Table 3
United Nations deliveries to the 4.6 million people in hard-to-reach areas,
February 2016
Sector (United Nations delivery only)

Number of people reached (as percentage of 4.6 million)

Food security

359 000 (7.9)

Health

294 000 (6.4)

Non-food items

160 000 (3.5)

Water, sanitation and hygiene

65 882 (1.4)

29. Since the beginning of 2016, 58 inter-agency convoy requests have been
submitted, to reach 1.87 million people in need across 47 besieged and hard -toreach locations, the status of which is outlined in table 4 below. On 10 March, the
Government of Syria approved United Nations requests to reach 15 hard -to-reach
locations. In addition, the Government of Syria requested the United Nations to
assist a number of other areas in Aleppo, Latakia and Rif Dimashq governorates. On
17 March, under simplified procedures proposed by the Government of Syria, the
United Nations submitted an inter-agency convoy plan to reach 356,200 people in
11 hard-to-reach and besieged areas, in April. Altogether, the United Nations and
partners aim to reach 1.1 million people in 26 besieged and hard -to-reach locations
through inter-agency convoys by end of April, if all approvals are granted and
convoys proceed.
Table 4
Status of inter-agency convoy requests in 2016
Status of requests

Number of requests

Approved and proceeded

13

Approved in principle; awaiting final facilitation letters

11

Submitted and pending approval by the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic

34

Total submitted in 2016

58

30. Active conflict in several governorates hindered the effective delivery of
humanitarian assistance, as well as people’s access to essential services. Major

16-04510

9/17

S/2016/272

supply routes from Damascus to southern Syria, as well as north to Aleppo,
remained vulnerable to insecurity due to ongoing clashes. For example, the
Khanaser road, which connects Aleppo to Homs, was closed from 19 to 29 February
due to an attack by ISIL. The closure affected all United Nations field missions to
and from Aleppo, as well as the dispatch of humanitarian supplies. The disruption of
the supply line reportedly resulted in drastic increases in the price of food and fuel
and in shortages of fresh products in Aleppo. Meanwhile, the frequent disruptions of
the Homs-Salamiyeh-Hama road, owing to fighting along the route, continue to
affect all United Nations missions to Hama. Fighting and shifting conflict lines in
Aleppo governorate in early February also continued to disrupt humanitarian
operations, particularly from Turkey into eastern Aleppo cit y.
31. Deliberate interference and restrictions by the parties also continued to prevent
aid delivery. For example, WFP continued to be unable to reach people in need in
areas of the country controlled by ISIL, due to the inability to work independently
and to monitor activities. This affected some 720,000 people in almost all of Dayr
al-Zawr and Raqqa governorates, parts of rural Aleppo and eastern rural Homs, as
well as pockets of southern rural Hasakah and north-western rural Hama.
Meanwhile, 14 requests from WFP to the Syrian authorities to reach 67,310 people
in Herne, Al-Qastal, Al-Tal and Halbon were not approved, on account of security
issues.
32. The Nusaybin/Qamishly crossing in Hasakah governorate has been
temporarily closed by the Turkish authorities, as a result of security concerns, since
27 December 2015. The price of most of the basic food commodities has reportedly
increased by up to 100 per cent since November 2015 in the governorate. Reports
have been received that people have adopted extre me coping strategies, including
eating only one meal per day and drastically reducing the types of food consumed.
33. On 1 March, the Syrian Ministry of Foreign Affairs sent a note verbale to the
United Nations proposing simplified procedures for the appro val of inter-agency
convoys across conflict lines that would reduce the number of steps in the process
and improve predictability in the timelines. Under the new mechanism, the
Government of Syria would advise its approval of a monthly plan for inter -agency
convoys of the United Nations and partners to besieged and hard -to-reach locations,
within seven working days of receipt of the plan. All necessary facilitation letters
for the movement of the convoy would be approved within three working days. On
17 March, the United Nations submitted the first monthly inter -agency convoy plan
pursuant to the new procedures.
34. As of 29 February, 67 United Nations visa requests (either new visas or
renewals) remained pending, 31 of which had exceeded the 15 working day limit. In
February, a total of 108 visas for United Nations staff from nine different agencies
were approved, 44 of which were new visas and 64 of which were renewals.
35. A total of 16 international non-governmental organizations are authorized to
operate in the Syrian Arab Republic. Two additional international non -governmental
organizations have applied to the Government of Syria for approval to operate. Such
organizations continued to face a series of administrative hurdles and restrictions
that affect their ability to operate, including in gaining permission to undertake
independent needs assessments. The Government of Syria, however, has expressed a
willingness to address, on a case-by-case and temporary basis, long-standing

10/17

16-04510

S/2016/272

requests to partner with national humanitarian organizations and to open sub offices.
36. The number of national non-governmental organizations authorized to partner
with United Nations organizations increased from 141 to 142 in February.
Authorized national non-governmental organizations continue to operate under
complex procedures in partnering with United Nations agencies.
Besieged areas
37. Of the 4.6 million people living in hard-to-reach areas, some 486,700 people
remained besieged. This includes some 274,200 people besieged b y the Government
of Syria in various locations in Rif Dimashq; 6,000 people besieged by the
Government of Syria and non-State armed opposition groups in Yarmouk in
Damascus; some 200,000 people in Dayr al-Zawr city who are besieged by ISIL;
and some 12,500 people who are besieged by non-State armed opposition groups
and the Nusrah Front in Foah and Kefraya in Idlib governorate.
38. Some progress was recorded in reaching besieged areas during February and
early March. In February and early March, some 150,00 0 people (31 per cent) were
assisted in 10 of the 18 besieged areas through inter-agency convoys, while some
people in Yarmouk could go and receive assistance in Yalda, an adjacent town.
However, the Syrian authorities have not granted approvals for parts of eastern
Ghutah (including Duma, Harasta, Arbin, Zamalka and Zabadin) and Darayya
despite repeated requests from the United Nations. Humanitarian conditions in these
areas are reportedly dire; the United Nations stands ready to deliver assistance to
these besieged locations as soon as access is granted. The flow of commercial
supplies through official routes remained largely blocked, leading to high prices for
the commodities that reach besieged areas through unofficial and irregular supply
lines. Freedom of movement remained heavily restricted, though limited numbers
were sporadically allowed to exit and re-enter some besieged areas.
39. In eastern Ghutah, Rif Dimashq, some 176,500 people remain besieged by
Government forces in the following locations: Duma, eastern Harasta, Arbin,
Zamalka, Ain Tarma, Hammura, Jisrein, Kafr Batna, Saqba and Zabadin. The United
Nations and Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoys reached Kafr Batna town, Ain
Tarma, Saqba, Jisrein and Hammura on 23 February and 4 and 7 March, delive ring
multisectoral assistance for some 46,800 people overall. A portion of the planned
medical supplies were not allowed to be loaded onto each of the convoys by
Ministry of Health officials, despite prior approval from Syrian authorities. Some
items for the prevention of child malnutrition were also rejected. As part of the
4 March convoy, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, in cooperation with UNICEF, WHO
and the Ministry of Health, delivered 21,000 vaccines to its Duma sub -branch for
distribution throughout eastern Ghutah. A rapid assessment found no evident sign of
malnutrition, with local organizations noting that access to food was not a problem
as the area surrounding Kafr Batna is fertile agricultural land and a variety of meat
and dairy sources are accessible. It was observed that there was a very high level of
recruitment of children by armed groups. Meanwhile, mobility restrictions for
students were reported, blocking their access to tertiary education.
40. In Madaya (and Buqayn) in Rif Dimashq governorate, some 42,000 people
remain besieged by Government forces. Reports of severe malnutrition continue to
be received. In Foah and Kefraya in Idlib governorate, some 12,500 people remain

16-04510

11/17

S/2016/272

besieged by non-State armed opposition groups and the Nusrah Front. United
Nations and Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoys delivered multisectoral assistance
sufficient for one month for the populations of Madaya, Foah and Kefraya on
17 February. UNICEF inpatient stabilization units were rejected from the loading
list and therefore not loaded onto the convoys.
41. In Zabadani, in Rif Dimashq governorate, some 700 people remain besieged
by Government forces. On 17 February, a United Nations and Syrian Arab Red
Crescent convoy delivered multisectoral assistance for 1,000 people, sufficient for
one month, to Zabadani.
42. In Darayya, in Rif Dimashq, about 4,000 people remain besieged by
Government forces. The United Nations has been unable to deliver assistance to
Darayya since November 2012.
43. In Madimayet Elsham, in Rif Dimashq, about 45,000 people remain besieged
by Government forces. The United Nations and Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoys
delivered assistance to Madimayet Elsham on 17, 23 and 29 February. Government
security forces removed health-care items, including midwifery kits and diarrhoea
kits. A portion of these materials were subsequently delivered to Madimayet Elsham
on 2 March. A rapid assessment found many cases of family separation, lack of civil
registration, lack of documentation renewal, increased child marriag e, child
recruitment by non-State armed groups and lack of access to education. In addition,
a significant number of female-headed households and many unaccompanied and
separated children were recorded. A number of armed teenagers were also observed.
44. In Yarmouk, in Damascus, some 6,000 people are besieged by Government
forces and non-State armed opposition groups. All operations of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in
Yarmouk remained suspended in February. However, on 13 February, UNRWA was
given blanket permission to resume food distributions in neighbouring Yalda for the
first time since June 2015. UNRWA completed its first round of aid delivery in
Yalda, reaching a total of 5,700 families, including families who could come from
Yarmouk to collect the aid, with food and non-food items. During distribution
missions, UNRWA staff observed that compared to the situation during its
operations in April 2015, there was noticeably less desperation in the appearance
and demeanour of the refugees coming forward to receive food and other assistance.
45. In the Government-controlled western neighbourhoods of Dayr al-Zawr city,
some 200,000 people are besieged by ISIL. The humanitarian situation in the
besieged area continues to deteriorate, with shortages of food and medical care and
severe malnutrition reported during the reporting period. On 24 February, WFP
carried out its first test of a high altitude airdrop over the besieged city, dropping
food assistance sufficient for 2,500 people. However, the operation encountered
technical difficulties as a result of changing weather conditions and unexpected high
winds. Some of the food pallets that were airdropped drifted astray and are so far
unaccounted for or cannot be reached, while others landed in or around the drop
zone but were damaged, as the parachutes did not open properly. Given the
complexity of the operation, WFP is working to find solutions for the technical
issues encountered and is carrying out tests in Jordan, to attempt again to airdrop
life-saving aid for the besieged population.

12/17

16-04510

S/2016/272

Free passage of medical supplies, personnel and equipment
46. While health-care facilities have special protected status under international
humanitarian law, attacks on medical facilities continue unabated. The United
Nations and health partners received reports, which are in the process of being
verified by the United Nations and partner organizations, of 30 attacks on medical
facilities in February.
47. The World Health Organization and other health partners delivered some
294,000 medical treatments in hard-to-reach and cross-line locations in Aleppo,
Idlib, Rif Dimashq, Homs, Dayr al-Zawr and Raqqa governorates. Between
31 January and 5 February 2016, WHO supported partners for a round of polio
vaccination in Talbiseh, Rastan and Houle in northern rural Homs, which reached
39,769 children under the age of five, more than 95 per cent of the target. Since
mid-February, UNICEF has supported a local polio vaccination campaign in Raqqa
for 200,000 children under five. On 16 February, UNICEF delivered a shipment of
routine immunization supplies to Dayr al-Zawr to reactivate routine immunization
services for the first time since April 2015. These services will target 40,000
children under one year of age.
48. In 2016, WHO has submitted 17 individual requests to the Government of
Syria to send medicines and medical supplies to hard-to-reach and besieged
locations in nine governorates, targeting over 2.5 million people. Two of these
requests have been approved, to send a mobile clinic to Madaya and to deliver
medicines and medical supplies to eastern Aleppo city, while the remaining
15 requests are pending. WHO has further received two approvals for requests
submitted in 2015 to reach Duma, Rastan, Talbiseh and Taldu in northern rural
Homs.
49. Despite the improved access to besieged areas, some 80,000 medical
treatments were not allowed on, or removed from, humanitarian convoys to
besieged areas during the reporting period. Some 60,700 medical treatments were
removed from the convoy to Madimayet Elsham on 17 February, including 50 per
cent of the items from the inter-agency emergency health kits, 90 per cent of the
items from the midwifery kits and 50 per cent of the items from the diarrhoea kits.
The removed items included trauma kits, antibiotics and gastrointestinal,
psychotropic and life-saving medicines, among others. On 2 March, the Government
of Syria allowed the United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent to deliver a
portion of these materials to health-care facilities inside Madimayet Elsham. For the
convoy to Kafr Batna on 23 February, 18,500 medical treatments were not allowed
to be loaded onto convoys, including tablets and ampoules for mental health needs,
15 burn kits, one steam sterilizer, 30,000 ampoules and vials of locally procured
antibiotics, analgesics, life-saving medicines and 34 items of standard WHO trauma
kits. Items for the prevention of child malnutrition were also rejected. The United
Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent continue to request permission to include
these materials in planned convoys to these areas.
Safety and security of staff and premises
50. On 2 February, two staff members of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent were killed
when an air strike hit their vehicle while distributing bread near Anadan in Aleppo
governorate.

16-04510

13/17

S/2016/272

51. On 10 February a joint WFP/UNHCR convoy travelling from Damascus to
Aleppo was caught in crossfire while passing through a Government of Syria
checkpoint near Salamiyeh. The convoy managed to escape safely and proceeded
onwards to Aleppo. All convoy participants were safe and no damage to the vehicles
was reported.
52. A total of 35 United Nations staff members, 33 of whom are UNRWA area
staff, 1 from the United Nations Development Programme and 1 from UNICEF
continue to be detained or missing. The total number of humanitarian workers killed
in the conflict since March 2011 is 87. This includes 17 staff members of the United
Nations, 53 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent,
8 volunteers and staff members of the Palestinian Red Crescent Society and 9 staff
members of international non-governmental organizations. Of the 87 killed, 21 have
been killed since 1 January 2015.

III. Observations
53. After five years of brutal and senseless conflict, over 250,000 Syrians have
been killed and nearly half of all Syrians have been forced from their homes,
seeking refuge within or outside the country. Many detainees have been tortured and
beaten to death. The commitment of the members of the International Syria Support
Group to use their influence with the parties to increase humanitarian access to
besieged and hard-to-reach areas in Syria and to implement a cessation of hostilities
has given Syrians a glimmer of hope. In towns across parts of Syria, there are signs
of that hope, as families are once again walking in the streets and children playing
in parks. We cannot squander this unique opportunity to finally bring an end to the
conflict, once and for all.
54. I welcome the recent progress to deliver aid to several besieged locations in
the first three months of 2016. During the same period in 2015, United Nations
inter-agency convoys were prevented from reaching a single person in besieged
areas. This represents positive progress, but remains insufficient. Access must
extend to all 4.6 million people in besieged and hard -to-reach locations. Of note, the
United Nations still has not received permission from the Government of Syria to
enter several besieged locations, such as Duma and Darayya. The continued support
of the members of the International Syria Support Group is required to ensure that
the parties facilitate the delivery of assistance to all people in need on a sustained,
unconditional and unimpeded basis, in line with their obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law, where applicable. Ultimately,
however, no amount of assistance to besieged areas can ever be considered
sufficient: I once again call for the sieges to be lifted and people allowed freedom of
movement.
55. While the recent deliveries to besieged areas are welcome, I regret that serious
concerns remain with regard to attacks on medical facilities and the denial and
removal of medical supplies and equipment from convoys to these locations. There
can be no possible justification for the removal of items to treat child malnutrition
or basic medicines to save lives. In addition, civilians in these areas require freedom
of movement to seek the assistance and medical care they desperately need. I call on
the parties to the conflict, particularly the Government of Syria, to ensure that
civilians can leave areas to seek the treatment they need safely, without delay and

14/17

16-04510

S/2016/272

hindrance, and that all necessary medical and surgical items are allowed to be
delivered. All parties who are imposing the siege and attacking medical facilities, as
well as committing unlawful detention, must be reminded that these acts constitute a
serious violation of international humanitarian law.
56. At this critical juncture in the Syria crisis, I commend the extraordinary efforts
of humanitarian workers who, despite all the challenges, have delivered aid to
millions of people month after month over the course of the past five years. Sy rians
themselves have played the lead role in alleviating the suffering of their fellow
people. It has come at a high cost, as 87 humanitarian workers have lost their lives
and hundreds of medical workers have been killed. I pay tribute to their bravery an d
sacrifice.
57. During the first week of February, my Special Envoy for Syria, Staffan de
Mistura, convened the first round of intra-Syrian talks in Geneva. Subsequently, the
United Nations decided to temporarily suspend the talks because of unresolved
procedural matters and the dramatic deterioration of the humanitarian situation on
the ground. Since then, the situation has gradually improved, creating the necessary
conditions for the formal negotiations to resume on 14 March in pursuit of the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communiqué of 30 June 2012 as the basis for a Syrian-led political transition. As
demanded repeatedly by the Security Council in its resolutions, it is imperative for
the parties to the conflict to protect civilians and guarantee humanitarian access. For
the ongoing negotiations to be meaningful and productive, it is important that all
Syrians see tangible progress through the reduction of violence, the release of
detainees, especially women and children, and increased access to humanitarian
assistance, with the parties adhering to their obligations under international
humanitarian law. I urge all parties not to miss the opportunity to engage
constructively in the United Nations-led political process and to be fully prepared to
present options on their visions for a political transition.

16-04510

15/17

S/2016/272

Map 1
16/17

Annex

16-04510

16-04510

Map 2

S/2016/272

17/17
