S/2020/813

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 August 2020
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020) and 2533 (2020)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the sixty-eighth submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), paragraph 6 of resolution 2393 (2017),
paragraph 12 of resolution 2401 (2018), paragraph 6 of resolution 2449 (2018),
paragraph 8 of resolution 2504 (2020), and paragraph 3 of resolution 2533 (2020), in
the last of which the Council requested the Secretary-General to provide a report at
least every 60 days, on the implementation of the resolutions by all parties to the
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on data available to agencies of the
United Nations system and obtained from the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and other relevant sources. Data from agencies of the United Nations system
regarding their humanitarian deliveries have been reported for June and July 2020.

II. Major developments
Key points
1.
The Syrian economy continued to exhibit signs of extreme fragility, including a
volatile exchange rate and high inflation, deepening the vulnerabilities of p opulations
across the country. After falling to its lowest recorded rate on the informal market in
June, the Syrian pound regained some of its value; however this did not translate into
price reductions for basic commodities. In July, the average price of a standard
reference food basket increased by 261 per cent year-on-year, according to the World
Food Programme (WFP) market monitoring. An estimated 9.3 million people in the
Syrian Arab Republic are food insecure, the highest number ever recorded, with
2.2 million more at risk of becoming food insecure.
2.
An increase in the number of violations near the southern contact lines of the Idlib
“de-escalation area” was recorded, in spite of the ceasefire agreement, causing civilian
deaths and injuries. Ceasefire violations reported included ground-based clashes and
mutual artillery shelling and aerial bombardment, as well as the use of unmanned drones.

20-10713 (E)

240820

*2010713*

S/2020/813

3.
A rise in the number of cross-line attacks was reported along the southern
contact lines of the Operation Peace Spring area between Tall Abyad and Ra’s al-Ayn,
before an understanding was reportedly reached to de-escalate and withdraw to
previous lines of control. Within the Operation Peace Spring area, on -State armed
groups were targeted by explosive devices that also killed and injured civilians.
4.
The water supply from the Aluk water station was again disrupted, affecting
460,000 civilians in Hasakah Governorate, including people residing at Hawl camp,
which accommodates approximately 65,000 people, two thirds of whom are children.
More than half of the 35,000 children at Hawl are under 5 years of age.
5.
The south-west of the Syrian Arab Republic saw continued popular unrest and
tensions, with protests remaining at the same elevated level as in the previous
reporting period, including protests against arbitrary detention. Assassinations and
kidnapping attempts were reported.
6.
Humanitarian assistance by United Nations agencies continued throughout the
Syrian Arab Republic, including WFP food assistance for 4.9 million people in June
and 4.4 million people in July, across all 14 Governorates. Support also included
continued coronavirus disease (COVID-19) preparedness and response efforts,
prioritizing measures to contain the virus, as well as clinical readine ss and sustaining
essential health-care services.
7.
With the adoption of Security Council resolution 2533 (2020), the United
Nations cross-border operation was reduced to a single authorized crossing point for
the delivery of humanitarian aid into the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic.
United Nations entities began addressing the logistical and operational challenges
stemming from the reduction to one crossing point, and a first delivery to northe rn
Aleppo through Bab al-Hawa was dispatched in July. Deliveries must cross lines of
control and travel longer distances to reach populations previously supported through
Bab al-Salam. Available routes are limited, in poor condition, frequently congested,
and not always open. The single remaining authorized border crossing, Bab al -Hawa,
was operating at high capacity prior to the expiry of Security Council resolution 2504
(2020) and will need to sustain higher demands.
8.
The fourth Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria and the
Region, co-chaired by the European Union and the United Nations, was held on
30 June. Total pledges in support of humanitarian, resilience and development action
in the Syrian Arab Republic and the region amounted to $7.7 billion, of which
$5.5 billion was pledged for 2020. Participants reaffirmed that a sustainable solution
to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic can be based only on the final communiqué
of the Action Group for Syria (Geneva communiqué) (2012) and the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 2254 (2015).

Humanitarian update
3.
The number of confirmed coronavirus disease (COVID-19) cases in the Syrian
Arab Republic continued to rise in June and July, while remaining relatively low as
compared with other countries experiencing outbreaks in the region. Testing capacity
increased but remained very limited, with a daily average of 345 tests conducted across
the country. As at 31 July, the Syrian Ministry of Health reported 738 cases, including
41 deaths. The first COVID-19 case in the north-west was identified on 9 July in Bab
al-Hawa, and 31 cases had been identified by the end of the reporting period, with no
deaths reported. Another seven cases were reported in the north-east. Eight per cent of
all confirmed cases were recorded among health workers. More than a third of active
known cases required hospitalization, placing a growing strain on the fragile health
system. Key areas of concern remained densely populated areas, notably Damascus and
2/23

20-10713

S/2020/813

Rif Dimashq, Aleppo and Homs, camps and informal settlements in the north-west and
north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as collective shelters throughout the
country. Areas with ongoing hostilities created further obstacles to sample collection.
4.
The Syrian economy continued to exhibit signs of extreme fragility, including a
volatile exchange rate and high inflation, deepening the vulnerabilities of populations
across the country. After falling to its lowest recorded rate on the informal market in June,
at 3,200 Syrian pounds to the United States dollar, the Syrian pound regained some value,
trading at approximately LS 2,200 to the United States dollar on 31 July. The WFP Market
Monitor recorded a 48 per cent increase in the average price of a standard reference food
basket from May to June. Food prices stabilized in July but remained high. A further 6 per
cent price increase was recorded between June and July, but with a 3 per cent drop from
the first to the third week of July. The year-on-year increase in the price of a standard
reference food basket in July stood at 261 per cent. Food security and nutrition indicators
continued to reflect the impact of food inflation on the population: WFP estimates
9.3 million people in the Syrian Arab Republic to be food insecure – the highest number
ever recorded – with 2.2 million additional people at risk of becoming food insecure.
WFP data further indicate that 86 per cent of households are adopting food consumption
coping strategies, meaning that they are taking such measures as buying lower quality
food less food or skipping meals. In the north-west, surveillance data show chronic
malnutrition among children under 5 at 29 per cent, compared with 19 per cent in
mid-2019.
5.
In the north-west of the country, in the Idlib “de-escalation area”, the ceasefire
largely continued to hold, albeit with a reported increase in the number of viola tions
near the southern contact lines. These included ground-based clashes and mutual
artillery shelling, aerial bombardment and the use of unmanned drones. The Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) verified 14
incidents, in which 10 civilians, including 3 children, were killed and 30 civilians,
including 10 children, were injured as a result of ground strikes and air strikes during
the 1 June to 31 July period. Some 220,000 returns of internally displaced persons
were recorded in the north-west between January and July 2020.
6.
In northern Aleppo, insufficient potable and farming water supply was reported
at Bab, where the main water supply system runs across lines of control and needs to
be restored, affecting water access for the local population and the ability to maintain
health and hygiene standards that are critical to avoiding the spread of infectious
diseases, including COVID-19.
7.
With the adoption of Security Council resolution 2533 (2020), the United
Nations cross-border operation was reduced to a single authorized crossing point, at
Bab al-Hawa, for the delivery of humanitarian aid into the north-west of the country.
The Bab al-Hawa and Bab al-Salam border crossings each provide a direct channel to
the largest concentrations of displacement camps and settlements in the two areas of
control in Idlib and northern Aleppo, where needs are particularly high. An estimated
1.3 million people live in the area, mainly accessed from Bab al-Salam, of whom
62 per cent are internally displaced. Movement between the two areas is controlled,
and the area that was accessed by Bab al-Salam is not always readily accessible from
Bab al-Hawa, owing to different factions controlling segments of the route, as well
as poor road conditions and congestion. Bab al-Salam was the entry point for 30 per
cent of vaccines entering the north-west, serving 340,000 children under 5 years of
age. Along with other life-saving assistance, these supplies must now be redirected
through Bab al-Hawa to reach immunization partners in northern rural Aleppo.
8.
United Nations agencies and humanitarian partners began to address the
logistical and operational challenges resulting from the reduction to one authorized
border crossing. Plans include the expansion of the Bal al -Hawa hub by the WFP-led
20-10713

3/23

S/2020/813

Logistics Cluster. A first delivery to northern rural Aleppo through the Bab al -Hawa
border crossing was dispatched by the International Organization for Migratio n on
28 July. The convoy was required to take an alternative route and experienced delays
arising from a lack of approvals by various parties, as well as poor road conditions.
Non-governmental organizations (NGOs) operating cross-border also reported that
the impact of the removal of the Bab al-Salam authorization was already apparent
within the reporting period, in terms of increased time, cost, complexity and the risks
of providing assistance in parts of the north-west.
9.
In the north-east, a rising number of cross-line attacks by non-State armed groups,
Syrian government forces and the Syrian Democratic Forces were reported at the
southern contact lines of the “Operation Peace Spring” area between Tall Abyad and
Ra’s al-Ayn. Within the “Operation Peace Spring” area, attacks using explosive devices
killed and injured civilians. Outside the Operation Peace Spring area, unmanned drones
reportedly targeted positions of elements linked to the Syrian Democratic Forces and
pro-Government forces. Both the Syrian Democratic Forces and pro-government forces
experienced an increase in the number of attacks by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) cells. Detention facilities holding ISIL militants reported increasing unrest, with
recurring uprisings and attempted breakouts.
10. Water supply from Aluk water station was disrupted several times, affecting
460,000 civilians in Hasakah Governorate. The United Nations continued to advocate
a sustainable agreement between the relevant parties on the provision of water f rom
Aluk, in line with international humanitarian law, calling for facilitation of access to
basic services, and in line with the operational realities and capacities of all parties to
prevent the spread of COVID-19.
11. Among the areas affected by the water shortages was Hawl camp, which
continues to accommodate around 65,000 people, two thirds of whom are children.
More than half of the children at Hawl, 35,000 children, are under 5 years of age.
Protection concerns continued, including over a lack of inf ormation pertaining to the
planned relocation of 400 families to Ruj camp and the r eported transfer of
unaccompanied youths aged 12 to 15 to Alaya prison. From 10 to 12 June, biometric
registration was conducted for residents of the “Annex” part of the cam p, which
houses non-Syrian and non-Iraqi families. The registration took place in the camp
without humanitarian or protection actors present.
12. The south-west of the Syrian Arab Republic saw continued popular unrest and
tensions. Protests remained at the same elevated level as during the previous reporting
period and included protests against arbitrary detention. Assassinations and
kidnapping attempts were reported. The Syrian Army maintained a reinforced
presence in districts across the south-west.
13. In Rukban, some 12,000 people continued to live in harsh conditions with very
restricted access for humanitarian organizations. Medical cases remained unable to
access the United Nations clinic on the Jordanian side of the border since its full
closure as part of COVID-19 preventative measures in March 2020. The United
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) estimates that 3,000 women and girls of
reproductive age, in need of protection and reproductive health services, reside at
Rukban, with 300 estimated to be pregnant at any one time. From 25 March to 30 July,
472 individuals, including emergency medical cases departed from Rukban to
government-controlled areas. No restrictions on departures were reported. Of these
departures, 411 individuals were transferred to transitional shelters in Homs and
subsequently proceeded to areas of their choice. The remaining 61 individuals stayed
at Wahah reception area, observing self-quarantine or receiving medical treatment.
14. The fourth Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria and the
Region, co-chaired by the European Union and the United Nations, was held on
4/23

20-10713

S/2020/813

30 June. Total pledges made at the Conference amounted to $7.7 billion, of which
$5.5 billion was pledged for 2020. Pledges were made in support of humanita rian,
resilience and development action in the Syrian Arab Republic and the region. The
highest amounts were pledged by the European Commission, Germany, the United
States of America, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Canada, Japan, Norway, the Netherlands, France and Denmark.
Update on overall developments
15. The Special Envoy for Syria advanced plans to convene and facilitate the third
session of the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned Constitutional Committee by confirming
with the Co-Chairs nominated by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and
the Syrian opposition, respectively, that the session would begin in Geneva on
24 August 2020, provided that travel conditions related to COVID -19 do not change.
In a tripartite virtual summit on 1 July 2020, the President of the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Hassan Rouhani, the President of the Russian Federation, Vladimir Putin, and
the President of the Republic of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, welcomed the
agreement to hold the third meeting of the Constitutional Committee and expressed
readiness to support its work. They also reaffirmed their commitment to implementing
Security Council resolution 2254 (2015).
16. Participants at the fourth Brussels Conference reaffirmed that a sustainable
solution to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic could be based only on the Geneva
communiqué (2012) and the full implementation of Security Council resolution 2254
(2015), calling for an inclusive Syrian-led, Syrian-owned political process, facilitated
by the United Nations, to reach a political settlement that meets the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people. The Conference expressed st rong support for
reconvening the Constitutional Committee and a nationwide ceasefir e in the Syrian
Arab Republic, building on the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire. The
Conference reaffirmed the need for accountability, the need to release detainees and
abductees and to clarify the fate of missing persons. Donor countries and the
European Union reiterated that reconstruction and international support for its
implementation would be possible only once a credible political solution, consistent
with resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué, is firmly under way.
Protection
17. Civilians continued to suffer at the hands of various parties to the conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic. Despite the ceasefire agreement within the “de-escalation area”
in the north-west, civilians were killed and injured as a result of shelling and intermittent
airstrikes by pro-Government forces in southern Idlib and western Hama. Civilians were
also killed and injured as a result of the increased, apparently indiscriminate, use of
firepower between and within various armed groups in the north-west, northern and
eastern parts of the country. The majority of civilians were killed in the north, north -east
and north-west by attacks carried out with various types of improvised explosive
devices, including vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices, and also by explosive
remnants of war, including unexploded ordnance. Civilians were also killed and injured
following the positioning of military objects, such as weapons depots, in populated
areas, including near internally displaced persons camps. Such incidents have been
attributed to Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham, which has been designated as a terrorist group by
the Security Council, and to the Syrian Democratic Forces.
18. From 1 June to 31 July 2020, OHCHR verified at least 63 incidents in which at
least 109 civilians, including 11 women and 40 children, were killed, and at least 260
civilians, including 33 women and 86 children, were injured as a result of the conduct of
hostilities across the Syrian Arab Republic, including ground-based strikes, improvised
explosive devices, and explosive remnants of war, armed clashes and targeted killings at
20-10713

5/23

S/2020/813

the hands of various parties to the conflict or by unidentified perpetrators. The majority,
at least 42 civilian deaths (39 per cent), were attributed to what appeared to be
indiscriminate attacks with improvised explosive devices in busy markets and residential
areas. The deadliest of these attacks occurred on 19 July on a main road leading to the
Bab al-Salam border crossing in the village of Saju in northern rural Aleppo. At least 8
civilians were killed and 76 other people were injured in this attack. In the light of the
patterns observed and the high number of incidents and civilians killed and injured in
markets and residential areas, it appears that parties to the conflict have failed to respect
the key principles under international humanitarian law of distinguishing civilians from
fighters and civilian objects from military objectives; of refraining fr om indiscriminate
attacks; of respecting proportionality in attack; and of taking constant care to spare
civilians and civilian objects in the conduct of military operations.
19. Both pro-Government forces and armed groups continued to arbitrarily detain
individuals in areas under their effective control. In the majority of cases recorded by
OHCHR, detainees were denied information about the reasons for their detention and
other due process rights, while their families were denied information concerning th eir
whereabouts or their fate, raising concerns that such detentions may constitute
enforced disappearance. In areas under the control of the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic, OHCHR continues to document cases of detainees dying while in
custody. In many such cases, individuals appear to have been subjected to enforced
disappearance, and the fact that they had been detained by the Government did not
become known until their deaths were acknowledged. The bodies of the deceased are
rarely returned to their families, who are also denied the opportunity to query the
causes of death stated in the notification or to know the whereabouts of the bodies.
OHCHR has also recorded cases of detainees and abductees dying while in the custody
of non-State armed groups, Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham and the Syrian Democratic Forces.
20. In Dar‘a, OHCHR continued to record incidents of targeted killings of civilians
and fighters reconciled from former armed opposition groups. The majority of such
attacks were carried out by unidentified perpetrators. Parties to the conflict in northwestern, northern and eastern parts of the Syrian Arab Republic continued to
systematically target civilians, including those perceived as being affiliated with
opposing parties or alleged to be critical of those in control of the territory, including
through killings, the arbitrary deprivation of liberty, torture, ill -treatment and
kidnappings. Parties to the conflict continued to impose rules and codes of conduct
on civilians living in areas under their control that are fundamentally contrary to
human rights, including the rights to life, liberty and security of person, to freedom
of movement and to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and association.
Through self-appointed courts, members of Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham continued to inflict
harsh penalties, including death, on those either perceived as critical of those rules or
accused of having affiliations with an opposing party to the conflict.
21. During the reporting period, parties to the conflict carried out seizures of houses,
land and property of civilians, including those who had fled the hostilities. Hostilities
continued to impede civilians’ access to health care and education, a situation further
exacerbated by COVID-19 mitigation measures. The security situation in the northeast and the north-west, as well as COVID-19 mitigation measures, impacted the
ability of women and adolescent girls to access lifesaving sexual and reproductive
health and gender-based violence services. In northern and eastern rural Aleppo,
armed groups continued to target some humanitarian and health-care services and
personnel, in addition to media professionals.
22. The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) recorded no incidents of
hostilities causing damage to educational facilities during the reporting period.
23. The Surveillance System for Attacks on Health Care of the World Health
Organization (WHO) reported three incidents affecting health-care personnel, with

6/23

20-10713

S/2020/813

two reported deaths and five injuries. Additional incidents are yet to be verified by
the Surveillance System. A total of 19 attacks affecting health care have been recorded
since the beginning of the year, including 41 injuries and 12 deaths.
Humanitarian response
24. Humanitarian assistance by United Nations agencies continued throughout the
Syrian Arab Republic. Food assistance by WFP was delivered for 4.9 million people in
June and 4.4 million people in July, across all 14 Governorates. Protection assistance
included Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)funded community centres and mobile units, with 91 community centres, 34 satellite
centres and 105 mobile units, supported by 2,566 outreach volunteers, providing
protection-related services across 11 Governorates as at end July. Some 677,000
protection interventions were conducted in June and July across all 14 Governorates (see
table 1). UNFPA reached 375,400 people per month with life-saving and life-sustaining
reproductive health and gender-based violence services. The Mine Action Service
continued humanitarian mine action interventions, with limitations and modalities
adapted in line with COVID-19 preventive measures. Jointly with UNICEF, the Service
launched a multi-platform media campaign which ran throughout July, sharing explosive
ordnance awareness content on social media, four mainstream newspaper websites, two
television channels, 17 radio channels and 45 billboards. The Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations commenced a national livestock vaccination
campaign for the peste des petits ruminants, reaching over 62,000 livestock-owning
households across all Governorates by the end of the reporting period.
25. The United Nations continued to support COVID-19 preparedness and response
efforts across the country, prioritizing containment of the virus by enhancing
surveillance and diagnostics capacity and procuring vital medical supplies and
equipment; supporting clinical readiness; and protecting the delivery of essential healthcare services. Operating from within the Syrian Arab Republic, 112 rapid response teams
were active and collected samples for referral to the Central Public Health Laboratory
in Damascus. Rapid response teams also carried out sample collection in the north-east,
where five were active in Hasakah, five in Raqqah and four in Dayr al-Zawr, with
Manbij/Ayn al-Arab covered from Aleppo. WHO supported dedicated training for 432
rapid response team personnel in 13 Governorates. Agencies provided personal
protective equipment to partner staff and to health facilities. Mass communication
campaigns were conducted to raise awareness of prevention measures, along with
dedicated hotlines to support persons of concern with such protection issues such as
gender-based violence prevention, child access to health care and mental and
psychosocial support. Soap and information leaflets were added to WFP general food
assistance distributions over the reporting period. WFP, in cooperation with WHO, began
a six-month institutional feeding programme to support vulnerable Syrians in
COVID-19 quarantine centres, which reached over 4,300 people by end July.
26. Response modalities were adapted for the safety of beneficiari es and
humanitarian workers and to ensure continuity of the broader response. Mitigating
measures continued to limit, to the extent possible, the risk of transmission in the
context of cross-border operations. These included enhanced sanitation and overall
security at the warehouses and at the transhipment hubs, measures to facilitate social
distancing and the use of protective personnel equipment. Measures were
continuously reviewed for full compliance.

20-10713

7/23

S/2020/813

Table 1
Average number of people reached each month by the United Nations and other
organizations through all modalities throughout the Syrian Arab Republic:
June and July 2020
Organization

Average number of
people reached monthly

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

439 530

International Organization for Migration

57 800

Mine Action Service

9 000

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
United Nations Children’s Fund

489 400
3 715 000

United Nations Development Programme

449 500

United Nations Population Fund

375 400

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

191 100

World Food Programme

4 650 000

World Health Organization

2 620 784

27. Humanitarian assistance provided by United Nations agencies from inside the
Syrian Arab Republic included the distribution by WFP of food assistance to
3.5 million people in June and 3 million people in July, representing, respectively,
73 per cent and 69 per cent of all WFP food assistance in the country in those months.
Cash and voucher assistance continued to be scaled up in line with needs, including
those resulting from the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Over 1 million
people in 13 Governorates, including some 400,000 Palestinian refugees, received
cash or voucher assistance. Eighty-four per cent of cash and voucher beneficiaries
received either a top-up to their planned allocation or a specifically designed
allocation in response to the COVID-19 impact in the Syrian Arab Republic.
28. In the north-west, the cross-border operation continued at record levels before
10 July. Subsequently, a drop in cross-border dispatches was recorded in July.
Warehouses inside the Syrian Arab Republic had been stocked, and pipelines and
warehouses in Turkey were being replenished.
Figure I
Number of beneficiaries assisted by the United Nations and its partners
through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, by cluster: June and July 2020
(monthly average)
(Thousands)

8/23

20-10713

S/2020/813

Table 2
Number of beneficiaries targeted through cross-border deliveries, by sector and by district:
June and July 2020 (monthly average)
Governorate

District

Education

Food

Health

Non-food
items/shelter

Nutrition

Water, sanitation
and hygiene

Aleppo

Afrin

–

8 300

–

–

–

–

Aleppo

I‘zaz

20 000

262 691

814 498

26 499

–

165 300

Idlib

Harim

6 450

871 889

1 441 577

41 451

39 869

561 600

Idlib

Idlib

54 369

–

16 075

7 920

–

74 540

29. During the reporting period, the Russian Federation sent informational bulletins
to the United Nations from the Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides and
Refugee Migration Monitoring, which outlined the provision of bilateral relief
assistance. Other Member States also continued to provide bilateral and other forms
of humanitarian assistance.
Humanitarian access
30. The provision of humanitarian assistance requires timely, safe, sustained and
unimpeded access by the United Nations and all humanitarian partners to people in
need across the Syrian Arab Republic. Principled humanitarian action depends on the
ability to independently assess needs and deliver assistance, and to monitor and
evaluate impacts independently, including by engaging regularly and directly with
affected people. The access landscape in the country is complex, with different
geographical areas and different types of services requiring different operating
modalities. More than 1,800 United Nations staff members are in -country, with more
than 600 deployed in nine humanitarian hubs outside Damascus, in Aleppo, Dar‘a,
Dayr al-Zawr, Hama, Homs, Ladhiqiyah, Qamishli, Suwayda’ and Tartus. A further
3,860 staff of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) are deployed throughout the country. The decentralized
presence contributes to greater access and proximity to affected populations.
Access limitations related to the pandemic
31. There remained a general easing of the preventive measures introduced in May
2020 to avoid the spread of COVID-19, while several new restrictions were also
introduced, such as the suspension of some indoor events and gatherings. Most land
borders remained closed to individual civilian movements, although facilitating
measures were instituted to enable the import of supplies and humanitarian assistance,
as well as for some returning nationals. Access through crossing points inside the
Syrian Arab Republic also remained largely restricted, with so me exceptions for
humanitarian and commercial cargo, humanitarian personnel, students and medical
cases. International commercial passenger flights remained suspended, while
international repatriation flights continued. Domestic cargo and passenger flights ,
including by the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service, also continued to operate.
At Tartus and Ladhiqiyah port facilities, precautionar y measures, including
mandatory sterilization procedures and the maintenance of a minimum staff, resulted
in a slowdown in operations. The towns of Ra’s al-Ma’arrah in Rif Dimashq
Governorate and Judaydah al-Fadl in Qunaytirah Governorate were placed under full
lockdown following the confirmation of several COVID -19 cases. WFP was able to
continue operations in both towns, reaching 3,200 people with food assistance in Ra’s
al-Ma’arrah and 7,500 people in Judaydah al-Fadl.

20-10713

9/23

S/2020/813

Access in government-controlled areas
32. In government-controlled areas, communities and enclaves that remained
difficult to access, owing to administrative and security approvals, included Duma,
East Harasta and Kafr Batna in Eastern Ghouta. In the southern part of the country,
insecurity and administrative restrictions continued to prevent sustained access to
areas formerly controlled by non-State armed groups, in particular in parts of western
Dar‘a and Qunaytirah. WFP operations in Dar‘a Governorate resumed in mid -June,
following a temporary suspension of some dispatches owing to insecurity across the
western countryside.
33. Across the Syrian Arab Republic, aid is distributed and implemented primarily
by national actors, including NGOs and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent. United Natio ns
personnel and third-party contractors continued to mobilize to field locations
alongside national NGOs and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent to conduct assessment,
monitoring and logistics and administrative support missions. In June and July, 1,541
regular programmatic movements took place under programme or blanket approvals,
a 36 per cent increase on the April–May reporting period, when 1,134 such
movements took place (see table 3). 1 Of those missions, 40 per cent were conducted
in the southern Governorates of Suwayda’, Damascus, Dar‘a, Qunaytirah and Rif
Dimashq; 26 per cent were conducted in the north-east, in the Governorates of
Hasakah, Raqqah and Dayr al-Zawr; 15 per cent in Aleppo and Idlib Governorates;
16 per cent in the central Governorates of Homs and Hama; and 2 per cent in the
coastal Governorates of Ladhiqiyah and Tartus (see figure II).
Table 3
Missions conducted under programme or blanket approvals from within the
Syrian Arab Republic by United Nations agencies and third parties/facilitators,
by type: June and July 2020
Type of mission

Assessment missions
Missions accompanying aid deliveries
Monitoring missions
Security, logistics and administrative
support missions
Total

Blanket approval

Programme approval

Total

29

1

30

373

0

373

1 099

8

1 107

30

1

31

1 531

10

1 541

Note: Missions conducted with programme or blanket approvals do not require specific approval
from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

__________________
1

10/23

United Nations staff and third-party contractors operating at humanitarian hubs outside
Damascus obtain programme or “blanket approvals” to carry out movements as part of their
regular programming. These enable regular access and reduce bureaucratic requirements.
20-10713

S/2020/813

Figure II
Missions conducted under programme or blanket approvals from within the
Syrian Arab Republic by United Nations agencies and third parties/facilitators,
by Governorate: June and July 2020

34. For missions requiring specific approval by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the
United Nations submitted 251 new requests, of which 138, or 55 per cent, were approved
(see table 4). This is a fourfold increase in the number of new requests as compared with
the previous reporting period, when 57 requests were submitted, and an improvement on
approvals of 9 percentage points on the previous reporting period, when 46 per cent of
requests were approved. United Nations agencies ultimately conducted only 93 of the
138 missions approved, owing primarily to COVID-19-related considerations.
35. On 28 July, the United Nations undertook a joint mission with the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent to areas newly accessible for humanitarian operations from Damascus,
in southern rural Idlib Governorate, visiting Khan Shaykhun and Khuwayn al -kabir
towns. The main objective of the mission was to assess the humanitarian situation and
identify priority needs. The mission found basic public services to be completely
absent, including water, electricity and sanitation services. No medical faciliti es or
schools were functioning, and no markets were operating in the area.
Table 4
Missions from within the Syrian Arab Republic requiring specific approval by
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs: June and July 2020
Type of request

Number requested

Number approved

Percentage approved

Assessment missions

33

25

76

Missions accompanying aid deliveries

25

17

68

Monitoring missions

167

94

56

Security, logistics and administrative
support missions

26

2

8

251

138

55

Total

Note: Missions by United Nations personnel departing from Damascus or travelling cros s-line
generally require specific approval from the Syrian Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

20-10713

11/23

S/2020/813

Access in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic
36. In the north-east, the United Nations maintained regular and sustained
humanitarian access in most parts of Raqqah and Hasakah Governorates, while other
areas, including Manbij and Ayn al-Arab, remained difficult to access from
Damascus, owing to the lack of agreement between parties in control and insecurity.
The M4 highway between Ayn Isa and Tall Tamr was reportedly only partially open
for civilian and commercial traffic during the daytime as at 31 July. According to
local sources, traffic remains limited owing to the security situation.
37. A scale-up in overall humanitarian deliveries from Damascus was achieved in the
first half of 2020, and approximately 1 million people in the north-east were being
reached with assistance each month. With regard to deliveries of medical items, efforts
continued with regard to replacing the supply of critical medical items previously
delivered cross-border from Iraq, following the adoption of Security Council resolution
2504 (2020) on 10 January. A WHO shipment of 85 metric tons of medical supplies
intended for cross-border delivery from Iraq to the north-east of the Syrian Arab
Republic, that had remained in Erbil following 10 January, was airlifted from Erbil to
Damascus, arriving on 12 June. The shipment was delivered to the north-east overland,
arriving on 4 July. Of the 85 metric tons in this shipment, 52 metric tons were delivered
to 17 hospitals, of which 16 are in areas outside of government control and 12 are
facilities supported by cross-border operations. Deliveries from this shipment were also
made to the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and the Hasakah Health Authority. Distribution
of supplies from this shipment continued beyond the reporting period. Once completed,
an increase in the previous cross-line reach for medical deliveries is anticipated.
Access in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic
38. In the north-west, the cross-border operation from Turkey continued at record
levels in advance of the expiration of Security Council resolution 2504 (2020). A
temporary drop in deliveries was recorded in July, following the pre-positioning efforts
of the preceding months (see para. 4). With the adoption of Council resolution 2533
(2020), the United Nations cross-border operation was reduced to a single authorized
crossing point for the delivery of humanitarian aid into the north-west. As a result, crossborder aid deliveries will have to cross lines of control and travel longer distances if they
are to reach all populations in the north-west. The available routes are limited and in
poor condition, in particular during the winter months; they are frequently congested
and not always open. The single remaining authorized border crossing, Bab al-Hawa,
was already operating at high capacity and will need to sustain even higher demands.
39. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
continued its operations as mandated under Security Council resolutions 2165 (2014),
2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020) and
2533 (2020). From 1 June to 31 July 2020, the Mechanism monitored and confirmed
the humanitarian nature of 30 consignments consisting of 1,982 trucks that crossed
into the country from Turkey: 15 consignments from Bab al -Hawa (1,488 trucks) and
15 from Bab al-Salam (494 trucks). This brings the total number of trucks monitored
since the beginning of operations to 40,034 (30,062 through Bab al-Hawa, 5,268
through Bab al-Salam, 4,595 through Ramtha and 109 through Ya‘rubiyah). There
were no concerns or questions regarding the humanitarian nature of these
consignments. For every shipment that crossed the border, the United Nations
provided 48-hour advance notice to the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic,
including information on the humanitarian goods to be delivered, t he number of
trucks, the United Nations owner and the destination (district). The Mechanism
continued to benefit from the excellent cooperation of the Government of Turkey.

12/23

20-10713

S/2020/813

40. While maintaining measures to prevent the spread of COVID -19, humanitarian
access inside the north-west was generally permissive for cross-border humanitarian
actors, with the exception of frontline areas impacted by violence in southern Idlib
and western Aleppo and some localized access issues.
41. Humanitarian workers continued to actively pursue an all-modalities approach
to respond to the humanitarian needs of the affected popul ation, including continued
efforts to deliver cross-line assistance to the north-west. Planning progressed for a
cross-line mission to Atarib, including dialogue with parties regarding the operational
modalities for the mission.
Access in the south-east of the Syrian Arab Republic
42. Access to Rukban remained heavily restricted, with the last United Nations
humanitarian convoy to reach Rukban from within the Syrian Arab Republic undertaken
in September 2019. A planned health assessment and assistance delivery mission to
Rukban remains suspended since April. Since then, only a handful of commercial trucks
have reached Rukban. Since the decision by the Government of Jordan in March to close
the border as a COVID-19 preventive measure, medical cases from Rukban have been
unable to access the United Nations Clinic on the Jordanian side of the border. The
United Nations continues to engage with all relevant parties to facilitate delivery of and
access to humanitarian assistance for the remaining population of Rukban.
Visas and registrations
43. The United Nations continued to work with the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic to allow for the timely provision of visas to staff (see table 5).
Table 5
Requests for United Nations visas: June and July 2020
Type of request

Number requested

Number approved

Number rejected

Number pending

Visas requested during reporting period

66

39

0

25

Renewals requested during reporting period

113

67

0

46

Visas pending from before reporting period

85

42

2

34

Renewals pending from before reporting period

76

72

0

4

Note: The United Nations withdrew seven visa requests that had been pending since before the reporting period.

44. A total of 41 international NGOs are registered with the Government to operate
in the country.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
45. The United Nations and NGOs continued to implement programmes in are as
affected by frequent clashes among parties to the conflict, by air strikes and by the
regular exchange of indirect artillery fire and other attacks. Humanitarian relief
personnel also operate in areas highly contaminated with unexploded ordnance,
explosive remnants of war and landmines.
46. Since the beginning of the conflict, hundreds of humanitarian workers have
reportedly been killed, including 24 staff members of the United Nations and of the
entities of the United Nations system, 19 of whom were staff members of UNRWA;
66 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent; and 8 staff
members and volunteers of the Palestine Red Crescent Society. Many staff members
of international and national NGOs have also been killed.

20-10713

13/23

S/2020/813

47. A total of 25 staff members of agencies and programmes of the United Nations
system, all from UNRWA were detained or missing at the end of the reporting period.

III. Observations
48. The extreme fragility of the Syrian economy, devastated by more than nine years
of conflict and the global downturn linked to the COVID-19 pandemic, is pushing
greater numbers of people into humanitarian need, in a country where over 11 million
people already require humanitarian assistance. I am deeply concerned over high
levels of food inflation and the impact already apparent in terms of rising food
insecurity among the Syrian population. I note with appreciation the generous pledges
made by international donors at the fourth Brussels Conference in June. I trust that
these much-needed funds will be quickly disbursed in support of humanitarian,
resilience and development action in the Syrian Arab Republic and the region.
49. The impact on civilians of increasing ceasefire violations in the Idlib
“de-escalation area” is alarming and a clear reminder of the importance for all parties
that they respect and ensure respect for international humanitarian law, in particular:
the obligation to distinguish between civilians and combatants and between civilian
objects and military objectives; the obligation to take all feasible precautions to avoid,
and in any event to minimize, incidental loss of civilian life, injury to civilians and
damage to civilian objects; and the prohibition of disproportionate and indiscriminate
attacks, including the indiscriminate use of high explosive weaponry in populated
areas. I emphasize, as the Security Council has done, that any measures to counter
terrorism must be consistent with parties’ obligations under international law.
50. I remain alarmed by the continuous human cost of hostilities across the Syrian
Arab Republic. Indiscriminate attacks, including the use of improvised explosive
devices in residential areas, internally displaced persons camps and busy markets,
must cease immediately. Schools and other civilian infrastructure should not be used
for military purposes, and weapons, munitions and explosive remnants of war should
be cleared from such facilities. The protection of civilians and civilian objects remains
an obligation under international humanitarian law that binds all parties to the conflict,
in all circumstances. Disregard for civilian safety also runs counter to the human rights
obligations and responsibilities of States and armed groups. I reiterate my appeal for
an immediate global ceasefire, and support the appeal of my Special Envoy for Syria
for a nationwide ceasefire in the country and an all-out effort to combat COVID-19,
so that significant calm in many areas can be sustained and expanded into a nationwide
ceasefire, as called for in Security Council resolution 2254 (2015).
51. I specifically remind parties of their obligation under international humanitarian
law to allow and facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage of impartial human itarian
relief for all civilians in need, wherever they are located. I take note of the Security
Council’s decision to extend its authorization for United Nations humanitarian
agencies and implementing partners to carry out cross-border humanitarian
operations into the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic for 12 months, thereby
extending what has been a lifeline for millions of civilians in the north -west. United
Nations agencies are working with their humanitarian partners to overcome the
operational challenges that derive from the reduction to just one border crossing, at
Bab al-Hawa, under Security Council resolution 2533 (2020). The first cross-border
aid delivery dispatched to northern Aleppo via Bab al-Hawa under the new resolution
was subject to the anticipated challenges, resulting in a more costly, higher risk, less
timely and, ultimately, less effective humanitarian response. Efforts have been and
will continue to be made to deliver cross-line assistance into the north-west.

14/23

20-10713

S/2020/813

52. The socioeconomic situation has further deepened the suffering of Syrians
across the country and contributed to peaceful protests in the south and areas outside
of government control in the north-east. Protesters took to the streets to exercise their
right to freedom of expression and right to peaceful assembly, yet were faced with an
excessive use of force, and some were arrested on charges related to taking part in
these protests. I recall that, in accordance with international human rights standards,
in the dispersal of non-violent assemblies, law enforcement officials shall avoid the
use of force or, where that is not practicable, shall restrict such force to the minimum
extent necessary. Arrest or detention for the legitimate exercise of the right to freedom
of expression or assembly is considered arbitrary.
53. I support the call of my Special Envoy for the unilateral release of persons
arbitrarily deprived of their liberty at a scale that is commensurate with the sc ope of
the issue, the majority of whom remain detained by the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic. I call upon the relevant parties to provide information on those whom
they are detaining and to allow humanitarian and human rights agencies access to all
places of detention. For persons facing prosecution, they should be afforded all
essential judicial guarantees. Detaining authorities should carry out prompt, effective,
thorough and transparent investigations to establish the cause and circumstances of
deaths in custody, and if it is found that such deaths resulted from criminal acts, the
perpetrators must be brought to justice. The families of persons who have died in
detention should be given information on their fate. Families of victims of serious
violations should receive full and adequate reparations within a reasonable period.
Addressing the fate of persons arbitrarily deprived of their liberty could build
significant confidence within society, as well as between the parties and international
stakeholders. A failure to address this issue would leave true reconciliation, the
healing of society’s wounds, credible justice and sustainable peace elusive.
54. I remain concerned about the well-being of thousands of families with perceived
affiliations with ISIL who continue to be held in overcrowded internally displaced
persons camps, with insufficient access to services. Al Hol camp currently hosts
35,000 children under five years of age under extremely challenging conditions. The
relevant obligations under international humanitarian and human rights laws
concerning persons deprived of their liberty must be respected. The current
COVID-19 pandemic demands even more urgent action to ensure continued access to
medical and other essential services for those in detention and in other closed and
congested facilities, as well as to facilitate the release of those considered most
vulnerable. Continued impunity for serious violations and abuses of human rights and
international humanitarian law remains of grave concern. Perpetrators of serious
violations and abuses of human rights and international humanitarian law must be
held accountable.
55. I remind all States, in particular those with direct influence over parties to the
conflict, that they are bound to take proactive steps to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law, including as it relates to the protection of civilians. I call upon all
parties to the conflict, in particular the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, as
well as all States, civil society and the United Nations system, to cooperate fully with
the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under
International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, in
particular by providing relevant information and documentation. Accountability for
serious violations and abuses of human rights and international humanitarian law is
both a legal requirement and central to achieving sustainable peace in the Syrian Arab
Republic. I reiterate my call for the situation in the country to be referred to the
International Criminal Court.

20-10713

15/23

S/2020/813

56. In view of the ongoing serious concerns repeatedly raised with regard to the
protection of civilians and other human rights concerns in the country, I continue to
strongly urge the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, in line with Human Rights
Council resolutions S-18/1 and 19/22, to cooperate with OHCHR, including through
the establishment of a field presence with the mandate to protect and promote human
rights.
57. As my Special Envoy proceeds to convene the third session of the Constitutional
Committee on 24 August 2020 in Geneva, conditions permitting, I call upon the Syrian
parties to prepare for a productive session on the agreed agenda. I also thank
international interlocutors for their ongoing efforts to support my Special Envoy.
Collective engagement and commitment will be needed to ensure the success of the
upcoming session of the Constitutional Committee. That said, the Committee is only
a part of the broader political process, which also requires the commitment of Syrian,
regional and international interlocutors to meet the aspirations of the Syrian people.
58. I recall that any sustainable peace arrangement depends on including women at
the negotiating table as full partners. I urge international and regional actors who
support parties to the conflict to exert efforts toward the renewed and meaningful
international cooperation that is key for the resolution of the conflict in the Syrian
Arab Republic through the implementation of Security Council resolution 2254
(2015). I appreciate the continued engagement of international and regional partners
with the United Nations and call upon them to maintain and deepen their support for
the mediation efforts of my Special Envoy and for the Gene va political process, with
the ending of the suffering of the Syrian people and ensuring sustainable peace as the
absolute priority.

16/23

20-10713

S/2020/813

Annex
Reported incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights: June and
July 2020*
Idlib Governorate
• On 4 June, a boy was killed and another civilian was injured by a reported
landmine that detonated near them on agricultural land near the city of Idlib.
• On 4 June, a boy was killed by a reported ground-based strike that hit an
agricultural land in the town of Afis in eastern rural Idlib.
• On 8 June, two civilians were killed and three civilians, including one woman,
were injured by a reported airstrike that hit the village of Mawzarah in southern
rural Idlib.
• On 9 June, two civilians, including a woman, were killed and seven civilians,
including three boys and two girls, were injured by a reported airstrike that hit
the town of Balyun in southern rural Idlib.
• On 9 June, two boys and one girl were killed by reported unexploded ordnance
that detonated near them in the village of Jidar, near the city of Idlib.
• On 10 June, members of Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham physically assaulted 12 members
of the news media near the Ariha Bridge in the city of Ariha in southern rural Idlib.
• On 13 June, two boys were injured by a reported landmine that detonated near
them in a residential area in the town of Fu‘ah in northern rural Idlib.
• On 17 June, a male civilian was hit and killed by reported sniper fire by
unidentified perpetrators while he was working on agricultural land on the
outskirts of the town of Ma‘arrat al-Na‘san in northern rural Idlib.
• On 17 June, for the fourth consecutive day, Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham and other armed
groups in Idlib and Afrin prevented students from crossing to governmentcontrolled areas in Aleppo to sit their Baccalaureate final examinations.
• On 18 June, a male civilian was killed in his house by reported sniper fire by
unidentified perpetrators on the outskirts of Ma‘arrat al-Na‘sanin northern rural
Idlib.
• On 19 June, Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham informed the family of a 22-year-old male
detainee of his execution by the group on 15 April in Idlib city.
• On 23 June, three civilians, including two women, we re injured by reported
small arms fire between armed groups in the city of Idlib and surrounding areas.
• On 25 June, a male civilian with a disability was killed by reported small arms
fire between armed groups in the village of Martin near the city of I dlib. Armed
clashes between the two armed groups on 23 June reportedly resulted in the
killing and injuring of civilians.
• On 5 July, a boy was killed by a reported drone strike near the town of Barah in
southern rural Idlib.
* The list of incidents exemplifies human rights issues of concern raised in the report. Owing to
the changing patterns of conflict and the loss of networks of credible and/or reliable sources in
many conflict-affected areas, however, verifying incidents is increasingly difficult. The list,
which contains only those incidents that were reported to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and that have been verified according to its methodology,
should not be considered comprehensive.
20-10713

17/23

S/2020/813

• On 7 July, four civilians were injured in the village of Mawzarah and one
civilian was injured in the town of Kansafrah by reported ground-based strikes
that hit these areas in southern rural Idlib.
• On 14 July, two civilians (a father and his son) were killed and five other civilians,
including one woman and three boys, were injured by reported ground-based
strikes that hit the city of Ariha in southern rural Idlib. The reported shelling also
hit and damaged the “al-Amin” medical compound in the area.
• On 15 July, a woman civilian was injured as a result of a reported ground -based
strike that hit the town of Barah in southern rural Idlib.
• On 18 July, three boys were injured by a reported landmine that detonated near
them, near the town of Nayrab in eastern rural Idlib.
• On 23 July, a male civilian was injured as a result of a reported ground-based
strike that hit the village of Ain Larouz in southern rural Idlib.
Aleppo Governorate
• On 1 June, seven civilians, including two boys, were injured by a reported
vehicle-borne improvised explosive device that detonated in a loca l market in
the town of Jandiris in Afrin district in north-western rural Aleppo.
• On 8 June, two civilians, including a woman, were injured by a reported
roadside improvised explosive device that detonated near them in the residential
neighbourhood of Mahmudiyah in the city of Afrin in north-western rural
Aleppo.
• On 11 June, a male civilian was shot and killed by members of Hay’at Tahrir
al-Sham in the town of Izmu in western rural Aleppo.
• On 20 June, six civilians, including four boys, were injured by a reported
vehicle-borne improvised explosive device in the city of Afrin in north -western
rural Aleppo.
• On 23 June, three women civilians were killed and two other unidentified
women were injured by a reported drone strike that hit a house in the village of
Halindijah in the area of Ayn al-Arab in eastern rural Aleppo.
• On 24 June, two male civilians were killed and five others injured by a reported
improvised explosive device attached to a motorbike that detonated in the
Mahmudiyah residential neighbourhood in the city of Afrin in north -western
rural Aleppo.
• On 25 June, a male civilian was killed in a drive-by shooting by masked gunmen
in front of his office in the city of Bab in eastern rural Aleppo. Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) later claimed responsibility for the attack.
• On 29 June, one boy was killed and another was injured by a re ported landmine
that detonated in agricultural land in the village of Shu‘ayb in Jarabulus area in
eastern rural Aleppo
• On 30 June, members of a non-State armed group raided the house of a
Palestinian displaced family near the Shabibah internally displa ced person camp
in the city of I‘zaz in northern rural Aleppo. The perpetrators de tained three
men, three women and three children, including an infant. All were released on
the same day, except for two men, whose fate and whereabouts remain unknown.
• On 30 June, two boys were injured by a reported landmine that detonated in an
agricultural land in the village of Sukkariyah in Bab area in eastern rural Aleppo.

18/23

20-10713

S/2020/813

• On 10 July, a boy was injured by a reported roadside improvised explosive
device that detonated near him inside the Suq al-Hal market in the city of Bab
in eastern rural Aleppo.
• On 11 July, five civilians were injured by a reported vehicle-borne improvised
explosive device that detonated in the diesel market in the city of Bab in eastern
rural Aleppo.
• On 12 July, four civilians, including one boy, were reportedly injured in a driveby shooting by unidentified masked gunmen in the city of Bab in eastern rural
Aleppo.
• On 15 July, 11 civilians, including three women and four boys, were reportedly
injured by two consecutive reported airstrikes that hit the residential are a of
Jahjah in the city of Bab in eastern rural Aleppo.
• On 15 July, a woman civilian was killed by a reported landmine in the village
of Shaykh Nasir in eastern rural Aleppo.
• On 16 July, two boys were injured by reported unexploded ordnance that detonated
while they were playing with it in the city of Afrin in north-western rural Aleppo.
• On 17 July, a male civilian was killed in a drive-by shooting by masked gunmen
near the city of I‘zaz in northern rural Aleppo. ISIL later claimed responsibility.
• On 19 July, 8 civilians, including 1 boy, were killed and 76 other people,
including 63 men, 8 boys and 1 girl, were injured by a reported vehicle-borne
improvised explosive device in the village of Saju near the city of I‘zaz in
northern rural Aleppo.
• On 19 July, a member of an armed group was killed and 11 civilians, including
3 men, 2 women, 3 boys and 3 girls, were injured by a reported magnetic
improvised explosive device attached to his vehicle in the city of Afrin in north western rural Aleppo.
• On 22 July, a woman civilian was reportedly killed in her house and her male
child injured by small arms fire between members of a non-State armed group
in the city of Afrin in north-western rural Aleppo.
• On 23 July, 2 boys and 1 girl from one family were killed and 11 other civilians,
including 2 women, 4 boys and 5 girls, were injured by reported explosions at a
weapons depot next to the “Armutah” internally displaced person camp near the
village of Shamarin in I‘zaz area in northern rural Al eppo.
Hama Governorate
• On 11 June, a girl was killed by reported unexploded ordnance that deto nated
while she was playing with it in the town of Qumhanah in northern rural Hama.
• On 27 June, two boys were killed and three other civilians, includ ing a woman,
were injured by a reported landmine that detonated near them on agricultural
land near the town of Suran in northern rural Hama.
• On 29 June, one boy and one girl were killed and another boy was injured by a
reported unexploded ordnance that detonated while they were playing with it in
the town of Suran in northern rural Hama.
• On 1 July, a boy was killed by a reported landmine that detonated near him on
agricultural land in the village of Abu Hubaylat in eastern rural Hama.
• On 3 July, a male civilian was killed by a reported ground-based strike that hit
the village of Qahirah in western rural Hama.
20-10713

19/23

S/2020/813

• On 14 July, two civilians were injured by a reported ground-based strike that hit
the village of Dukmak in western rural Hama.
• On 19 July, a male civilian was killed and his wife was injured by a reported
ground-based strike that hit the village of Tall Wasit in western rural Hama.
Raqqah Governorate
• On 5 June, members of an armed group detained six family members of an
escaped detainee in the city of Tall Abyad in northern rural Raqqah. His wife
was released on 6 June and the fate of the other detainees remains unknown.
• On 12 June, two male civilians at the makeshift Mahmudli internally displaced
persons camp in western rural Raqqah were detained by members of the Syrian
Democratic Forces. Their family was denied access to information relating to
their fate and whereabouts.
• On 20 June, a boy was killed by reported unexploded ordnance that detonated
while he was playing with it in the city of Tall Abyad in northern rural Raqqah.
• On 16 June, a female civilian was detained at a checkpoint near Shaykh Hasan
village in the area of Ayn Isa in northern rural Raqqah.
• On 4 July, three civilians were injured by reported heavy weapons fire between
armed groups in the city of Tall Abyad in northern rural Raqqah.
• On 5 July, a male civilian was injured in a reported ground-based strike that hit
his car on the M4 highway near the town of Ayn Isa in northern rural Raqqah.
• On 7 July, 6 civilians, including 1 woman and 2 boys, were killed and at least
14 other people, including 3 women and 3 boys, were injured by a reported
vehicle-borne improvised explosive device in the city of Tall Abyad in northern
rural Raqqah.
• On 18 July, two boys were killed by a reported landmine that detonated near
them near the village of Hunaydah in western rural Raqqah.
• On 19 July, a male civilian was injured by a reported roadside improvised
explosive device that detonated in the residential neighbourhood of Amasi in
the city of Raqqah.
Hasakah Governorate
• On 4 June, one male civilian was killed and three others were injured by reported
small arms fire when the Syrian Democratic Forces fired into the air to disperse
peaceful protesters in the city of Shaddadah in southern rural Hasakah
• On 5 June, one boy was killed and seven other civilians, including two boys, were
injured by a reported vehicle-borne improvised explosive device that detonated in
a residential area in the city of Ra’s al-Ayn in western rural Hasakah.
• On 6 June, four civilians, including one woman, were killed and four other
civilians were injured by a reported vehicle-borne improvised explosive device
that detonated in the Ghanam livestock market in the town of Tall Halaf in the
area of Ra’s al-Ayn in western rural Hasakah.
• On 21 June, a male civilian was injured by a reported roadside improvised
explosive device that detonated near his fuel truck near the town of Abdan in
southern rural Hasakah. ISIL later claimed responsibility for the attack.
• On 23 June, 5 civilians, including one boy, were killed and 18 civilians, including
5 boys, were injured by a reported vehicle-borne improvised explosive device
20/23

20-10713

S/2020/813

that detonated inside a local market in the town of Tall Halaf in Ra’s al-Ayn area
in western rural Hasakah.
• On 3 July, a girl was killed and six other civilians, including one woman, were
injured by reported heavy machine gun and rocket-propelled grenade fire
between armed groups in the city of Ra’s al-Ayn in western rural Hasakah.
• On 11 July, the family of a deceased male detainee received his body, bearing
visible marks of torture, from the Hasakah Hospital in the city of Hasaka h.
• On 23 July, at least one woman civilian was killed and seven male civilians were
injured by a reported vehicle-borne improvised explosive device in the city of
Ra’s al-Ayn in western rural Hasakah.
Dayr al-Zawr Governorate
• On 1 June, the Chief of the village of Gharibah was killed in a drive-by shooting
by unidentified perpetrators in the village of Barihah in the Basirah area in
eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr. ISIL later claimed responsibility for his killing.
• On 2 June, two boys were injured by a reported roadside improvised explosive
device that detonated in a residential area in the town of Susah in eastern rural
Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 3 June, a male civilian who was a member of the Busaytin Local Council
was reportedly killed by unidentified perpetrators in a drive-by shooting in the
village of Busaytin in northern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 10 June 2020, the body of a deceased detainee was delivered to his family
in the town of Abu Amr in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr. Dayr al-Zawr. OHCHR
reviewed two videos in which the body of the deceased showed clear signs of
inflicted trauma.
• On 15 June, three boys were injured by a reported roadside improvised
explosive device that detonated near them in the town of Susah in eastern r ural
Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 15 June, gunmen stormed the headquarters building of the local council in
the town of Tayyani in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr. They shot and killed the Chief
of the council in front of the building. ISIL later claimed responsibility for his
murder.
• On 19 June, three displaced male civilians at a makeshift internally displac ed
person camp near the city of Shahil in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr were detained
by the Syrian Democratic Forces. Their families were denied information abou t
their fate and whereabouts.
• On 20 June, two male civilians were detained by the Syrian Democ ratic Forces
in a house raid in the village of Jazrat al-Buhamid in western rural Dayr al-Zawr.
Their fate and whereabouts remain unknown.
• On 25 June, a girl was killed by reported unexploded ordnance that detonated
near her in the city of Mayadin in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 25 June, a male civilian was injured by a reported roadside improvised
explosive device that detonated near his fuel truck near the al-Omar Oil Field area
in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr. ISIL later claimed responsibility for the attack.
• On 4 July, three male civilians were detained by members of the Syrian Democratic
Forces at their homes in the village of Izbah in northern rural Dayr al-Zawr.

20-10713

21/23

S/2020/813

• On 17 July, a boy was injured by a reported landmine that detonated near him
in the town of Kashmah in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 17 July, a male civilian was detained by the Syrian Democratic Forces in the city
of Basirah in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr. His fate and whereabouts remain unknown.
• On 18 July, a male civilian was detained by the Syrian Democratic Forces in a
house raid in the town of Zirr in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr. His fate and
whereabouts remain unknown.
Suwayda’ Governorate
• On 15 June, government security forces reportedly beat protesters with rub ber
batons and arbitrarily arrested and detained at least 10 male protesters in
Suwayda’. Other protesters were detained in similar protests in Suwayda’ in
June. All were released in the following days.
Dar‘a Governorate
• On 3 June, a civilian man was reportedly killed by unidentified perpetrators in
a drive-by shooting on the road between the city of Harah and the town of
Aqraba in northern rural Dar‘a.
• On 11 June, three civilians, including one woman and one girl, were injured by
a reported roadside improvised explosive device that hit their car on the road
between the city of Harak and the town of Surah in eastern rural Dar‘a.
• On 13 June, three male civilians were killed by a reported roadside improvised
explosive device that detonated as they were trying to deactivate it in the area
of Dar‘a al-Balad in the city of Dar‘a.
• On 18 June, two boys were injured when unidentified perpetrators reportedly
threw a hand grenade in a local market in the city of Sanamayn in northern rural
Dar‘a.
• On 18 June, three civilians were reportedly injured in a drive-by shooting by
unidentified perpetrators in the town of Tafas in western rural Dar‘a.
• On 21 June, an unidentified man was killed and two boys were injured by a
reported roadside improvised explosive device that detonated in front of the
“Mahattah al-Thaniyah” School near the Suq al-Hal in the neighbourhood of
Kashif in the city of Dar‘a.
• On 23 June one male civilian was killed and another was injured when armed
men reportedly opened fire into the air to disperse a crowd in Jasim in northern
rural Dar‘a.
• On 23 June, unidentified masked gunmen kidnapped a male civilian i n front of
his house in the city of Jasim in northern rural Dar‘a.
• On 27 June, a male civilian was killed while inside his house in a drive-by
shooting by unidentified perpetrators in the town of Nahtah in eastern rural
Dar‘a.
• On 30 June, one male civilian was reportedly killed and another was injured in
a drive-by shooting by unidentified perpetrators in the town of Tall Shihab in
western rural Dar‘a.
• On 30 June, the bodies of two male civilians were found in the town of Muzayrib
in western rural Dar‘a after they had been abducted by unidentified perpetrators
two days earlier.

22/23

20-10713

S/2020/813

• On 30 June, the body of a man was found near the neighbourhood of Dar‘a
al-Balad in the city of Dar‘a after he had been abducted by unidentified
perpetrators two days earlier.
• On 3 July, a civilian man (a school headmaster) was killed by a reported
magnetic improvised explosive device attached to his vehicle in the town of
Tayba in eastern rural Dar‘a on 28 June
• On 4 July, a girl was killed and three male civilians were injured by reported
exchange of fire between armed groups in the area of Dar‘a al-Balad in the city
of Dar‘a.
• On 14 July, two civilians, including a woman, were reportedly killed and one
male civilian was injured in a drive-by shooting by unidentified perpetrators
who opened fire on people inside a shop in the city of Jasim in northern rural
Dar‘a.
• On 14 July, five civilians, including four boys, were killed and six civilians,
including two women and one boy, were injured by a reported land mine on
agricultural land near the city of Shaykh Miskin in northern rural Dar‘a.
• On 15 July, three civilians (a mother and her two female children) were killed
and one male civilian (the father) were injured by a reported magnetic
improvised explosive device attached to their vehicle that detonated in the town
of Umm al-Mayadhin in eastern rural Dar‘a.
• On 19 July, a woman civilian was injured when unidentified masked gunmen
reportedly opened fire on her vehicle in the city of Jasim in northern rural Dar‘a.

20-10713

23/23
