A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/86
27 January 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 95
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/54/582)]
54/86.

Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants
of Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 53/63 of 3 December 1998,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General on offers by Member States of study and
training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, 1 prepared pursuant to its
resolution 845 (IX) of 22 November 1954,
Conscious of the importance of promoting the educational advancement of the inhabitants of NonSelf-Governing Territories,
Strongly convinced that the continuation and expansion of offers of scholarships is essential in order
to meet the increasing need of students from Non-Self-Governing Territories for educational and training
assistance, and considering that students in those Territories should be encouraged to avail themselves of
such offers,
1.

1

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;1

A/54/267.

00 26234

/...

A/RES/54/86
Page 2

2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have made scholarships available to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Invites all States to make or continue to make generous offers of study and training facilities to
the inhabitants of those Territories that have not yet attained self-government or independence and,
wherever possible, to provide travel funds to prospective students;
4. Urges the administering Powers to take effective measures to ensure the widespread and
continuous dissemination in the Territories under their administration of information relating to offers of
study and training facilities made by States and to provide all the necessary facilities to enable students
to avail themselves of such offers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present
resolution.
71st plenary meeting
6 December 1999
