S/PRST/2012/4

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 March 2012
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6729th meeting of the Security Council, held on 5 March 2012, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Council issued the following statement on behalf of
the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the International London Conference on
Somalia held on 23 February 2012 and fully supports its conference
communiqué. The Conference demonstrated the international community’s
political will and determination to support the Somali people as they build
peace and stability in Somalia.
“The Security Council supports the progress made at the London
Conference on Somalia, which affirmed international support, progress on the
political process, security, increasing stability, economic development and
action to address terrorism, piracy and hostage taking. The Council
emphasised the need to build on agreement in London and continue to pursue a
comprehensive strategy for the establishment of peace and stability in Somalia
through the collaborative effort of all stakeholders. The Security Council also
welcomes the meeting, which preceded the London Conference, on the
ongoing and protracted humanitarian situation in Somalia.
“The Security Council further welcomes the consensus in London that
the mandate of the Transitional Federal Institutions will end in August 2012
and that there will be no further extension of the transitional period. The
Council welcomes commitments to work for a more representative government
in Somalia, in line with the Transitional Federal Charter, the Djibouti
Agreement, the Kampala Accord, the End of Transition Roadmap and the
Garowe Principles. The Security Council reaffirms its respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and unity of Somalia.
“The Security Council reiterates its full support for the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary General, Augustine P. Mahiga, and the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS) in facilitating progress
towards peace and stability in Somalia, as well as that of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and the African Union.
The Council welcomes the relocation of UNPOS to Mogadishu and encourages
the UN to achieve a more permanent, full relocation to Somalia when security
conditions allow.

12-25100 (E) 050312

*1225100*

S/PRST/2012/4

“The Security Council pays tribute to the contribution of AMISOM and
the Somali national security forces to achieving a more peaceful and stable
Somalia, and expresses its appreciation for the commitment of troops by troop
contributing countries to AMISOM and the significant sacrifices made by both
AMISOM and Somali forces. In this regard, the Security Council recalls
resolution 2036 (2012) authorising an expansion of AMISOM, increasing the
scale and scope of the UN Logistic Support Package to enhance the
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of AMISOM’s financing, and
imposing an international ban on Somali charcoal. The Council welcomes the
valuable financial support provided by the African Union’s partners to
AMISOM, including through bilateral support programmes from the United
States of America and from the African Peace Facility of the European Union.
The Security Council stresses the need for continued support to AMISOM and
calls for further support from existing and new partners to provide equipment,
funding for troop stipends to AMISOM and uncaveated funding including
through the United Nations Trust Fund for AMISOM.
“The Security council recalls its resolutions 1674 (2006), 1738 (2006)
and 1894 (2009) on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, welcomes the
progress made by AMISOM in reducing civilian casualties during its
operations and urges AMISOM to continue to undertake enhanced efforts in
this regard.
“The Security Council emphasises the importance of effective
governance in Somalia and the delivery of basic services to the Somali people
throughout Somalia. The Security Council underlines the need for further
efforts to fight corruption and promote transparency in Somalia, and welcomes
initiatives to increase transparency and accountability in the collection, and
efficient use, of Somali public revenues.
“The Security Council underlines that the development of the Somali
security forces and institutions is vital to ensure Somalia’s long term security
and stability and calls upon the international community in coordination with
the UN and AMISOM to provide increased support to the Somali security and
justice sectors. The Council fully supports the training of Somalia security
forces through the bilateral support programmes of Member States and the
European Union Training Mission for Somalia (EUTM).
“The Security Council supports efforts to expand existing stabilisation
plans in Somalia to new sectors, welcomes increased international support to
areas of stability, including through a new stability fund, and encourages
further efforts to address Somalia’s long-term reconstruction and economic
development.
“The Security Council recognises that while the famine may have ended
in Somalia, there are significant ongoing humanitarian needs. The Council
underlines the high number of internally displaced persons in Somalia who
urgently need support, and persons in need of emergency relief. The Council
emphasises the need for the international community to provide well
coordinated, timely and sustained humanitarian assistance to the Somali
people, and to help build their resistance to future shocks, and stresses the
importance of upholding and respecting the humanitarian principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence. The Security Council

2

12-25100

S/PRST/2012/4

demands that all parties ensure full and unhindered access for the timely
delivery of humanitarian aid to persons in need of assistance across Somalia,
consistent with relevant humanitarian and human rights law.
“The Security Council welcomes the fact that effective countermeasures
have led to a substantial reduction in the number of successful piracy-related
attacks, although it notes with concern the increased incidence of attempted
attacks. The Security Council remains gravely concerned about the ongoing
threat posed by piracy and armed robbery off the coast of Somalia, including
the issue of hostage taking and the increasing use of violence against hostages,
and the extended range of the piracy threat into the western Indian Ocean and
adjacent sea areas. The Security Council recognises that the ongoing instability
in Somalia contributes to the problem of piracy and armed robbery at sea, and
stresses the need for a comprehensive response to repress piracy and armed
robbery at sea and tackle its underlying causes. The Council welcomes the
commitments made at the London Conference on new efforts to repress piracy,
including efforts by bilateral donors and regional organisations to strengthen
the capacity of Somalia and relevant states in the region to prosecute those
responsible for acts of piracy and armed robbery off the coast of Somalia and
to imprison convicted pirates.
“The Security Council remains gravely concerned about the threat posed
to Somalia and the international community by terrorist attacks by Somali
armed opposition groups, in particular Al Shabaab, and welcomes the
commitment made at the London Conference for renewed international action
to address this threat, while ensuring full respect for the rule of law, human
rights and international humanitarian law. The Council also stresses the
importance of addressing conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism.
“The Security Council welcomes the intention of the Government of
Turkey to hold a Conference on Somalia in Istanbul.
“The members of the Security Council will keep the situation in Somalia
under close review.”

12-25100

3
