S/PV.8106

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8106th meeting

Friday, 17 November 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alfano. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli Frieri

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Security challenges in the Mediterranean

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-38826 (E)
*1738826*

S/PV.8106

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Security challenges in the Mediterranean
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank the Italian
presidency for convening this meeting.
The word “Mediterranean” literally means
“in the middle of the Earth”. Figuratively, too, the
Mediterranean has found itself, since time immemorial,
at the confluence of civilizations, cultures, religions,
trade and migration. Developments in the region
continue to shape the history and politics of the world.
The Mediterranean Sea provides immense economic
resources, such as hydrocarbons and fish stocks, and
invaluable trade routes. However, its benefits depend
on stability and cooperation.
Indeed, the situation in the Mediterranean
illustrates that peace and security are inseparable from
democratic, economic and social progress, and from
the advancement of gender, youth, minority and human
rights. Events over the past few years in the region have
forcefully — and painfully — made that clear.
Today the Mediterranean faces serious challenges
on multiple fronts: the illicit trade in narcotics, weapons
and petroleum products; large movements of refugees
and migrants, who are preyed upon by human smugglers
and traffickers; and maritime piracy. The narcotics
trade is also generating deadly spillover effects, such
as increased drug use and health crises.
In parts of the region, fragility is being exacerbated
by systematic violations of human rights and violence
against women and girls. The Mediterranean is also
suffering from severe environmental degradation and
natural-resource constraints. In recent years, food
scarcity and sharp rises in prices have led to social and
political unrest. Long-festering regional wounds and
sectarian divides have been made worse by atrocity
crimes, terrorism, attempts to annihilate minorities, the
2/21

17/11/2017

plundering of cultural heritage, forced displacement
and the use of chemical weapons.
Libya’s stability is vital for the region. Yet, after
years of prolonged transition, the country’s institutions
remain deeply divided. The United Nations is committed
to helping the Libyan people reach an inclusive
political settlement. Instability in the Sahel region
has contributed to an increase in irregular migration
towards Europe. The United Nations will continue to
support the countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) and the G-5 Joint Force, including through
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
Achieving peace between Israelis and Palestinians
is also critical. The United Nations remains committed
to providing all possible support towards a just,
comprehensive and lasting resolution of the conflict
through the two-State solution. A comprehensive
political settlement in Cyprus would also mitigate
political tensions in the region.
Da’esh will continue to thrive unless the deep
political roots of the Syrian conflict are resolved
through a credible and comprehensive political process,
as foreseen under resolution 2254 (2015). The security
gains against terrorist groups in Libya, Iraq and
elsewhere may prove reversible if we do not accelerate
reconstruction and economic recovery.
I commend refugee host countries for their
generosity. There is a clear need to address the drivers
of displacement. We must also address the worrisome
increase in xenophobia and discrimination against
refugees, migrants and minorities. That is a shared
global responsibility. It is essential to re-establish the
integrity of the refugee-protection regime on both sides
of the Mediterranean and to increase resettlement and
relocation programmes. Trafficking in human beings
should not be isolated from trafficking in cultural
property, drugs, weapons and oil, which benefit
militias, terrorists and armed groups.
The Libya sanctions regime restricts the movement
of arms and related material into and out of Libya.
The Panels of Experts on Libya and the Sudan have
been investigating the financing of armed groups.
Along with the newly re-established Mali sanctions
regime, I hope that those tools will be useful in
supporting Governments and regions working towards
peaceful transitions.
17-38826

17/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

All too often, responses to security challenges in
the Mediterranean are undertaken largely or solely
through traditional security arrangements or ad hoc
solutions. Such approaches carry the risk of prolonging
unacceptable status quos or worsening situations if
not backed by efforts to address the underlying root
causes. Our efforts to achieve the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development have an important role to
play in that regard.
The Mediterranean is a global junction of mutually
enriching cultures, societies and economies. Yet
violence and hatred are threatening that dynamism,
to the detriment of the entire world. We should do our
utmost to resolve the worst crises of the region, so that
it can then continue to contribute its best. I count on
countries in the Mediterranean and beyond to reaffirm
their proud tradition of openness and solidarity.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing, which was, as usual, smart and visionary.
It is now my
national statement.

pleasure

to

deliver

Italy’s

The focus of today’s Security Council meeting is on
an issue of worldwide implications. The Mediterranean
is a small sea, almost the size of a large lake when seen
on a map. However, it is where much of our global
security is at stake. It is a fact that a great number
of the world’s crises originate in the Mediterranean
basin — the spread of Da’esh, Libya’s instability, the
Syrian war, new tension in Lebanon, the dangers posed
by foreign terrorist fighters, the fragile situation in the
Western Balkans, the migration crisis, and the list goes
on and on.
Although the Mediterranean amounts to only
approximately 1 per cent of the world’s surface, a
significant part of our global stability and security is
played out in that Sea. Italy, located at the centre of the
Mediterranean, is bearing the brunt of that insecurity.
Our strategy has been to combine solidarity and
security. For example, in the course of the migration
crisis, we have proved that it is possible to save more
than half a million lives at sea and, at the same time,
counter fundamentalism and extremists who despise
the values of our open and democratic society.
However, we need to do more together as global
partners to control the routes that today could be
taken by foreign terrorist fighters, following the defeat
of Da’esh in Iraq and in Syria. The global coalition

S/PV. 8106

against Da’esh has neutralized the safe havens in
which terrorists could mastermind attacks against
all of us. Italy has done its part as the second-largest
contributor to that coalition in Iraq. We have trained
almost 30,000 military and police units, but we must
remain ever-vigilant against the spread of Da’esh in the
Mediterranean and the concrete risk of foreign terrorist
fighters returning to North Africa and to Europe.
Therefore, we must deepen information-sharing
among our intelligence agencies in order to identify
jihadists and halt them in their quest for destruction.
Our commitment against terror must be extended far
and wide, including in the Sahel, where instability
directly affects the security of the Mediterranean. In
Libya, after being forced out of Sirte, Da’esh remains
a threat, with its roots also in the Sahel. That too is
a reason that Libya remains a key challenge for
the Security Council. However, in order to further
emphasize the moral burden of improving the lives of
refugees and migrants who are exploited by criminal
organizations in Libya, we must take on greater shared
responsibility, with more humanitarian assistance and
long-term development.
On the political process in Libya, I will not repeat
what I said yesterday in this Chamber (see S/PV.8104).
However, I will stress once again that it is crucial
for all of us to support the action plan of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. If we miss
that chance, all of us, not only Libyans, will pay a
heavy price.
The tragic story of Syria should be a reminder to
the Libyans that a negotiated solution is vital, and that
there is no military short cut. Regional tensions and
brutal actions by the Al-Assad regime have made peace
in Syria difficult for far too long. Our key objective
should always remain the same — to support the
political process led by the United Nations. We call
on the countries around this table and on the entire
United Nations membership to redouble their efforts to
encourage a genuine commitment by the Syrian parties
to engage in negotiations.
We are also concerned by the latest developments
in Lebanon, where Italy has invested deeply in peace
and stability, especially in the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon peacekeeping mission. We call on
all parties to respect the independence and integrity of
Lebanon’s democratic institutions. There is no role in

17-388263/21

S/PV.8106

Maintenance of international peace and security

Lebanon for any foreign forces or militaries other than
the legitimate security forces of the Lebanese State.
In an interconnected world where stability and
security are tested by gross violations of human rights
and a humanitarian crisis, it is the responsibility of the
international community to react. Our reaction must be
built upon more political dialogue and more security
cooperation, as well as more cultural collaboration.
Italy considers culture to be a key pillar of sustainable
development. In order to create lasting political solutions
in the Mediterranean, we are convinced that we need
to invest in human capital, especially in the education
of youth. Preserving cultural heritage is also a way
to tackle extremism. That is why Italy, together with
France, promoted resolution 2347 (2017), which was the
first of its kind on the destruction of cultural heritage
in armed conflict. Terrorists who destroy cultural sites
want to erases peoples’ identities. We should therefore
always protect such rich and moderate identities, which
have shaped a common culture of dialogue and mutual
respect in the Mediterranean for millenniums.
In the interest of the security of the Mediterranean,
it is also crucial to defend religious freedom and protect
religious minorities. If religious freedom is protected,
the rule of law and security can be asserted. If such
protection is absent, the consequence is instability. For
fanatics, religion is only a pretext. They want to hold
God hostage to their evil ideologies. Therefore, we
must do more to separate those who join their hands in
prayer from those who take up arms.
We also recognize that more women have to be
protagonists in the Mediterranean. In October, in Rome,
we launched the Mediterranean Women Mediators
Network. It is important to strengthen preventive
diplomacy through the greater involvement of women
in mediation.
The Mediterranean may be troubled by numerous
challenges, but it is also a sea of many opportunities. It
is a market of 500 million consumers. It makes up 10 per
cent of the global gross domestic product (GDP). That
GDP grows at approximately 4.5 per cent annually. It is
also where 20 per cent of maritime traffic and 30 per
cent of the oil trade take place.
Will the Mediterranean region evolve into a meeting
place of cultures that trade freely and cross-fertilize
civilizations as it did once before? Or will it devolve
into a region of terror, social despair and unrest? The
answer very much depends upon the willingness and
4/21

17/11/2017

capacity of the international community to strongly
confront all security challenges and simultaneously
promote a pluralistic society that does not marginalize
its youth, women or minorities. Those are the values
that inspired the Charter of the United Nations. They
are values that still ensure stability and development
all across the world. In a region that connects Europe,
Africa and Asia, the dividends of peace and security
are huge and global. It is up to us to seize them.
I now resume my function as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Italian presidency
for convening today’s meeting. I thank you, Sir, for
honouring the Council with your presence and for
leading today’s meeting.
The Mediterranean is in a strategically unique
geographic location. It is the heart of the old world. It is
the cradle and intersection of civilization. It has been a
cultural beacon for the entire world. The Mediterranean
has been a source of inspiration for peoples in the West
and the East. It has been a bridge of communication
between the West and the East. It has had a very unique
cultural nature for the peoples of the Mediterranean
that is based on diversity, tolerance and acceptance
of others.
The crisis that we are witnessing in the
Mediterranean has made the region a destination for
foreign terrorist fighters. It is also a destination for
returnees. Various terrorist organizations have found
new ways to finance their terrorist activities, such as
trafficking in petroleum, the destruction and trafficking
in cultural artefacts and trafficking in persons, not
to mention that some Governments are sponsoring
terrorism in order to achieve political aims. They
are providing terrorists with arms and funds. They
also facilitate the transit of foreign terrorist fights.
Combating terrorist challenges in the Mediterranean
requires adopting a comprehensive approach. We also
need to address the root causes of terrorism without
any discrimination. In Iraq and Syria, we cannot focus
on combating the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) if its fighters can escape to Libya and the Sahel.
That would not lead to combating terrorism. Rather,
it would temporarily export the problem to a different
region. We must combat the root causes of terrorism
17-38826

17/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

and halt any support that is being given to terrorists.
We must ensure compliance with Security Council
resolutions, especially those relating to counterterrorism and combating terrorist discourse. We must
also ensure the implementation of relevant sanctions.
The Mediterranean intersects the Sahel region.
That is why it is an important priority to ensure
stability in the Sahel. It affects security and stability
in the Mediterranean. Recently, we have seen that
the security of the Sahel affects the security of the
Mediterranean. We are witnessing the deterioration of
the security situation in Libya and Mali, as well as the
emergence of a security vacuum. It is hard to control
the borders, especially in remote deserts. That has led
to the creation of safe havens for terrorist organizations
and organized crime networks.
At this juncture, I would like to emphasize the
importance of the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint
Force in combating such threats. The international
community has a responsibility to support such an
ambitious initiative. It is important to invest in the
Joint Force. It will yield positive results, and such an
investment would bear fruit.
It is also important to redouble efforts to implement
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
It addresses the different challenges in the region
from a comprehensive, holistic perspective that takes
into account development, security and humanitarian
dimensions, which are all interrelated and intertwined.
The Mediterranean suffers from water scarcity,
especially in the Southern and Eastern Mediterranean.
Egypt believes that any serious approach to preventing
crises cannot overlook water scarcity. We are witnessing
increasing challenges to development that are related
to environmental challenges. Therefore, water scarcity
might be a reason for future wars. That is why it is
incumbent upon us to work together to guarantee
cooperation among different Mediterranean countries,
so as to ensure development and the availability of water.
That is why Egypt has signed bilateral and multilateral
agreements with its neighbours and with other
countries along the Nile River to ensure cooperation
without causing harm to the environment and based on
the principle of prior notification. In that way, countries
can use the water in a reponsible manner.
Forced displacement is a direct result of the
security and development challenges we are witnessing
in the Mediterranean. Every year, millions of people

S/PV. 8106

escape from armed conflict, persecution, violence,
terrorism, destitution and lack of food security, or they
are escaping from the negative repercussions of climate
change, natural disasters or other factors. Egypt
believes it is important to adopt a holistic approach to
address the root causes of forced displacement. Such an
approach should focus on the development dimension
in the countries of origin and in the host countries.
Countries hosting refugees and migrants should make
efforts to create more possibilities to welcome migrants
and refugees. We cannot focus only on security
solutions and close our borders. That runs contrary to
the 1951 Geneva Refugee Convention. Egypt welcomes
the efforts to adopt a global compact for safe, orderly
and regular migration. In that way, countries can share
the burden and the responsibilities. It will ultimately
ensure the dignity of refugees and migrants.
In conclusion, the security approach in dealing
with the problems in the Mediterranean has proven to
be flawed. It is not conducive to restoring stability in
the region. All parties must cooperate to combat the
serious challenges and to address the root causes of
the problems. We will overcome the challenges only
through a genuine partnership based on capacitybuilding, and in a way that ensures stability in the
Mediterranean. It will again make the Mediterranean
a bridge for cultures, a bridge for development rather
than being an open grave for ambitious young people
who yearn for a better future. We cannot waste this
human potential, which could completely change the
landscape in the Mediterranean.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): It is really humbling to speak
in this debate after the briefing, as always stimulating, by
the Secretary-General, and now by the representatives
of Italy and Egypt, two prominent Mediterranean
countries. I want to thank you, Mr. President, as well
as Italy, for initiating this discussion. As the SecretaryGeneral clearly articulated, the security challenges
in the Mediterranean region are the consequence of a
confluence of factors at play in the immediate region
and beyond.
Today, perhaps more than ever, the prosperity,
stability and security of the peoples of the
Mediterranean region and their neighbours are bound
together by challenges that are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing. They include conflict, terrorism, violent
extremism, multidimensional poverty, climate change,
forced displacement, organized crime and political
instability. They are all transboundary in nature.

17-388265/21

S/PV.8106

Maintenance of international peace and security

17/11/2017

Overcoming them requires comprehensive approaches,
regional perspectives and new partnerships at all levels.

is unacceptable in that regard, and further efforts are
needed to ensure that international standards are met.

This is not the type of discussion we normally have
in the Security Council. Most days we meet to discuss
one report, one country, one conflict. Yet it is becoming
more and more evident that most of today’s conflicts do
not exist in a vacuum, within neatly defined borders.
Likewise, we are also recognizing that modern conflicts
are being driven not by one issue, but are a function
of how different drivers — such as poverty, inequality
and climate change, to name a few — interact with one
another, and of the cumulative impact on individuals
and societies.

Secondly, our overarching focus must be on
sustaining peace and preventing conflicts from
emerging in the first place, or when they do,
responding and resolving them quickly. Building on
the sustaining peace agenda, the Security Council and
the United Nations system as a whole must be more
effective in addressing conflicts in the Mediterranean
and neighbouring regions early on, including by
enhancing analysis, understanding of root causes
and information sharing. The Council needs to draw
upon more integrated analysis from the entire United
Nations system in order for it to effectively assess,
address, prevent and respond to conflicts and threats
to international peace and security. I very much believe
that the reform effort of the Secretary-General is meant
precisely to improve that part of our work.

It is clear, therefore, that our responses must follow
a similar logic if we are to be effective. We must meet
people’s present needs based on their realities, while
at the same time building resilience and investing in
peaceful societies. Protecting human dignity and
human rights is not only the surest way to prevent
conflict, but also the foundation for building peaceful,
prosperous and sustainable societies. Today marks a
welcome opportunity for the Council to zoom out and
to take a broader perspective in order to discuss the
root causes of security challenges in the Mediterranean
region and how to address them. With that in mind, I
want to make five brief points.
First, the most vulnerable within society
are hit hardest when factors such as instability,
underdevelopment and terrorism combine. It is essential
that we continue to respond to the needs of those
people in the short and medium term. That includes
providing lifesaving humanitarian assistance, while
at the same time building the resilience of individuals
and communities against future shocks. It also means
responding to the needs of those displaced as a result
of poverty, conflict and insecurity, whose human rights
must be upheld. We are particularly concerned about
the current situation for refugees and migrants in parts
of the Mediterranean region.
The Secretary-General has very often — and I think
very rightly — spoken about the need to enhance the
dignity of refugees. And he has often stressed the need
to re-establish the integrity of the refugee-protection
regime. All States must comply with the international
human rights and refugee frameworks, particularly
when it comes to detention. As I said in this Chamber
only yesterday (see S/PV.8104), the situation in Libya
6/21

Thirdly, we need to expand our ability to manage
long-term structural risks. That includes identifying
and responding to the risks of instability and insecurity
arising from the interaction of climate change and
social, economic and political factors. The Council
has already recognized the adverse effects of climate
change on stability in the Lake Chad region, and
called for adequate risk assessments, risk-management
strategies and early-warning mechanisms. The Council
must remain alert to those issues.
Fourthly, we know that many of the challenges
facing the Mediterranean region originate in chronic
underdevelopment, poverty, human rights violations and
abuses, weak governance and a lack of opportunities.
Hence, any long-term strategy needs to tackle those
issues as a matter of priority. That includes addressing
youth unemployment, social exclusion and inequality;
respect for, and enjoyment of, human rights, including
freedom of expression and of assembly; creating
economic opportunities and a society built on the rule
of law; and sustainable growth — just as you stressed,
Mr. President. Above all, we need to see dedicated and
determined implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, which, with its aim to leave
no one behind, in itself constitutes a powerful tool for
prevention. There are established links between gender
inequality, political instability and underdevelopment.
For that reason, the full and effective participation of
women in decision-making at all levels is necessary
in order to create stability and achieve sustainable
development in the region.
17-38826

17/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Finally, in order to adopt an approach that is truly
comprehensive, we need true partnerships among
States, regional organizations and among people. We
are very encouraged by the ever-increasing cooperation
between the African Union and the United Nations and
we support, as others have said, the Group or Five for
the Sahel in all its efforts. The European Union has a
key role to play in promoting security and prosperity
inside and outside the borders of the Union. The
upcoming African Union-European Union Summit in
Abidjan at the end of this month provides an important
opportunity to strengthen crucial partnerships, with a
timely focus on regional investment in youth.
Situated at the intersection of three continents,
the Mediterranean has acted throughout history as
a melting pot for culture, trade and people. The new
types of complex security challenges facing the
Mediterranean region are by no means unique. They
are being replicated in different regions throughout the
world. Responding will require us to work together,
with the whole of the United Nations system supporting
national and regional efforts with a range of flexible,
integrated and innovative tools. Only by joint action
can we respond to those overlapping challenges and
ensure a better future for all.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for presiding over this meeting of the
Security Council and for everything that Italy does
so effectively in tackling the security challenges in
the Mediterranean region. I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing on this complex set
of issues before us.
It is all too often that we discuss the consequences
of instability in the Council, and thpse consequences
form some of the biggest threats that we all face:
terrorism, modern slavery, disorderly mass migration
and so on. I welcome this opportunity today to dig
beneath the surface and to consider the root causes, as
previous speakers have done.
In many cases, it is a Government’s lack of
respect for human rights — whether through inability
or unwillingness — that leads to conflict, mass
displacement and abuses. Terrorists and armed criminal
groups have exploited the breakdown of State authority
in parts of the Sahel and in Libya to exploit people. They
use their profits from smuggling, human trafficking
and modern slavery to fuel even more instability,
which in turn damages the economic opportunities

S/PV. 8106

that Governments should be offering their citizens.
That then further fuels displacement, terrorism and
modern slavery. Today I want to set out what the United
Kingdom is doing to address those root causes.
First of all, we are totally committed to the
Secretary-General’s agenda of preventing conflict.
We are substantially increasing our investments in
fragile States to strengthen their resilience; we have
implemented new early-warning and early action
systems that help prevent, mitigate and resolve conflict.
And we will continue to help the United Nations to
strengthen its conflict prevention, mediation and
peacebuilding capacity.
The United Kingdom is proud to be the largest
donor to the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund and,
in the Security Council, as penholder on Libya, we are
at the forefront of international efforts to help Libya
overcome the political and security challenges that it
faces. As we discussed yesterday (see S/PV.8104), an
inclusive political deal negotiated within the framework
of the Libyan Political Agreement is the best way of
stabilizing Libya and tackling the criminal networks
that make it a transit route for illegal migration.
It is also the best way of developing Libya’s huge
economic potential.
We recognize that we need to reduce the space in
which terrorists and people traffickers thrive across the
region. It is those groups that too often also cause, or
exploit, instability and conflict. We therefore encourage
all Member States to work with the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Security Councilmandated Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate to
develop their capabilities to counter terrorism and to
prevent violent extremism.
Secondly, the United Kingdom recognizes that,
when crises become protracted, refugees who have
no choice but to flee their homes cannot return. It
is therefore vital that education and employment
opportunities and support be available to displaced
people and to the communities that host them. We are
proud to give 0.7 per cent of our gross national income
to development. Over half of all the spending of the
Department for International Development is to fragile
States and regions. In addition, we have helped to
secure new World Bank funding for countries that host
refugees. At the London conference on Syria in 2016,
the United Kingdom pioneered, and secured agreement
for, historic compacts between Governments of the

17-388267/21

S/PV.8106

Maintenance of international peace and security

region and the international community to deliver
education, create jobs and provide opportunities for
refugees and local people.
Thirdly, the United Kingdom is stepping up its
efforts to combat the criminal networks that profit from
modern slavery: for instance, we are developing an
ambitious programme in Nigeria, from where so many
migrants across the Mediterranean flow. We all have a
role to play to rid the world of this terrible scourge. Let
us all invest in livelihoods and development in source
countries, and let us all work with border authorities
and intelligence agencies to tackle human trafficking
and smuggling networks.
In conclusion, our ultimate goal is a well-governed,
stable region where human rights are respected.
That will ensure we have a stronger platform to fight
international terrorism, to end modern slavery and to
achieve safe and well-managed migration, bringing
value to the destination country and country of origin
while also ensuring the safety of those travelling.
Given the scale of the challenges ahead, we owe it to
all involved to work together and address all of those
issues simultaneously.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): It is s pleasure to see
you, Sir, once again presiding over the Security Council.
The security challenges in the Mediterranean have
many dimensions, as they do not negatively affect only
countries in the region but also have severe implications
for global peace and security. It is therefore timely and
necessary to think collectively about how best to tackle
these threats. I thank you again, Mr. Minister, for
bringing such an important issue to the attention of the
Security Council. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his important briefing.
Today’s discussion can be seen as continuation
of our deliberations yesterday (see S/PV.8104) on
the situation in Libya. We believe that the country
remains an important element for the stability of
neighbouring States, North Africa and the Sahel. It is
therefore even more regrettable that the current crisis
in Libya shows no signs of abating. People live under a
constant threat of death or injury from fighting among
various armed groups. Hundreds have been killed or
tortured. And thousands have been displaced. The
humanitarian and economic situation continues to
deteriorate rapidly. More and more Libyans require
international assistance. The Libyan crisis has opened
up a wide range of opportunities to exploit the security
8/21

17/11/2017

and institutional vacuum. It has enabled local terrorist
groups and criminal networks to gain ideological
influence and military strength not only in Libya, but
in the wider region.
It should be mentioned that the terrorist threat is
not something new to the countries of the South-East
Mediterranean and the neighbouring Sahel. Major
contingents of foreign terrorist fighters who joined the
ranks of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Jabhat
Al-Nusra, Al-Qaida and their affiliates in Iraq and
Syria originated from those particular regions. Now,
in view of the recent significant setbacks and loss of
territory by respective terrorist organizations in the
Middle East, countries in North Africa have to face the
inflow of both those who are returning and those who
are relocating. Their presence will, without a doubt,
fuel only sectarianism and increase the complexity and
duration of conflicts.
The other side of the problem is the possible abuse
of asylum systems by terrorists while huge waves of
migrants arrive from conflict zones, seeking shelter.
There is a growing concern about the possible creation
of sleeper cells in different parts of North Africa and
Europe, which has to be duly addressed.
In order to combat potential terrorism outbreaks and
its spread to new regions, the international community
may need to elaborate additional measures to those set
established in resolutions 2178 (2014) and 2322 (2016),
which should address terrorists’ modus operandi, inter
alia, in a number of ways.
First, we should ensure broader criminalization
of foreign terrorist fighters and develop bilateral and
international exchange of evidence of their crimes, so
that terrorists can be apprehended at the earliest stage
possible and face justice.
Secondly, we should ensure swift and unimpeded
sharing of information between States, especially
of terrorist biometric data, and universalize
the use of advanced passenger information and
INTERPOL databases.
Thirdly, we should establish effective cross-border
cooperation between immigration, law-enforcement
and judicial authorities.
Fourthly, we should conduct risk assessments and
identify the most vulnerable border stretches in order to
strengthen respective controls.
17-38826

17/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

And, fifthly, we should further cut off the sources
of financing for terrorism, especially combating
extortion activities and kidnapping for ransom, as well
as disrupting terrorists’ cooperation with transnational
organized crime groups involved in smuggling and the
trafficking in human beings and weapons.
We also believe that, without political or economic
opportunities, particularly for youth, there is a risk that
the North Africa and sub-Saharan regions will remain
impoverished and ungoverned zones where terrorists
and criminals will find a safe haven and a suitable
environment for illegal trafficking in persons and arms,
as well as other unlawful activities.
Syria remains another burning hotbed of tension in
the Mediterranean, poisoning the surrounding region
and the wider security environment. The uncountable
waves of refugees that fled Syria, seeking salvation
from the brutal tyranny and inhumane conditions,
arrived in Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq, Turkey and many
European Union States, thereby creating additional
risks for the socioeconomic and security situation in
those countries.
Six years of the conflict have passed and what
do we see? If current trends persist in Syria, there is
a chance that one side will claim a military victory
and the overall situation will be akin to that of 2011.
However, this time it will be compounded by a
traumatized society affected by years of war and a
deepening sectarian divide, with neither national
reconciliation nor the root causes of the crisis having
been addressed. Under such circumstances, any victory
over the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) in
Syria will provide only temporary relief, with a door
remaining open for a new ISIS-like crisis to emerge.
Therefore, we continue to believe that there should be a
longer-term blueprint for Syria, one that is firmly based
on a commitment to a negotiated political settlement
and a clear understanding of what will be done next.
In the absence of such a blueprint, the situation in the
country will continue to pose a long-term risk for the
entire Mediterranean region.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate that, if we
want to achieve sustainable peace and stability in the
Mediterranean, more investments have to be made in
the socioeconomic development of the countries in
need. Without functioning Government structures, the
provision of most essential social services, working law
enforcement and judicial organs, and the active State

S/PV. 8106

support for local businesses and trade initiatives, the
vulnerable communities in conflict-affected countries
will remain an easy target for terrorists and criminals.
Therefore, initiatives to fight terrorism, bring about
economic development and ensure respect for human
rights — including the active promotion and protection
of the rights of women and children — must go hand in
hand and complement each other.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): It is a true honour to see you,
Mr. President, presiding over this meeting. We would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his important
briefing, and we take this opportunity to once again
commend the way in which Italy is conducting its
presidency of the Security Council this month.
The challenges affecting security in the
Mediterranean have root causes in the conflicts
currently taking place in the Middle East and North
Africa, as well as the collateral effect that has been
generated in the Sahel region. That in turn has
translated into the difficulty of States embroiled in
internal conflicts to guarantee the security of their own
citizens and establish effective measures to strengthen
their internal order.
Regrettably, one of the dimensions of this crisis,
as we have heard during this meeting, is reflected in
the alarming number of migrants and refugees who
have died in the Mediterranean Sea — amounting to
nearly 3,000 fatalities in 2017 alone. That is a figure
that, according to the report of 13 November of the
International Organization for Migration, represents
more than half of the worldwide fatalities linked to
migrants and people seeking refuge. Furthermore, the
trafficking in migrants and refugees, subjecting them
to slavery, their degrading treatment and the many
cases of sexual exploitation, are other examples of the
serious effects of this crisis, evidencing the existence
and interconnections of terrorist organizations and
networks of transnational criminal organizations. Such
groups take advantage of the fragile security and control
bodies of the States affected by internal conflicts and
exploit people’s need to safeguard their lives and their
families lives by fleeing the conflicts in their places of
origin. That generates resources and finances for the
criminal organizations and exacerbates the crisis in
the region.
In that context, we appreciate the significant
efforts made by the agencies of the United Nations

17-388269/21

S/PV.8106

Maintenance of international peace and security

17/11/2017

and the various international cooperation bodies to
alleviate the situation of the migrants and refugees who
seek to escape conflicts by crossing the Mediterranean
Sea. We are also grateful for the State and regional
efforts that are being implemented in compliance with
resolutions 2240 (2015), 2312 (2016) and 2380 (2017) to
combat the crime of trafficking in persons, mainly off
the Libyan coast.

It is evident that Government vacuums, the
weakening of order and security forces and the
absence of border controls have been, and continue
to be, elements that allow the proliferation of terrorist
groups and irregular combatants, who find the spaces
to commit acts of destabilization, in addition to
perpetrating crimes and violations of human rights,
which may constitute crimes against humanity.

We call on all States and the international
community to make the greatest possible efforts to
prevent and put an end to the proliferation of human
trafficking networks operating in the Mediterranean
Sea by developing and strengthening the institutional
capacities of the countries of transit and origin of
those victims. In that regard, Bolivia proposed in June,
during the World Peoples’ Conference, the concept
of “universal citizenship”, with the aim of reducing
the barriers that prevent refugees from escaping war,
armed conflicts or human trafficking. We believe that
that proposal constitutes a useful tool to deal with the
crisis that is currently occupying the attention of the
international community.

Finally, we believe that those weaknesses and
challenges can be addressed if the parties to the various
conflicts commit to engage in sustained dialogue to
resolve their differences, opting to cease hostilities and,
above all, seeking to strengthen the organic structures
of the security forces, generating confidence in State
institutions and reinforcing the presence and control
of States on their borders. In that regard, the efforts
of the Council and the international community should
focus on paving the way to promote and strengthen
peaceful means of conflict resolution. To that end,
we believe that the role of the various missions of the
United Nations established on the ground to facilitate
that work is fundamental.

The issue of security in North Africa is an important
element to take into account when analysing the
situation in the Mediterranean according to what was
reported on Friday, 10 November in the joint meeting
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011),
concerning Libya, and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015), concerning South
Sudan. The reports mentioned the presence of foreign
fighters and mercenaries operating in the region who
are moving without much difficulty between the
countries that are embroiled in internal conflicts and are
actively involved in taking up arms and undermining
all efforts to achieve a political and peaceful solution
to those conflicts.

We reiterate that, to a large extent, the challenges
that today affect security in the Mediterranean are
the direct and concrete result of the application
of regime-change policies, interventionism and
interference in the internal affairs of other States, which
does nothing more than lead to millions of victims,
displaced persons and fatalities.

An example of the related effects of the crises in the
region was reflected in the final report of the Panel of
Experts established pursuant to resolution 1973 (2011)
submitted in 2015, which established that weapons
from Libya considerably strengthened the military
capacity of the terrorist groups that operate in the Sahel
subregion and are currently used to perpetrate attacks
against the national security forces, as well as civilians
and members of the United Nations peacekeeping
missions in the field.
10/21

Mr. Bessho (Japan): To begin, I would like to
thank the President — His Excellency Mr. Angelino
Alfano — for convening this meeting on such an
important topic. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his insightful briefing.
The Mediterranean region, which is adjacent
to three continents, has historically enjoyed great
cultural diversity as the birthplace and crossroads
of many civilizations. At the same time, its location
makes it particularly vulnerable to the spillover
effects of conflict. Today the Mediterranean region
is experiencing various challenges in addition to
conflict, including climate change, famine, terrorism,
violent extremism, transnational organized crime,
including trafficking in persons, and an unprecedented
volume of migration. Those challenges are complex,
intertwined threats to peace and security in the region
that are exacerbating or prolonging existing conflicts.
Against that backdrop, we would like to share a few
17-38826

17/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

perspectives on how to more effectively address those
complex, interlinked threats to peace and security in
the Mediterranean.
First, we need to grapple with complex,
multifactoral challenges to international peace and
security through a more comprehensive and integrated
approach. In particular, we would like to emphasize
the perspective of the peace and security, development
and humanitarian nexus. It is clear that complex
driving factors to conflict cannot be dealt with from a
fragmented perspective. In that regard, it is important
to implement the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel, which addresses the multidimensional and
interlinked challenges facing the Sahel region. Those
challenges are among the major factors underlying the
surging movement of people through the Mediterranean.
We appreciate the Secretary-General’s leadership
to strengthen the United Nations work in the Sahel by
establishing a steering committee for the Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. Japan has been a strong
supporter of flagship projects in that regard. We have
provided support for border control, as well as for
countermeasures against the radicalization of youth
and activities to raise awareness of civic rights. Those
assistance projects aim to strengthen border control
capacity and prevent young people from turning to
violent extremism, and thereby stabilize the region.
Secondly, efforts to sustain peace in the region
cannot succeed without the States’ ownership. In that
regard, we would like to commend the ongoing political
process in Libya, which is being led by the Libyan
people themselves, and express our ongoing support to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
his role to facilitate that process. The Council should
continue to robustly support efforts such as the Libyan
political process, conducted with the ownership of the
affected countries themselves.
In addition, the role played by regional organizations
around the Mediterranean — which include the League
of Arab States, the European Union and the African
Union — cannot be overemphasized. We believe that
the strengthened partnership and better coordination
between the United Nations, the Security Council and
regional organizations are essential to comprehensively
address complex, regional challenges.
Thirdly, we believe that the human security
approach could serve as a useful tool in dealing with
the complex, interlinked threats to peace and security

S/PV. 8106

in the region. Human security seeks to protect and
empower every individual; it necessarily addresses
multiple challenges at once, including those that are
most destabilizing to the Mediterranean region, such
as food and water insecurity, migration, internally
displaced persons and health care.
I would like to conclude by thanking once again
the presidency of Italy for organizing this holistic and
thematic meeting of the Security Council. It is important
for the Council to seek better ways to address today’s
complex, multifactoral challenges to international peace
and security. During our presidency of the Council next
month, we would like to continue relevant discussions,
building upon today’s discussions.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President — Foreign Minister Alfano — for
presiding over this important discussion. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing this afternoon.
Several members have already spoken about
many of the specific challenges countries around the
Mediterranean face. Terrorism, illicit smuggling,
migration and development are all urgent issues that
deserve our full attention. But let us step back for a
moment. When we look at the Mediterranean, we can
see that many of those challenges originate in conflicts
in two places, that is, Syria and Libya. Both of those
conflicts began when ordinary people demanded
respect for their human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Attempts by the Al-Assad and Al-Qadhafi
regimes to suppress those demands by force created
much of the instability we are now grappling with
today. The lesson is simple: the question of security
in the Mediterranean is really a question of human
dignity. When we support respect for human dignity
and the rule of law, we can achieve lasting stability.
However, ignoring such demands for human rights can
sow the seeds of future conflict.
In Syria, Al-Assad’s brutality gave the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) and Al-Qaida a window
of opportunity. As the Al-Assad regime rounded up,
tortured and executed thousands of people, ISIS and
Al-Qaida’s violent ideology gained new traction. As
Al-Assad’s regime literally starved its people and
bombed hospitals and schools, the migration exodus
began. As long as the Al-Assad regime remains in
power, the potential for instability and extremism
will remain.

17-3882611/21

S/PV.8106

Maintenance of international peace and security

In Libya, decades of misrule by Al-Qadhafi left
the country with extremely weak institutions. When
the revolution came, those institutions crumbled.
Libya became a place where ISIS was able to set up an
outpost and where illegal activity, such as trafficking
in people and arms, could thrive as well. As with
Syria, the Libyan people continue to pay a steep price.
It is now time for all Libyans to support and engage
constructively in the political process facilitated by the
United Nations to achieve national reconciliation, end
the conflict and build unified national governance and
security institutions.
Today we are facing the consequences of those
decades of tyranny. Oppression at home in Syria and
Libya created threats to international peace and security.
The answer to security challenges in the Mediterranean
must therefore not be a misguided attempt to recreate
failed political structures of the past; instead, we have
to do better. All of us in the Council must work, in word
and in deed, to support something different. We need
political solutions to conflicts in Libya and Syria that
empower people and that create strong representative
institutions over the long run. That goal has to be what
guides us in responding to the immediate challenges
of the present. Of course, there is no shortage of
immediate threats to confront. None is more pressing
than defeating ISIS and Al-Qaida.
The United States continues to lead, with important
successes against ISIS in Syria. But we have to stay
vigilant. Fighters on the run in Syria threaten to slip
across borders as they try to return home or go to third
countries. All Member States will need to increase
their defences against foreign terrorist fighters, in line
with the terms of resolution 2178 (2014). In Libya, we
partnered with the Government of National Accord
and its aligned forces as they expelled ISIS from Sirte,
which was once the principal stronghold of ISIS outside
Iraq and Syria. Yesterday, we heard from Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, Special Representative of the Secretary
General, on his mediation efforts (see S/PV.8104).
The international community must help Special
Representative Salamé and the Libyan parties advance
the country’s political process, which is the only viable
way to stabilize Libya and unify national security
forces against the real threat, that is, ISIS. Armed
civil conflict among Libyans will only destabilize the
country and play into ISIS’s hands.
Of course, civilians face dire risks every day from
the fighting in Syria and Libya, too. Just this week,
12/21

17/11/2017

air strikes reportedly killed more than 50 civilians
in a market in northern Syria. These were the latest
incidents in the regime’s long track record of flagrant
disregard for the lives and welfare of the Syrian people.
The Al-Assad regime’s barbaric acts continue to play
right into the hands of terrorist groups and undermine
stability across the region.
We are also seeing new risks for civilians in
Libya. Just a few weeks ago, more than a dozen people
were killed and many more injured in an air strike
in the city of Derna, and its people desperately need
immediate and unhindered humanitarian access. Last
month 36 bodies were found in a mass grave not far
from Benghazi. The United States strongly condemns
those incidents. As Mr. Salamé, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, stated yesterday
(see S/PV.8104), there are also concerns that a number
of the fighters who died last week in the Warshefana
area, in western Libya, were killed in a manner that
violates international law. Those responsible must now
be held accountable in order to prevent such atrocities
from happening in the future, and all sides must avoid
further escalation.
Finally, the United States agrees with many
others in the Council about the importance of
combating trafficking in persons and illicit smuggling.
Transnational criminal organizations are responsible for
so much of that illegal activity, and they are preying on
the defenceless. We continue to hear sickening reports
from victims inside Libya, including migrants who
have been raped, sold into prostitution or subjected to
forced labour. It is no surprise that those same criminal
gangs have no concern for the lives of migrants at sea,
where more than 2,900 people have died this year in the
Mediterranean alone.
We recognize the important work of the European
Union’s Operation Sophia, led by Italy, in combating
smuggling and rescuing thousands of lives at sea, but
the criminals are branching out, including through the
illegal smuggling of Libyan oil and petroleum products.
That is why it was important that the Council designated
for sanctions two ships involved in the illegal petroleum
trade earlier this year, and we should use all the tools
we have to disrupt those criminal networks. But we
all have to remember where so many of the challenges
began. They began with regimes that did not respect
the dignity and rights of their peoples. Stability in the
Mediterranean is not just about addressing all of the
17-38826

17/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

short-term challenges around us; it is about learning from
the recent past. It is about investing in real institutions
that protect people’s rights. It is about speaking up as a
Security Council when we see Governments moving in
the wrong direction. It is about remembering that when
people are oppressed, the consequences go far beyond
the borders of any one country, and that is what we
must act on.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Italian delegation for taking
the initiative to convene today’s meeting. In our view,
its format makes it possible to consider the challenges
and threats to global peace and security from a new
perspective, including through the prism of the
situation in the Mediterranean region. We would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his informative
report on the subject.
The Mediterranean region has clearly encountered
a slew of problems spawned by crisis situations in
countries around it as well as beyond it. The terrorist
threat continues to grow and the scale and scope of
transnational organized crime is continually expanding,
owing in part to its close ties to terrorist activity. The
waves of migrants attempting to leave their homes
to seek a better future in a new homeland are not
diminishing. However, it would be wrong to imply
that such worrying trends are linked exclusively to the
region around the Mediterranean Sea. Their negative
impact is being felt around the world. Our planet has
become so interdependent that a crisis in one spot on the
globe can have a chain reaction far beyond its borders.
Regrettably, in this era of globalization, we cannot
defend ourselves from this either by building walls or
deploying military forces. In this situation, there is
only one possible way for the international community
to respond to these threats. We must unite our efforts,
based on cooperation through honest partnerships,
with the aim of resolving the situations of conflict in
the Middle East, North Africa and the Sahel-Saharan
region — which have become catalysts for the wave
of destabilization in the Mediterranean — as well as a
factor of waging an uncompromising fight against the
threat of terrorism. We have long called for this.
One of the stated aims of today’s briefing is to
consider the root causes of the multifaceted threats
to security in the Mediterranean. We believe that,
overall, this approach is worth supporting. From the
very beginning of the so-called Arab spring, which
triggered a series of destructive processes in the Middle

S/PV. 8106

East and North Africa, Russia has repeatedly suggested
that the Security Council should conduct a substantive
analysis of what occurred and draw lessons from it
for the future. However, few have made use of that
sad but valuable experience. Meanwhile, the growing
instability in the region has been skilfully exploited by
extremists and terrorist groups. Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb, Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab, the African cells
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and others
have hastened to fill the power vacuum that external
forces helped to create.
We share the concerns about the unprecedented
harm they continue to do to cultural heritage sites, using
profits from their trade in historically and culturally
valuable objects to finance terrorism’s requirements.
We expect that this problem, and the issue of human
trafficking, will be considered in more detail in separate
Security Council meetings this month.
Just yesterday we discussed the situation in Libya
(see S/PV.8104), where the lack of stability is a key
piece in the region’s jigsaw puzzle of security. We
heard worrying assessments of the political situation,
and many expressed their concerns about the slow
implementation of Special Representative Salamé’s
action plan. Yet almost no one mentioned the original
causes of the crisis in Libya. The representative of
Bolivia alone reminded us — and we thank him
for it — that they are to be found in the military
intervention that the NATO countries undertook in
2011 in order to change a regime that they did not like,
in violation of international law. The result was that
the radical groups that had been used not long before
to oust Mr. Al-Qadhafi gained access to arsenals, a
danger that had warned about well in advance. That in
turn foreordained the further evolution of the situation
far beyond the borders of Libya, primarily in the SahelSaharan region and the Mediterranean.
It would be wrong to delude ourselves that
terrorists can be used for achieving political goals such
as effecting regime change in Tripoli, Damascus or
anywhere else, and then to hope that they will sign up
for deradicalization classes and assimilate peacefully
into civil society. They will accept financial, military
and other assistance, of course, but they will turn their
backs on their sponsors as soon as they consider it
necessary. We have already seen that with Al-Qaida in
Afghanistan, and we will see it again. It is simply wrong
to close one’s eyes to manifestations of radicalization in
such situations, let alone condone them.

17-3882613/21

S/PV.8106

Maintenance of international peace and security

We do not share the belief that human rights
violations are the primary cause of conflict and
that action in support of human rights is the key to
preventing conflict. Indeed, practice has shown that
the reverse is true. Only resolving conflicts can lead
to improvements in human rights situations. Reckless
intervention, including under the banner of protecting
human rights, can lead to a collapse of State authority,
humanitarian disasters, civil wars and surges in
terrorism, and thereby produce massive flows of forcibly
displaced people. We believe that States that are actively
involved in such interventions should acknowledge that
it is they who have primary responsibility for assisting
the refugees and internally displaced persons who have
fallen victim to their actions.
We share the concerns about the deaths of refugees
and migrants who choose dangerous paths in their quest
for a better life, fleeing terrorist threats, persecution,
conflict, instability and poverty. It is important to
understand that the long-term solution to the problem
lies in finding political settlements in the refugees’
countries of origin. Millions of people, and entire
nations, are in need of peace, stability and confidence
in the future. The ultimately determining way to
significantly reduce the refugee problem is to establish
lasting peace in Syria, Libya and other countries in the
grip of conflict.
It is essential to comprehensively combat criminal
organizations that are smuggling people, improve and
strengthen mechanisms to manage migration processes
and increase the international community’s cooperation
on this issue. We must also expand socioeconomic
development assistance to countries of origin, and it is
as important as ever to combat displays of racism and
xenophobia towards refugees and migrants.
The obvious fact remains that in order to ensure
security, development and stability in a region, it
is essential to strengthen State institutions, provide
for systemic economic and social development and
universal respect for human rights and the rule of
law, as well as taking measures to combat terrorism.
It will be essential to improve the performance of
existing mechanisms. For example, the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel has not yet been used
to its full potential. If the response to the threats in the
Mediterranean is not a truly collective one, waves of
instability will continue to spread from crisis areas. It is
essential to stop double-dealing and courting radicals.
We are ready to cooperate openly with all of our partners
14/21

17/11/2017

in the interests of preventing the destructive evolution
of events in the Mediterranean region. Russia’s policy
is transparent. We have no hidden agenda.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): As we were
yesterday, the Senegalese delegation is pleased to see
you presiding over today’s debate on security challenges
in the Mediterranean, Mr. President.
For a change, I will begin by reading out a press
statement issued today by the Government of Senegal.
“The Government of the Republic of Senegal
expresses its profound indignation upon learning
of the sale on Libyan territory of migrants from
sub-Saharan Africa. The Government of the
Republic of Senegal vigorously denounces and
condemns in the strongest terms such human
trafficking, which is a serious outrage to the
conscience of humankind. Senegal urges the
competent Libyan authorities, as well as the African
Union and the United Nations, to launch a prompt
investigation into this practice of a different era in
order to do everything possible to put an end to it.”
As a natural link between Africa, Europe and Asia,
the Mediterranean basin has over the years become a place
where complex internal and external factors — human,
cultural, socioeconomic and recently, owing to climate
change, environmental — are intertwined. The
Mediterranean is also a hotbed of passions and tensions
that have shaped diverse itineraries and trajectories and
directions for coastal countries and peoples.
The threats to the stability of the Mediterranean
region are therefore numerous and, to varying degrees,
present in all its countries, with roots that extend as far
as the Sahel-Saharan belt. In particular, North Africa is
directly affected, especially since the upheavals in the
Arab world that have destabilized Libya, among other
countries. The consequences of the disruption of Libya
are being felt today throughout the Sahel and well
beyond, including, of course, the Mediterranean region,
thanks to the double effect of the spillover of weapons
to the Sahel, which is pushing migrants towards Europe.
The Sahel region, which is feeling the full impact
of the consequences of the situation in Libya, is
now plagued by insecurity, trafficking of all kinds,
terrorism and violent extremism, whose consequences
include attacks, kidnappings and summary executions
of unprecedented violence, perpetrated by armed
groups — mainly criminal, but also terrorist — that
17-38826

17/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

continue to spread terror within communities. We
know that these groups take advantage of loopholes
in international legal systems and flaws in national
and international financial systems to raise funds,
including through the illicit sale of oil, kidnappings for
ransoms, human and arms trafficking, looting, the sale
of cultural property and even of protected animal and
plant species. For now, violent extremism seems to be
taking permanent root in the Sahel and throughout the
Mediterranean region.
If we are to take up the challenge of insecurity in the
Sahel and the Mediterranean, we believe we must take
a holistic approach that will bring together the security,
humanitarian, development and environmental aspects,
since it is clear that only a comprehensive response and
united efforts will enable us to overcome the various
threats that continue to undermine the security and
stability of the Mediterranean and the Sahel. In that
connection, the United Nations must continue to play
its central role in supporting ongoing regional efforts
in both regions.
With regard to Libya, the delegation of Senegal
would like to insist, as it did at yesterday’s briefing in
this Chamber (see S/PV.8104), on the importance of
addressing the issue within the overall framework of
the search for a political solution to the Libyan crisis
through inclusive dialogue, as part of a Libyan-led
process, through the good offices of the United Nations,
particularly Mr. Salamé. We firmly believe that the
restoration of peace and stability in Libya is essential
to all neighbouring countries and regions, including in
the Mediterranean region.
In general, the solutions to the challenges facing
most of the States of the Mediterranean could be
summarized as follows. We must prioritize political
approaches in the search for solutions to crises;
encourage and promote better subregional and crossregional cooperation and integration; fight together
against terrorist movements, organized transnational
criminal networks and violent extremism; and reduce
the fragility of States and their economies by mitigating
the effects of climate change.
Syria, a country in the Mediterranean basin that
is enduring a deep political crisis, is undoubtedly an
amalgam of these various challenges, with the presence
of terrorist groups such as the Islamic State, foreign
terrorist fighters, mass movements of displaced persons
and refugees not only to neighbouring countries but

S/PV. 8106

also to Europe, as well as the looting and trafficking of
cultural property. With the decline of the Islamic State,
now on the defensive in Syria and in Iraq thanks to the
efforts of various stakeholders, my delegation reaffirms
its belief in the urgent need for a political solution to the
Syrian dispute on the basis of the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015), with
a view to addressing the humanitarian challenges and
ensuring accountability for the multiple alleged crimes,
including the use of weapons of mass destruction, such
as chemical weapons.
My delegation has not forgotten the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, which is as old as the Organization
itself, and calls on the international community, in
particular the Security Council, to redouble its efforts
so that, like the Israelis, who enjoy a democratic
and prosperous State, the Palestinians can fulfil
their legitimate aspirations to obtaining a sovereign
and viable State within secure and internationally
recognized borders.
Equally concerning is the situation in Lebanon,
where the resignation of the Prime Minister is
generating institutional instability.
We must also acknowledge that the lack of
cooperation and shared vision among the various
regions affected by the global security situation in
the Mediterranean basin complicates the search for
solutions. With regard to the Mediterranean and as
way forward, the Senegalese delegation proposes
reflecting on the outcome document (General Assembly
resolution 71/312), entitled “Our ocean, our future: call
for action”, which, last July, authorized the United
Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to begin by
joining others in thanking the Italian presidency for
organizing this timely briefing on the security challenges
in the Mediterranean region. I thank Secretary-General
Guterres for his briefing and sharing his thoughts on
how to address such pressing challenges.
In this briefing, although there have been references
to issues that do not belong here, we prefer to stick to
matters that are relevant to the topic at hand. In our
view, attempts to exercise a monopoly on any area of
discussion does not contribute to peace. Ethiopia has
always been committed to a win-win outcome in all
engagements with its partners.

17-3882615/21

S/PV.8106

Maintenance of international peace and security

Armed conflicts in the Mediterranean region
continue to create space for terrorist organizations and
violent extremist groups within which to operate. They
have also created favourable conditions for organized
criminal groups engaged in trafficking in persons and
smuggling. Those trends have caused unspeakable
suffering for civilian populations, thereby resulting in
forced displacement in the Sahel, Middle East and North
Africa, as well as the large-scale secondary movement
of people using the Mediterranean route. The large-scale
secondary movement coupled with the entrenchment
of organized transnational criminal groups continues
to pose serious challenges to maintaining peace and
security in the Mediterranean region, particularly in
front-line countries, such as Italy and Greece.
Restrictions on mobility are also among the
challenges facing the Mediterranean region, particularly
in the light of increased suffering faced by people on
the move, including tragic deaths, extortion, slavery
and sexual and gender-based violence, as well as other
serious human rights abuses at the hands of terrorist
groups and trafficking and smuggling networks. In our
view, those serious challenges require a comprehensive
and coordinated approach that could be based on the
following three pillars.
First, it is vital to intensify all efforts to address the
root causes of conflicts, as well as respond to challenges
that might have resulted from the vacuum caused by
them, such as transnational organized crimes, terrorism
and violent extremism. The role of the Security Council
in resolving the root causes of conflict and responding
to challenges posed by terrorists and violent extremist
groups to the maintenance of peace and security and
countries affected by armed conflict continues to be
critical. In that regard, the Council should continue to
work towards finding a political solution to conflicts,
and use all the available tools at its disposal to that
end. Enhanced cooperation and coordination with the
African Union and subregional organizations would
also complement the Security Council’s efforts in that
area. Our united efforts in addressing the root causes
of conflict will enable us to establish favourable
conditions for the sustainable, voluntary repatriation
and reintegration of refugees to their countries of origin
in safety, and prevent further secondary movements
to Europe.
Secondly, in countries emerging from conflict or in
post-conflict situations, justice and security institutions
struggle to manage the wider socioeconomic and
16/21

17/11/2017

political challenges inherent to recovery processes. It is
important to redouble our efforts in supporting countries
emerging from conflicts in the Sahel, particularly with
regard to their institutions and efforts to sustain peace
and development.
Thirdly, serious protection challenges concerning
the humanitarian situation caused by armed conflicts
and terrorism in north-eastern Nigeria, Libya, Syria
and Mali, among others, and the lack of durable
solutions for refugees and internally displaced persons
from those countries continue to be the primary
cause of secondary movement via the Mediterranean.
For instance, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees has indicated that refugees
and migrants continued to risk their lives crossing
the Mediterranean sea during the first half of 2017.
Although I commend the generosity of countries of the
Mediterranean region that continue to open their borders
to refugees, I would like to underscore the importance
of facilitating regular, safe, accessible and orderly
mobility, particularly through expanded resettlement
opportunities, and visitor, family reunification, work,
resident and student visas, as well as other temporary
protection schemes. I would also like to re-emphasize
the need to redouble our support for refugees response
plans in first countries of asylum to respond to their
protection needs.
In conclusion, I would like to end my statement by
affirming our commitment to working in a coordinated
manner with all relevant actors to address the root causes
of the peace and security challenges in the Mediterranean
region, while encouraging countries in and beyond the
region to continue their generosity directed towards
refugees seeking international protection.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank the Italian
presidency and you, Mr. Minister, for convening this
meeting and highlighting the security challenges
that the Mediterranean faces today. I also thank
Secretary-General
António
Guterres
for
his
comprehensive briefing.
The security environment in the Mediterranean
region has indeed changed dramatically in recent years.
The conflicts, threats and unprecedented humanitarian
crises in North and West Africa, the Middle East and
the Sahel have deeply impacted stability in Europe as a
result of contemporary security challenges. Those can
be categorized as unconventional terrorism, irregular
migration and organized crime involving arms, drugs
17-38826

17/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

and trafficking in persons, all of which generate an
atmosphere of fear, distrust and intense hostilities.
They, in turn, further negatively affect the social and
political structure of European society and regional
stability, as well as international peace and security.
We are deeply concerned about the growing
migration flow through the Mediterranean to Europe,
primarily through Libya, which has become the largest
illegal channel for the transit of migrants and refugees.
Instability, a fragile and volatile security situation, and
a lack of unity within Libya create a breeding ground
in which human traffickers are able to actively operate
in the country. Hundreds of thousands of migrants
and refugees in Libya suffer abuses and detention in
inhuman conditions.
Kazakhstan therefore welcomed the adoption of
resolution 2380 (2017) on 5 October, extending for another
year the mandate of the European Union (EU) military
operation in the Southern Central Mediterranean and
conferring upon it the charge of combating smuggling
and human trafficking on the high seas off the coast of
Libya. More importantly, my delegation also urges for
the immediate and strict implementation by all Member
States of its various provisions.
We commend the outcome of the annual
Mediterranean Conference of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation (OSCE) in Europe, held in
Palermo last month under the Italian chairmanship
of the OSCE-Mediterranean Contact Group, which
focused on the large movements of migrants and
refugees across the Mediterranean. The results of
this significant meeting have a direct bearing on the
necessary steps that need to be taken.
Tackling the challenges of migration is of common
interest to all European States and the rest of the world.
It is not only a humanitarian issue, but also a political
and a security problem, which could be solved through
close partnership among the United Nations and the
EU, NATO, the African Union, the League of Arab
States and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
as well as countries of origin and transit. The rights
of refugees and migrants must be protected, including
through their active engagement in the social life of
their host countries and through their integration within
European society, so that people build a future in their
new home. This comprehensive development response
helps drive long-term economic growth, as well as jobs
and opportunities for potential economic migrants.

S/PV. 8106

The role of the EU remains vital to support affected
countries by implementing the mandates of the EU
Trust Fund, the Joint Communication on the Central
Mediterranean route, and the Malta Declaration.
However, global challenges can only be effectively
addressed by the involvement of the international
community as a whole, working together in a balanced
and human rights-compliant way. The key principle of
such global support is balancing non-interference in the
internal affairs of States with the provision of technical
assistance and capacity-building for strengthening
State institutions.
Fragile Member States must be helped to protect
their citizens through bilateral and multilateral support
for the rule of law, good governance and securitysector reform, and by promoting human rights and
investing in development, so as to create political,
economic and social stability. Understanding the root
causes of displacement, together with strengthening the
security-development nexus, is necessary for long-term
development, for which a regional approach consistent
with the “One UN” strategy would be most effective.
Such an approach cannot bear fruit without investing
in poverty reduction, education, job creation and
basic services.
Kazakhstan is strongly committed to reaching
concrete outcomes on the issue of migrants and
refugees, working together with the United Nations as
well as other Member States, based on the fundamental
principles of human dignity, justice and freedom. We
firmly believe that through our joint efforts we can
make the Mediterranean a region of new opportunities
and an oasis of global prosperity and stability.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Italy’s initiative in holding a public meeting
on the security challenges in the Mediterranean. We
welcome Foreign Minister Alfano’s presence in the
Chamber today and thank him for presiding over today’s
meeting. The statement by Secretary-General Guterres
has provided excellent context for our discussion, for
which China is grateful.
The Mediterranean is a region where Asia, Africa
and Europe meet. In recent years, the situation in Libya,
Syria and the Sahel region has been deteriorating. The
hotspot issues have continuously been getting worse.
Terrorist forces have been rampant and spreading. The
problem of the illegal transfer of arms is serious. The
regional situation is volatile and unstable, seriously

17-3882617/21

S/PV.8106

Maintenance of international peace and security

affecting the development of countries of the region
and their peoples’ lives. Many countries are faced with
multiple challenges, such as unbalanced development,
intercommunal conflict, massive flows of refugees and
migrants, and serious cross-border organized crimes,
inter alia.
The fates of the countries and peoples in the
Mediterranean are interwoven, and the spillover
impacts of the regional situation on the surrounding
larger region cannot be underestimated. Expeditiously
improving the situation in the region and finding a way
to achieve regional stability, prevent new conflicts and
build sustainable peace and development will require
the joint efforts of the international community. China
would like to emphasize the following points.
First, regional hotspot issues should be the
focus, and the process of political settlement should
be accelerated. Libya’s neighbouring countries, the
African Union, the League of Arab States and the
European Union should step up their efforts to promote
peace talks in support of the action plans and initiatives
on the political settlement of the Libyan issue, so as
to achieve reconciliation, stability and development in
Libya at an early date. The international community
should remain united and push the Syrian parties to
reach an agreement acceptable to all parties as soon
as possible through the Geneva peace talks. Bearing
in mind the specific context in the Sahel region, the
international community should take comprehensive
measures to help cool down the hotspot issues in a
relevant way and achieve overall peace and stability in
that region. The international community should not
neglect the long-standing Palestinian issue. Unless we
resolve that issue at the root of the Middle East question,
it will be difficult to truly achieve regional stability.
Secondly, we should strengthen international
and regional efforts, as well as coordination and
cooperation with the countries concerned, and jointly
meet our security challenges. The United Nations
has a central role to play in international affairs in
terms of coordinating efforts in preventive diplomacy,
development assistance, good offices in mediation and
post-conflict reconstruction. Regional organizations
should also play a constructive role, giving greater
assistance to countries of the region in conflict
resolution and development, enhancing capacitybuilding and achieving regional stability, while paying
attention in this process to safeguarding the sovereignty
of the countries concerned, respecting their views
18/21

17/11/2017

and focusing on their needs. At the same time, the
coordination of country and regional strategies should
be strengthened to encourage synergies.
Thirdly, we should resolutely fight terrorism and
appropriately address the refugee and migrant issue.
Terrorism is the public enemy of all humankind. It
seriously undermines the security and stability of the
region. The international community should unite
in its fight against terrorism and comprehensively
use the various means available to it to strengthen
border control and law enforcement cooperation in the
Mediterranean region and adjacent regions, cut off the
financing of terrorists and their supply of arms, halt
the spread of terrorist ideologies and step up the efforts
aimed at preventing the spillover and return of foreign
terrorist fighters.
In dealing with the issue of refugees and
migrants, it is necessary to strengthen support for
countries receiving refugees, eliminate xenophobia
and discrimination against them, and address the root
causes of social instability and development imbalance.
By supporting the countries of origin and transit, we
can create conditions for the return of refugees and
promote the sustainable development in the countries of
origin. China appreciates the efforts of Italy, Lebanon
and Jordan and others in their response to the refugee
crisis in the region.
Fourthly, we should promote inclusive, balanced
development that benefits everyone, respecting the
diversity of civilizations and fostering our awareness
of the community of a common destiny. Conflicts,
war, terrorism and refugee and migrant crises can
all find their roots in poverty and backwardness.
Development is fundamental to resolving these global
issues. We should seek open, inclusive, innovative
and mutually beneficial development outlook for the
Mediterranean region, which could help developing
countries implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, enhance their capabilities in terms of
poverty alleviation — or even elimination — and
homegrown development, achieving shared progress
and promoting lasting peace.
We should insist on upholding the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
following the new security concept, which is common,
comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable in nature,
in a joint effort to build a regional security network. We
should construct a partnership that is based dialogue
17-38826

17/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

instead of confrontation or partnership instead of
alignment, strengthen dialogue among civilizations
and religions, abandon zero-sum thinking, adhere to
the general direction of peaceful settlement of disputes,
and resolve differences through political means.
The Mediterranean is a strategically important
region, rich in natural resources, with a unique cultural
background and great potential for development. China
is committed to according continued attention to the
situation in the Mediterranean region, along with
countries of the region and the international community.
The Mediterranean region is an important link along the
Belt and Road, based on the idea of jointly discussing,
building and sharing. In recent years, China has
proposed and actively promoted joint implementation
of the the Belt and Road Initiative. That proposal has
enjoyed a positive response from the international
community, including the Mediterranean region. China
and the countries of the region have conducted in-depth
and results-oriented cooperation on the strengthening
of connectivity and the development of infrastructure,
and positive progress has been achieved. China will
continue to contribute to the realization of stability,
security and lasting development in the Mediterranean
region and is committed to building the community of
a common destiny.
Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the delegation of Italy for bringing
this topic for consideration at this meeting, and I
would like to thank you personally, Mr. President, for
presiding over this meeting. We would also like to thank
Secretary-General António Guterres for his presence
and participation internationaln today’s meeting.
The Mediterranean region faces a series of closely
linked challenges that are fuelled by the serious crises
in Libya, Syria and the Sahel region; the global threat
of terrorism and violent extremism, trafficking in
persons, international organized crime, the absence of
State authority and the effects of climate change, among
other factors. These challenges must be addressed with
a holistic perspective that considers needs related to
security, cooperation, development, human rights and
humanitarian law. The causes of extreme poverty,
hunger, unemployment and sectarian and religious
tensions that can threaten regional stability must
be addressed.
Many of these factors have led to massive
displacement in recent years of the inhabitants of

S/PV. 8106

sub-Saharan Africa in search of a better future. In
seeking this future, and before they can cross the
Mediterranean in an attempt that often costs them their
lives, they become victims of international mafias and
criminal groups that exploit their desperate situation
and subject them to absolutely inhuman and degrading
treatment. Allow me to recall that the displacement
of persons does not in itself constitute a threat to
international peace and security. As we prepare to
begin negotiations on the global compact for safe,
orderly and regular migration, Uruguay wishes to stress
the principle of the non-criminalization of irregular
migration and recall that the need to promote and
protect human rights and the fundamental freedoms of
all should be a cornerstone in addressing this topic.
We remain concerned about the desperate situation
of migrants who use Libya as a country of transit to
reach Europe. At the same time, this situation puts a
lot of pressure on host countries, which by making
enormous economic and social efforts to welcome
them, are facing difficulties arising from this new
reality. Hundreds of thousand sub-Saharan migrants
are in Libya right now, waiting for a chance to cross the
Mediterranean and they are being subjected to abuse
and serious violations of their human rights. In the past
few hours, once again, media outlets have reported
the sale of slaves in Libya. This is an aberration and
must be unanimously condemned by all present in this
Chamber. This cannot and should not be tolerated.
Only the political and institutional stabilization of
Libya will make it possible to significantly counter
this phenomenon. With that in mind, we welcome the
new action plan and the United Nations road map for
Libya, which hope will make it possible to revive a
political negotiation process facilitated and lead by the
United Nations.
Just two years ago, the world witnessed the greatest
refugee and migrant crisis since the Second World
War, when hundreds of thousands of Syrians fled the
country to escape the worsening conflict, the escalation
of violence and the expansion of terrorism. We all
remember the images of entire families travelling
through Europe, trying to cross borders to find a new
life away from the horrors of the war in their homeland.
While some have succeeded in their quest, thousands
of others, many of them children, drowned in the
Mediterranean Sea, which has gone from being a cradle
of civilizations to a collective grave for innocent lives.

17-3882619/21

S/PV.8106

Maintenance of international peace and security

The challenges in the Mediterranean are an result
of this cluster of problems that we have just mentioned.
Respect and protection for the human individual must
always be at the centre of our work in order to ensure
development in that region and achieve peace and
security in a stable environment.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the Secretary-General for
his edifying briefing and his personal commitment to
addressing the problems that have brought us together
today. I would also like to thank the Italian presidency
for taking the initiative to hold this important discussion
on our common challenges in the Mediterranean. This
subject is strategically important when it comes to
regional and international security and stability. It is
also a humanitarian priority — almost 3,000 people
have died in the Mediterranean since the beginning of
the year.
I would like to begin by underlining the urgency of
tackling security challenges in the Mediterranean. The
Mediterranean — a crossroads between Europe, Africa
and the Middle East — is facing an unprecedented
multiplication of regional crises. It is home to multiple
humanitarian, security and development challenges,
which affect particularly vulnerable populations. It
is our responsibility to take collective action against
these threats.
The fight against terrorism is the first major
challenge and a top priority for France. Increased
efforts are needed to address the common challenges
posed by terrorism: the return or relocation of foreign
terrorist fighters, the use of the Internet by terrorist
groups and the financing of terrorism, which will be
the focus of an international conference organized
in Paris by President of the Republic, Emmanuel
Macron in April 2018. The links between transnational
organized crime and terrorism must also receive our
full attention. In both Libya and the Sahel, various
trafficking activities carried out by criminal networks
are fuelling terrorist groups.
The fight against terrorism also involves continuing
to work to protect cultural heritage. Resolution 2347
(2017), adopted in March on the initiative of France
and Italy, underscored how the destruction, looting and
illicit trafficking in cultural property is contributing to
these conflicts. We are looking forward to returning to
this topic at the meeting on 30 November.
20/21

17/11/2017

A second manifestation of the security challenges
in the Mediterranean is the migration crisis, which
is affecting Europe and leaving millions of people
completely destitute. A purely security-oriented
approach to the migration issue would be neither
desirable nor effective. The migration challenge
demands increased European and international
cooperation and should encompass the entire migratory
route — from the countries of origin to the countries
of destination — while respecting the rights of the
persons concerned.
That is why our President, in close connection with
Italy, has made migration one of France’s top priorities.
In that regard, I wish to pay tribute to Italy for its
considerable efforts to host refugees. On the initiative
of President Macron, an international meeting was
held in Paris, on 28 August, which led to the adoption
of a plan of action on migratory issues in the central
Mediterranean, with a particular focus on the countries
of origin, Chad and the Niger.
We remain very concerned about the inhuman
treatment of migrants who are passing through Libya.
We reiterate our appeal to the Libyan authorities to
make every effort to ensure that migrants are treated
with dignity and respect for their human rights. The
EUNAVFOR MED Operation Sophia, which is saving
tens of thousands of lives every year and whose mandate
was recently renewed, illustrates the European Union’s
commitment to fighting the smuggling of migrants in
the central Mediterranean.
To address these issues over the long term, we
must promote a cross-cutting approach, based on
cooperation among Africa, the Middle East and Europe.
Mediterranean crises will not be resolved without a
coherent, long-term political approach that combines
security, development and solidarity. Climate change
exacerbates development issues in the Mediterranean
region and its effects are potential sources of instability
and conflict. That was one of the observations made by
the Council during its mission to the Lake Chad basin,
which I personally found striking.
In the Sahel, France promotes a conmprehensive
response based on the pillars of security, development
and good governance, as well as education and the
prevention of violent extremism. In that spirit, we
actively support the Group of Five for the Sahel initiative
to establish a joint force to lead cross-border operations
in order to combat the transnational threat posed by
17-38826

17/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

terrorism and trafficking in States of the region. We
work with the other partners of the Sahel Alliance
to further mobilize the principal donors to promote
development and good governance in the countries of
the Sahel. The political track and implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
must progress in parallel. Finally, we will continue
to mobilize the international community to support
the Joint Force, in line with the ministerial meeting
of 30 October 2017 and looking ahead to the Brussels
conference. In that regard, we will soon put forward
proposals, taking into account both the needs expressed
on the ground and the sensitivities around this table.
The crises in the Middle East require political
solutions that are inclusive of all populations. That is
why France fully supports a negotiated transition in
Syria, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). France
calls on the international community to support the
efforts of the Special Envoy, Staffan de Mistura, ahead
of the Geneva negotiations at the end of the month. That
is the only political process that is likely to lead to a
lasting political solution.
In Libya, the solution lies in national reconciliation
and the restoration of State authority throughout
the territory. That is also the best long-term solution
to overcoming terrorism and to responding to the
challenges of migration. As we said yesterday before
the Council (see S/PV.8104), we fully support the
efforts of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ghassan Salamé.
In Gaza, the humanitarian crisis, coupled with an
environmental crisis, also has political causes. The
intra-Palestinian reconciliation process must continue.
We commend the efforts of Egypt in that regard. That
process must enable the Palestinian Authority to fully
exercise its prerogatives in the Gaza Strip, including in
the area of security, and to facilitate the lifting of the
blockade imposed on the Gaza Strip. In our view, that
intra-Palestinian reconciliation is inseparable from the
resumption of the peace process on the basis of the twoState solution.
Finally, the protection of the rights of all, including
people belonging to minorities, is critical to preserving
pluralism and diversity in the Middle East, which

S/PV. 8106

we strongly support. Together with Jordan, France
organized the international Paris conference in
September 2015, which resulted in the submission of an
action plan in support of victims of ethnic and religious
violence in the Middle East. As we recalled this year at
the Madrid conference, France is fully committed to the
implementation of that plan. It contributed €10 million
euros to the emergency fund.
It will be essential to continue the fight impunity
for violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. Following the adoption of resolution 2379
(2017) in September, we welcome the establishment of
an investigative team to document the crimes committed
by Da’esh in Iraq. Strengthening the role of women,
in particular through their effective participation in
political processes, must also be an integral part of the
response. France will continue to ensure the protection
of children, who remain the first victims of conflicts.
The scale of the challenges seen today calls for
the Security Council and the entire international
community to play an greater role. Beyond the
mobilization of the General Assembly with the
negotiation of the agreements on migration and refugees,
the increased mobilization of the Council is essential.
France continues to be committed to strengthening
its cooperation with countries on both shores of the
Mediterranean — both European countries and those
of the Maghreb, with whom we maintain particularly
close historical and cultural ties. In that spirit, France
supports the economic development of countries on the
southern shores of the Mediterranean, in particular in
the context of the Tunisia 2020 initiative.
In conclusion, responding to the multifaceted
challenges of the Mediterranean area requires a
comprehensive and integrated approach: prevention,
peacekeeping and peace-building efforts must be
mutually reinforcing in order to be fully effective.
Solidarity with countries neighbouring conflict zones,
which are at the front line of population displacements,
is also necessary. More than ever, we must tackle the
challenges facing the Mediterranean area. We owe that
to the people concerned, to ourselves and to the melting
pot of culture, civilization and coexistence that the
Mediterranean represents.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

17-3882621/21
