S/2017/552

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 June 2017
Original: English

Letter dated 23 June 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey herewith the sixth report of the Organisation for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (see annex).
I should be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be brought to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

17-10687 (E)

300617

*1710687*

S/2017/552

Annex
Letter dated 23 June 2017 from the Head and the members of
the Leadership Panel of the Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
addressed to the Secretary-General
The Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism has the honour to transmit its sixth report pursuant to
Security Council resolutions 2235 (2015) and 2319 (2016).
(Signed) Edmond Mulet
Head
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
(Signed) Judy Cheng-Hopkins
Leadership Panel
(Signed) Stefan Mogl
Leadership Panel

2/6

17-10687

S/2017/552

Enclosure
Sixth report of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
I.

Introduction
1.
The present sixth report of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW)-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism, submitted pursuant
to Security Council resolutions 2235 (2015) and 2319 (2016), covers the period
following the fifth report (S/2017/131), from 11 February 2017 to 22 June 2017.

II.

Background
2.
As set forth in Security Council resolutions 2235 (2015) and 2319 (2016), the
mandate of the Mechanism is to identify, to the greatest extent feasible, individuals,
entities, groups or Governments who were perpetrators, organizers, sponsors or
otherwise involved in the use of chemicals as weapons, including chlorine or any
other toxic chemical, in the Syrian Arab Republic where an OPCW fact -finding
mission determines or has determined that a specific incident in the Syrian Arab
Republic involved or likely involved the use of chemicals as weapons, including
chlorine or any other toxic chemical. In accordance with Security Council resolution
2319 (2016), the mandate of the Mechanism will come to an end on 16 November
2017.
3.
On 25 April 2017, the President of the Security Council informed the
Secretary-General (see S/2017/355) that the members of the Security Council had
taken note of the intention expressed in the letter dated 21 April from the Secretary General (S/2017/354) to appoint Edmond Mulet (Guatemala) as the new Head of the
Leadership Panel of the Mechanism. He assumed his functions on 1 May, and Stefan
Mogl (Switzerland) and Judy Cheng-Hopkins (Malaysia) joined as members of the
Leadership Panel on 2 May and 15 June, respectively. The Head of the Panel has
overall responsibility for the work of the Mechanism, including its direction,
supervision and management.
4.
The Leadership Panel is supported by three components: the Political Office
and the Planning and Operations Support Office in New York and the Investigative
Office in The Hague, Netherlands. The Investigative Office is composed of two
units: the Information Collection Unit and the Analysis and Corroboration Unit. As
noted in the Mechanism’s fifth report, these two dedicated, complementary units
were established to enhance the working methods of the Investigative Office. In
addition, the Mechanism is working to redeploy a liaison officer to Damascus.
5.
The Mechanism continues to implement its mandate in accordance with the
methods of work outlined in its previous reports. During the first phase (information
collection and planning for case development), the Mechanism reviews and analyses
data, collects relevant information and elaborates an investigation plan. On the basis
of the analysis carried out during the first phase and the report of the fact-finding
mission, the Leadership Panel takes a decision as to whether the Mechanism will
conduct an in-depth investigation into a particular incident. The second phase (case
investigation) commences thereafter, during which the Mechanism undertakes an
in-depth analysis of the information obtained by the fact -finding mission and from
other sources, and conducts field visits and witness interviews as necessary. The
second phase continues until the Mechanism is satisfied that it has gathered and
assessed all information that it can obtain and, on that basis, presents its findings to
the Security Council.

17-10687

3/6

S/2017/552

6.
With respect to the findings of the Leadership Panel regarding the four cases
referred to in the Mechanism’s third and fourth reports (S/2016/738/Rev.1 and
S/2016/888), if new information is provided, supplementary investigations may be
undertaken to identify additional actors who were perpetrators, sponsors, organizers
or otherwise involved. In the absence of additional information and noting the
current time frame for investigations, the Mechanism is focusing on new cases
identified by the fact-finding mission.

III.

Activities
Cases under review
7.
Since its fifth report, the Mechanism has reviewed two new cases identified by
the fact-finding mission concerning incidents reported in Umm Hawsh, Aleppo
Governorate, in September 2016, and Khan Shaykhun, Idlib Governorate, on 4 April
2017:
(a) Umm Hawsh. In a letter dated 4 May 2017, the Secretary-General
transmitted to the President of the Security Council the “Report of the OPCW Fact Finding Mission in Syria regarding the incident of 16 September 2016, as reported
in the note verbale of the Syrian Arab Republic, number 113, dated 29 November
2016” (S/2017/400, enclosure). In the conclusion of that report, the fact-finding
mission confirmed that the two female casualties reported to have been involved in
the incident in Umm Hawsh, Aleppo, of 16 September 2016 were exposed to
sulphur mustard. Based on the Mechanism’s preliminary assessment of the case,
which took into account the findings of the fact-finding mission, the Leadership
Panel decided to proceed with an in-depth investigation into the incident;
(b) Khan Shaykhun. In a letter dated 18 May, the Secretary-General
transmitted to the President of the Security Council the document entitled “Note by
the Technical Secretariat: status update of the OPCW fact-finding mission in Syria
regarding a reported incident in Khan Shaykhun, 4 April 2017” ( S/2017/440,
enclosure). The status update presents the results of an analysis of samples, which
indicated the presence of sarin or a sarin-like substance.
8.
While taking due note that the fact-finding mission has not yet issued its report
in connection with the incident in Khan Shaykhun, the Mechanism is collecting
information from alternative sources in relation to the incident. The Leadership
Panel will make a formal decision on conducting an in -depth investigation into the
Khan Shaykhun incident once the report of the fact-finding mission has been issued.
Investigative activities
9.
Regarding the incident of September 2016 in Umm Hawsh, the Mechanism has
prepared an investigation plan to guide its work, including with respect to the scope
of its investigation. Consistent with its mandate, the Mechanism us ed the
determination of the fact-finding mission as a starting point for its investigation,
including the information and evidence collected by the fact -finding mission, and is
in the process of seeking information from a range of other sources. At this st age,
these sources include the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, other States
Members of the United Nations and publicly available sources.
10. The information being collected by the Mechanism includes photographs,
videos and other digital information, sample analysis results, witness interviews and
statements and other data. While continuing to collect relevant information and
potential evidence, the Mechanism is simultaneously translating, analysing and
assessing the information gathered.

4/6

17-10687

S/2017/552

11. The Mechanism has enhanced its technical and analytical capacity through
engagement with several internationally recognized forensic and technical institutes,
including those with geospatial expertise. These institutes have been engaged to
conduct scientific analyses of material pertaining to the cases under investigation,
including media files obtained by the Mechanism, in order to determine, inter alia,
the authenticity of photographs and videos and to determine and/or verify specific
dates and locations, which can be used for corroboration.
12. On 15 June 2017, the Mechanism addressed a formal request for information
concerning the incident in Umm Hawsh to the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as
relevant regional and other Member States. The request included qu estions related
to, inter alia, the situation in and around Umm Hawsh in mid -September 2016, any
chemical or chemical agent used, the means of delivery and the persons affected,
including victims. Member States were also requested to provide any other
information considered to be relevant to the incident. As responses to the questions
are received and reviewed, the Mechanism will follow up with more specific
requests and questions as may arise in the course of the investigation.
13. Regarding the incident reported in Khan Shaykhun, the Mechanism has
analysed the status update of the fact-finding mission (S/2017/440, enclosure), is
conducting a preliminary assessment of the information contained therein and is
actively gathering and examining information from other sources pending the
issuance of the report of the fact-finding mission.
Interaction with Member States and the Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons
14. The Mechanism has continued to interact with Member States on matters
relating to its mandate. Since taking up his functions on 1 May 2017, the Head of
the Mechanism has met and continues to meet with Member States, including all
members of the Security Council and the Syrian Arab Republic. He also regularly
meets and exchanges information with the Director General of OPCW. The
Mechanism continues to interact with the OPCW Technical Secretariat.
15. As stated in the fourth and fifth reports of the Mechanism ( S/2016/888 and
S/2017/131), on 10 October 2016, the Syrian Arab Republic notified the Mechanism
that the Syrian national committee had opened an internal investigation, which
included a review of flight plans and air operations. On 14 October 2016, the
Leadership Panel requested the Government to provide information related thereto.
The Panel continues to await a response from the Syrian Arab Republic.
16. Since the issuance of its fifth report, the Mechanism has received 21 formal
allegations of non-State actors’ acquisition, possession, transfer or use of, or intent
to use, chemical weapons or toxic chemicals. Four allegations refer specifically to
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Seventeen allegations concerned the
acquisition, possession and transfer of chemical weapons or toxic chemicals, as well
as missiles fitted with toxic chemicals, by non-State actors, including two
allegations concerning the Nusrah Front. These allegations were shared with the
OPCW Technical Secretariat.
United Nations counter-terrorism and non-proliferation bodies
17. As encouraged by the Security Council in its resolution 2319 (2016), the Head
of the Mechanism met with the Chairs of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004); the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism; and
the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011)
and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al -Qaida
17-10687

5/6

S/2017/552

and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities. The Mechanism
continues to meet with relevant experts associated with the aforementioned
Committees.

IV.

The way forward
18. In accordance with its mandate, the starting point of the Mechanism’s
investigation is the determination by the fact-finding mission that a specific incident
in the Syrian Arab Republic involved or likely involved the use of chemicals as
weapons. The fact-finding mission is continuing investigations into other alleged
incidents of the use of chemicals as weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic. The
Leadership Panel will review any determinations of use of chemicals as weapons by
the fact-finding mission, with a view to considering whether the Mechanism may
investigate these incidents.
19. The Mechanism is gathering all relevant information concerning the two
reported incidents involving the use of chemicals as weapons in Umm Hawsh and
Khan Shaykhun in the Syrian Arab Republic. Member States, as well as
international organizations, non-governmental organizations, other entities and
individuals in possession of information relating to these incidents, are encouraged
to approach the Mechanism and share such information at the earliest opportunity.
The Mechanism continues to adhere to strict standards for the protection of
confidential information.
20. The Leadership Panel reminds the Syrian Arab Republic and all parties in the
country, as well as other Member States, that the investigation depends on the
quality of information shared with the Mechanism and that its outcomes are tied to
the timely receipt of such information.

V.

Concluding remarks
21. The Leadership Panel resolutely condemns the use of chemica ls as weapons in
the Syrian Arab Republic. These deliberate, insidious acts of poisoning must stop.
The international community has worked tirelessly to eradicate chemical weapons
through the Geneva Protocol of 1925 and the Chemical Weapons Convention of
1993. We cannot allow these gains to be lost.
22. The Leadership Panel is concerned by unfortunate attempts to politicize the
work of the Mechanism and is aware that various stakeholders hold views on how
the investigation should be conducted in order to generate confidence in its
outcomes. The Panel and the entire staff of the Mechanism remain committed to
fully implementing its mandate in an independent, impartial and objective manner.
23. It is the hope of the Leadership Panel that its work, building on that of the
previous Panel, may serve as an active deterrent to any further use of chemical
weapons. To that end, the Mechanism will identify, to the greatest extent feasible,
those involved in the use of such weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic, so that they
may be brought to account.
24. The Leadership Panel wishes to thank the Member States for their continued
expressions of support for the work of the Mechanism, including through
contributions to its voluntary trust fund. The Panel also wishes to thank the United
Nations Secretariat, in particular the Office for Disarmament Affairs, and the OPCW
Technical Secretariat for their continued support for the functioning of the
Mechanism.

6/6

17-10687
