UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/60
21 October 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3441st meeting of the Security council, held on 21 October 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Burundi", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the situation in Burundi, on the
basis of the Secretary-General’s report (S/1994/1152). It recalls its
earlier statements on this subject, most recently that made by the
President of the Council on 25 August 1994 (S/PRST/1994/47). It warmly
welcomes the election and swearing in of the President, the confirmation in
office of the Prime Minister, and the formation of the new coalition
Government. It believes that this represents an important step forward in
the stabilization of the situation in Burundi. It calls upon all parties
in Burundi to cooperate in the work of re-establishing democracy and
stability.
"The Security Council remains concerned that, despite the important
political progress that has been made, much remains to be done if the
climate of insecurity described by the Secretary-General in his report is
to be dispelled and the country set firmly on the path of reconciliation
and reconstruction. The Council deplores the fact that extremist elements
continue to threaten national reconciliation, including through the
operation of a clandestine radio station inciting ethnic hatred and
violence. It reaffirms the importance of bringing to justice those
responsible for the coup of 21 October 1993 and subsequent inter-ethnic
massacres and other violations of international humanitarian law. In this
regard, it also encourages the Secretary-General to pursue his suggestion
that United Nations assistance be provided to the Government of Burundi in
strengthening its judicial system.
"The Security Council commends the role played by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, including in helping the new
coalition Government to organize a national debate early in 1995 on the
problems of relations between the two communities. The Council attaches
importance to the success of this initiative. In this regard, it welcomes
the Secretary-General’s intention to strengthen the office of the Special
Representative.

94-41011 (E)

211094

S/PRST/1994/60
English
Page 2

"The Security Council believes the international community must
continue to give priority to the restoration of stability and the promotion
of national reconciliation in Burundi. In this context, it recognizes the
work of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the office he has
established in Burundi, and notes the important role human rights monitors
might play. It welcomes the recent increase in the number of Organization
of African Unity (OAU) military observers in Burundi. It encourages the
OAU, United Nations agencies and Member States to continue their
involvement in Burundi and to intensify political contacts and visits. It
notes the importance of increased technical assistance from the
international community as the coalition Government tackles the critical
tasks of reconciliation and reconstruction.
"The Council remains deeply concerned at the plight of refugees and
displaced persons in Burundi. It commends the continuing efforts of the
High Commissioner for Refugees and other humanitarian bodies to address
this problem. It welcomes the Secretary-General’s sending of a Special
Envoy to study the refugee crisis from a regional perspective and looks
forward to any recommendations that the Secretary-General may have as a
result of that initiative.
"The Council calls on the authorities and all parties in Burundi to
ensure the safety and security of all personnel involved in the relief
efforts and other international personnel.
"In the statement made by the President of the Security Council on
14 October (S/PRST/1994/59) on the situation in Rwanda, the Council
encouraged the Secretary-General to pursue consultations as to how the
United Nations can assist in the preparation and convening of an
international conference to look into the problems of the subregion. The
Council believes that the holding of such a conference would be of real
value in the context of Burundi.
"The Security Council stands ready to consider further any detailed
proposals which the Secretary-General may have. The Security Council will
remain actively seized of the matter."

-----
