192

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

1. Calls upon Member States to take additional appropriate measures for further improving the economic and
social conditions of women in rural areas;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council, the Commission on the Status of Women, the regional commissions
and other bodies of the United Nations system, in particular
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, to devote greater attention to the problem of elevating the status of rural women;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, within the
framework of the integrated reporting system on the status
of women which the Economic and Social Council, in its
resolution 1980/38 of 2 May 1980, decided to continue, a
comprehensive report containing the observations and comments received from Governments on national experience
relating to the improvement of the situation of women in
rural areas, paying special attention to such aspects as social
insurance, mother and child care, health facilities, training,
education and employment opportunities;
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to consider holding, within the framework of the Programme of Action for
the Second Half of the United Nations Decade for Women,
as a matter of priority, an interregional seminar on national
experience relating to the improvement of the situation of
women in rural areas, with special emphasis on the problems
of developing countries;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session, through
the Commission on the Status of Women and the Economic
and Social Council, the report requested in paragraph 3
above.
90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982

37/60.

Preparations for the World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the
United Nations Decade for Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December
1975, in which it endorsed, inter alia, the action proposals
contained in the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's Year, 65
Recalling its resolution 3490 (XXX) of 12 December
1975, in which it expressed its conviction that a comprehensive and thorough review and appraisal of progress made
in meeting the goals of- the World Plan of Action was of
crucial importance for the success of the Plan and recognized
that the results of the implementation of the Plan would
contribute to the consideration of the review and appraisal
of the International Development Strategy for the Second
United Nations Development Decade 66 and would consequently promote the role of women in the development
process,
Recalling also its resolution 35/136 of 11 December 1980,
in which it endorsed the Programme of Action for the Second Half of the United Nations Decade for Women 67 as
adopted at the World Conference of the United Nations
65
Repon of the World Conference of the International Women·s Year,
Mexico City, 19 June-2 July 1975 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.J), chap. II, sect. A.
06
Resolution 2626 (XXV).
61 Repon of the World Cor!ferenc,, of the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Copenhagen. /4-30 July /980
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.80.IV.J and corrigendum), chap.
I, sect. A.

Decade for Women, and decided to convene in 1985, at the
conclusion of the Decade, a World Conference to Review
and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women.
Recalling further that the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade68
stressed that the important set of measures to improve the
status of women, contained in the World Plan of Action
adopted at Mexico City in 1975, 65 and the important agreed
measures relating to the International Development Strategy
in the Programme of Action for the Second Half of the
United Nations Decade for Women, adopted at Copenhagen
in 1980, should be implemented,
Recalling its resolution 36/ I 26 of 14 December 1981, in
which it requested the Commission on the Status of Women,
at its session to be held in 1982, to give priority to the
question of the preparations for the Conference,
Noting that the Economic and Social Council, at its first
regular session of 1982, considered the recommendations
of the Commission on the Status of Women as set forth in
its report69 and adopted, on 4 May 1982, resolution 1982/
26 on the preparations for the Conference,
Bearing in mind all its relevant resolutions and decisions
regarding preparations for special conferences, in particular
its resolution 33/189 of 29 January 1979,
I . Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1982/26 on the preparations for the World Conference to
Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women, to be held in 1985;
2. Welcomes the decision of the Economic and Social
Council that the Commission on the Status of Women should
be the preparatory body for the Conference and that it should
operate on the basis of consensus;
3. Endorses the decision of the Economic and Social
Council to invite the widest possible participation by States
in the preparatory meetings for the Conference and expresses
the hope that they will designate representatives who will
have the background and experience in the area of women
and development;
4. Notes that the first session of the Commission on the
Status of Women as the preparatory body of the Conference
is to be held at Vienna from 23 February to 4 March 1983
and that the report on that session will be considered by
the Economic and Social Council at its first regular session
of 1983;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to take into account
paragraph 9 of General Assembly resolution 33/189 when
appointing the Secretary-General of the Conference;
6. Decides to consider at its thirty-eighth session the
recommendations of the Economic and Social Council at its
first regular session of 1983 based on the report of the first
session of the Commission on the Status of Women as the
preparatory body for the Conference, together with the observations, if any, of the Secretary-General;
7. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the progress made in the preparation
of a world survey on the role of women in development 70
and recommends that the survey should be submitted to the
Conference;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session an item entitled "Preparations for the

"" Resolution _,5156, annex.
69
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1982, Supplement No. 4 (E/J9g2/14)
10 N37/381.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women".
90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982

37/61.

Women in public life

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the objectives of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace,
Bearing in mind paragraphs 72 and 73 of the Programme
of Action for the Second Half of the United Nations Decade
for Women, 67 in which equitable representation for women
was called for at all levels in national government and in
international bodies,
Recalling that in article 7 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 71 it
was agreed that States Parties should ensure that women
have the right, on equal terms with men, to participate in
the formulation and implementation of government policy
and to hold public office,
Recalling further that in article 8 of the Convention it
was agreed that States Parties should ensure to women, on
equal terms with men, the opportunity to represent their
Governments at the international level and to participate in
the work of international organizations,
Recognizing that only three years remain before the end
of the United Nations Decade for Women,
l. Notes with concern that women are still not represented on an equitable basis with men in decision-making
positions in a majority of national and international
institutions;
2. Calls upon all Member States, by the end of the
United Nations Decade for Women in 1985, to make special
efforts to nominate and appoint women, on an equal basis
with men and taking due account of the same professional
criteria, to decision-making positions in those national and
international bodies in which they are not equitably
represented;
3. Calls upon the Secretary-General and the executive
heads of the specialized agencies and other organizations
of the United Nations system to make, by the end of the
United Nations Decade for Women in 1985, increased efforts to select and appoint women, in conformity with Article 101 of the Charter of the United Nations, to decisionmaking positions in the Secretariat and in the organs and
agencies of the United Nations system.
90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982

37/62.

Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade
for Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/133 of 16 December 1976,
containing the criteria and arrangements for the management
of the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for
Women,
Recalling also its resolution 36/ 129 of 14 December 1981 ,
Welcoming the contributions made by Member States and
non-governmental organizations towards the implementation of the goals of the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace,

Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the Fund, 72
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the recommendations
of the Consultative Committee on the Voluntary Fund for
the United Nations Decade for Women at its eleventh and
twelfth sessions; 73
2. Considers that the Fund has a unique contribution to
make in the technical assistance field to the implementation
of the goals of the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace;
3. Considers further that the evaluation of projects has
an important role to play in enabling the Fund to fulfil its
objectives;
4. Notes with satisfaction the continuing increase in the
number of projects submitted to and financed by the Fund,
and the catalytic role played by the Fund in promoting the
adoption of innovative and experimental activities by Governments and other funds;
5. Notes the appointment of senior women's programme
officers at the regional commissions within regular budget
resources available to them, and recognizes the valuable
contribution that this is making to the work of the Fund and
thus to the implementation of the goals of the Decade;
6. Urges the executive secretaries of the regional commissions to take further action to use available financial and
personnel resources to strengthen their programmes for
women;
7. Notes with concern that contributions to the Fund
have not been sufficient to enable it to take on all the worthwhile projects submitted to it;
8. Considers that fund-raising and information activities
have a vital role to play in maintaining and increasing the
financial viability and effectiveness of the Fund;
9. Expresses its appreciation for the support which national committees for the Fund, national United Nations
associations and other non-governmental organizations have
given to the work of the Fund;
10. Expresses its appreciation also for the voluntary
contributions to the Fund pledged by Member States, and
its hope that the overa11 level of such contributions will be
maintained or increased;
11. Notes the view of the Consultative Committee on
the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for
Women, as expressed at its twelfth session, that there are
still grounds for concern regarding administrative matters
relating to the Fund, and its hope that specific and concrete
measures will be taken by the Secretary-General on an urgent basis to ensure that these issues are studied and the
necessary action is taken;
12. Notes also the assurance given to the Consultative
Committee that the Secretary-General will do everything
possible to ensure that the Fund is administered efficiently;
13. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue to report annually on the management
of the Fund and on the progress of its activities;
(b) To continue to include the Fund, on an annual basis,
as one of the l'rograrnmes for which funds are pledged al
the United Nations Pledging Conference for Development
Activities.
90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982

72

71

Resolution 34/180, annex.

193

73

A/371421.
Ibid., sect. IV.
