276

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

3. Considers that this decision by the Government of
the United States of America, the host country, constitutes a violation of the international legal obligations of
the host country under the Agreement between the United
Nations and the United States of America regarding the
Headquarters of the United Nations;
4. Urges the host country to abide scrupulously by the
provisions of the Agreement and to reconsider and reverse
its decision;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
on the developments in this matter no later than I December 1988.
65th plenary meeting
30 November 1988

43/51.

Declaration on the Prevention and Removal of
Disputes and Situations Which May Threaten
lnternational Peace and Security and on the
Role of the United Nations in this Field

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 38/141 of 19 December 1983,
39/88 of 13 December 1984, 40/78 of 11 December 1985,
41/83 of 3 December 1986 and 42/157 of 7 December
1987,
Taking note of the report of the Special Committee on
the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization, 4 which met in
New York from 22 February to 11 March 1988 and completed a draft Declaration on the Prevention and Removal
of Disputes and Situations Which May Threaten International Peace and Security and on the Role of the United
Nations in this Field,
Convinced that the adoption of the Declaration on the
Prevention and Removal of Disputes and Situations
Which May Threaten lnternational Peace and Security
and on the Role of the United Nations in this Field will
contribute towards strengthening the role and enhancing
the effectiveness of the United Nations in maintaining international peace and security,
Considering the need to ensure a wide dissemination of
the text of the Declaration,
l. Approves the Declaration on the Prevention and Removal of Disputes and Situations Which May Threaten
International Peace and Security and on the Role of the
United Nations in this Field, the text of which is annexed
to the present resolution;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Special Committee
on the Charter ofthe United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization for its importan!
contribution to the elaboration of the text of the Declaration;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the Governments of the States Members of the United Nations or
members of specialized agencies, and the Security Council, of the adoption of the Declaration;
4. Urges that every effort be made to ensure that the
Declaration becomes generally known and fully impleme1,''.:d.
68th plenary meeting
5 Decembcr 198R

4
Ojjícial Record,· of' tlw General A,semhly. Forrv-rhml Se,sion.
Supplcmcnt No. 33 (A/4.1/3.1).

ANJ'I.EX
Declaration on the Prevention and Removal of Disputes and Situations
Which May Threaten I nternational Peace and Security and on the
Role oí the United Nations in this Field
Th!! General Assemhly.
Recognizing the importan! role that the United Natiom, and its organs
can play in the prevention and removal of international disputes and
situations which may lead to international friction or give rise toan international dispute. the continuance of which may threaten the maintenance of international peace and security (hereafter: "disputes" or
"situalions"), within their respective funclions and powers under the
Charler of the United Nations.
Convinced that the strengthening of such a role of the United Nations
will enhance its effectiveness in dealing with questions relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security and in promoting the
peaceful settlement of international disputes,
Recognizing the fundamental responsibility of States for thc prevention and removal of disputes and situations,
Recalling that the peoples of the United Nations are determined to
pract1se tolerancc and liw logether in pcace with one another as good
neighbours,
Bearing in mind the right of ali States to resort to peaccful means of
their own choice for the prcvention and removal of disputes or situations,
Reaffirming the Declaration on Principies of lnternational Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,s the Manila Declaration
on the Peaceful Settlement of lnternational Disputes 6 and the Declaration on the Enhancement of the Effectiveness of the Principie of Refraining from the Threat or Use of Force in International Relations. 7
Recalling that it is the duty ofStates to refrain in their international relations from military, polilical, economic or any other form of coercion
against the political independencc or territorial integrity of any State,
Calling upon States to co-operate fully with the relevan! organs of the
United Nations a11d to support actions take11 by them in accordance with
the Chartcr relating to thc prc,ention or removal of disputes and situations,

Bearing in mind the obligation ofStates to conduct their relations with
other States in accordance with international law, including thc principies of the United Nations.
Reaffirmi11g the principie ,,f cqual rights and self-determination of
peoples,
Recalling that the Charter confers 011 the Security Council the primary
responsibility for the maintcnance of international peace and security,
and that Member States havc agreed to accept and carry out its decisions
in accordance with the Charter,
R,Yalling a/so the importan! role conferred by the Charter 011 the General Assembly and the Sccrctary-General in the maintenance of intemational peacc ami securit).
Solem11ly declar!!.1 that:

l.

States should act so as to preven! in their international relations
the emergcncc or aggra,atton of disputes or situations, in particular by
fulfilling in good faith lheir obligations under international law;
2. In order to prevent disputes or situations, States should devclop
their relations on the basis of the sovereign equality of States and in
such a manner as to enhance the effectiveness of the collective security
system through the effective implementation of the provisions of the
Charter of the United :-iations;
States should consider the use of bilateral or multilateral rnnsultations in order bcltcr to understand each other·, views, positions
and intercsts;
4 States party to regional arrangements or members of agencies
rcferrcd lo in Article 52 ofthe Charter should make every effort to preven! or remove local disputes ,,r situations through such arrangemcnts
and agencies;

'

S1ates conccrned slwuld constder approaching thc rclevant or-

"ª'" of lhe Unitcd Nati"n' in order lo ohtain advice or rccomrnenda11011..., l)fl prevl·nt1ve me;l\l" fnr dealing with a dispute or ~ituatÍl)n:

' Rcsolut,011 ~t,25 (XX V). ,111r1t·x.
Rcsolution .n / 10. an11cx
Rt_•solulion 4~ /22, a11ncx

1,

7

IX.

277

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

6. Any State party to a dispute or directly concerned with a situation, particularly if it intends to request a meeting of the Security
Council, should approach the Council. directly or indirectly, at an
early stage and, if appropriate, on a confidential ba~is;

21. The Secrctary-General shou Id consider approaching the States
directly concerned with a dispute or situation in an effort to preven! it
from becoming a threat to the maintenance of international peace and
security;

7. The Security Council should consider holding from time to time
meetings, including ata high leve! with thc participation, in particular.
ofMinisters for Foreign Affairs, or consultations to review the international situation and search for effective ways of improving it;

22. The Secretary-General should, where appropriate, consider
making foil use of fact-finding capabilities, including, with the con»ent
of the host State, sending a representative or fact-finding missions to
areas where a dispute ora situation exists; where necessary, the Secretary-General should also consider making the appropriate arrangements;

8. In the course ofthe preparation for the prevention or removal of
particular disputes or situations, the Security Council should consider
making use of the various means al its disposal, including the appointment of the Secretary-General as rapporteur for a specified question;
g_ When a particular dispute or situation is brought to the attention of the Security Council without a meeting being requested, the
Council should consider holding consultations with a view to examining the facts of the dispute or situation and keeping it under review,
with the assistance of the Secretary-General when needed; the State~
concerned should have the opportunity of making their views known;
10. In such consultations, consideration should be given to employing such informal methods as the Security Council d~ems appropriate, including confidential conlacts by its Presiden!;
1l. In such consultations, the Sccurity Council should consider.
in ter alia:

(a) Reminding the States conccrned to respect their obligations
under the Charter;
Making an appeal to the States concerned to refrain from any
action which might give rise to a dispute or lead to the deterioration of
the dispute or situation;
(b)

(e) Making an appeal to the States concerned to take action which
might help to remove, orto prevent the continuation or deterioration
of, the dispute or situation;
12. The Security Council should consider sending, at an early
stage, fact-finding or good offices missions or establishing appropriate
forms of United Nations presence, including observers and peacckeeping operations, as a meaos of preventing the further deterioration
of the dispute or situation in the arcas concerned;
13. The Security Council should consider encouraging and, where
appropriate, endorsing efforts al the regional leve! by the States concernedor by regional arrangements or agencies to preven! or removc a
dispute or situation in the region concerned;
14. Taking into consideration any procedures that have already
been adopted by the States directly concerned, !he Sccurity Council
should consider recommending to them appropriate procedures or
methods of settlement of dispute, or adjustment of situations, and
such terms of settlement as it deems appropriate;
15. The Security Council, if it is appropriate for promoting the
prevention and removal of disputes or situations, should, at an early
stage, consider making use ofthe provisions ofthe Chartcr concerning
the possibility of requesting the lntcrnational Court of Justice to give
an advisory opinion on any legal question:
16. The General Assembly should consider making use of the
provisions of the Charter in order to discuss disputes or situations.
when appropriate, and, in accordance with Articlc 11 and subject to
Article 12 of the Charter, making rccommendations;
17. The General Assembly should consider, where appropriate,
supporting efforts undertaken al the regional leve! by the States concernedor by regional arrangements or agencies, to preven! or remove a
dispute or situation in the region rnncerned;
18. !fa dispute or situation has been brought befare it, the General
Assembly should consider including in its rccommendations making
more use offact-finding capabilities, in accnrdance with Article 11 and
subject to Article 12 of the Chartcr;
19. The General Assembly, if it is appropriate for promoting the
prevention and removal of disputes or situations, should consider
making use of the provisions of the Charter concerning the possibility
of requesting the lnternational Court of Ju,tice to give an advisory
opinion on any legal question;
20. The Secretary-General, if apprnached hy a Sta te or Sta tes directly concerned with a dispute nr situat1011. should respond swiftly hy
urging the States to seek a solution or adjustment by peaceful means of
their own choice undcr thc Charkr and hy oifering his good officc, or
other means at his disposal, as he decm, appropriak;

23. The Secretary-General should be encouraged to consider using, at as early a stage as he deems appropriate, the right that is accorded to him under Article g9 of the Charter;
24 The Secretary-General should, where appropriate, encourage
efforts undertaken at the regmnal leve! to preven! or remove a dispute
or situation in thc region concerned;

25. Should States fail to preven! the emergence or aggravation of a
dispute or situation. they shall continue to seek a settlement hy peaceful mean, in accordance with the Charter;
2. Declares that nothing in the present Declaration shall he construed as prejudicing in any manner the provisions of the Charter, including thosc contained in Articlc 2, paragraph 7, thereof, or the rights
and duties of States, or the scope of the functions and the powers of
Unitcd Nations organs under the Charter, m particular those relating 1,,
the maintenance of international peace and security;
3. A/Jo declares that nothing in the present Declaration could in any
way prejudice the right to self-determination, freedom and independence
of peopks forcibly deprived of that right and referred to in the Declara-tion on Principies of International Law concerning Friendly Relations
and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, 5 particularly peoples under colonial or racist régimes or
other forms of alíen domination.

43/160.

Observer status of national liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity and/or by the League of Arab States
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 35/167 of 15 December 1980,
37/104 of 16 December 1982, 39/76 of 13 December 1984
and 41/71 of 3 Decem ber 19 86,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 8
Recalling also its resolution 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974, by which it granted observer status to the Palestinc Liberation Organization,
Recalling further it;. resolution 31/152 of 20 December
1976, by which it granted observer status to the South
West Africa People's Organization,
Desirous of enhancing the effective role played by these
national liberation movements,
Bearing in mind the necessity of facilitating the work of
these organizations,
1. Decides that the Palestine Liberation Organization
and the South West Africa People's Organization are entitled to have their communications relating to the sessions
and work of the General Assembly issued and circulated
directly, and without intermediary, as official documents
of the Assembly:
2. Decides also that the Palestine Liberation Organization and the South West Africa People's Organization are
entitled to have their communications relating to the sessions and work of all international confercnces convened
under the auspices of the General Assembly ofthe United

·' Al43/528 and Add. 1 and 2
