URITY COUNCIL
FICIAL

RECORDS

TH/RTY-FIRST

,‘/’

$//\II\‘/2 j:?,~!f.,~;,‘!t’;

YEAR

9

!:,I.
:AI’/, ‘,

th

MEETING:

12 AUGUST

1976

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l949)

, . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . ,

I

Expression of thanks to the retiring ‘President . . . . , . . . , , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . , , , , , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . .

I

Complaint by Greece against Turkey:
Letter dated 10 August 1976 from the PerVnanent Representative of Greece
to the United Nations addressed to the President !of the Security Council
(S/12167)

. . . . , . ,....,.

I..,,,

.....,,....,,,,....,..,,...,..,,......

1

SlPV. 1949

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Qfficicrl Rawcis of the Sacrwity Corrtd.
The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions
of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of R~~.so/rrtio/~s trd
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1949th MEETING
Held in New York, on Thursday,
Pwsident:

Mr. Isao ABE (Japan).

made in the letter which the representative of Greece
addressed to’the President of the Council on 10 August
[S//2/67].
In his letter the representative of Greece
requested that Greece be invited, under rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure, to participate in the
discussion. In conformity with Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure,
I propose that the Council invite the representative of
Greece to participate in the Council’s
discussion,
without the right to vote.

Prcw~zt: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America.

Provisional
1. Adoption

12 August 1976, at 4 p.m.

agenda (S/Agenda/l949)

of the agenda

2. Complaint by Gree&e against Turkey:
Letter dated 10 August 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Greece to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/12167)

3. The PRESIDENT:
I have also received a letter
from the representative of Turkey in which he requests
that Turkey be invited to participate in the discussion,
In accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, I propose that the Council invite the representative of Turkey to participate in the Council’s discussion without the right to vote.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT:
It is my pleasant duty and
privilege as President of the Council for this month to
express the admiration and appreciation felt, I am
sure, by all the members of the Council for the outstanding services rendered to the Council by our colleague Ambassador Piero Vinci during his tenure of
the presidency of the Council for the month of July.
He was most generous in offering his wide experience
and exceptional abilities in presiding over so many
meetings, both formal and informal, during that
month. I know I am speaking for all my colleagues
on the Council when I say how much we have appreciated the courtesy, efficiency and statesmanship
shown by our colleague from Italy. Since Ambassador Vinci has, luckily, been enjoying a quiet vacation in Italy, I would be grateful to the Italian delegation if it would be good enough to convey our thanks
to him.

4. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw the
attention of the members of the Council to the following additional documents:
document
S/12168,
which reproduces the text of a letter addressed to the
Secretary-General
by the representative of Greece,
and document S/12172, which reproduces the text of
a letter addressed to the Secretary-General
by the
representative of Turkey.
5. The first speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Greece, Mr. Dimitri Bitsios, and I should like to
welcome him on behalf of the Council.
6. Mr. BlTSlOS (Greece): Mr. President, I should
like to thank you sincerely for your kind words of
welcome.

Adoption of the agenda

7. The Greek Government has asked for an urgent
meeting of the Council, on the basis of Article 35 of
the Charter, in view of the dangerous situation created
for peace and security in the Eastern Mediterranean
as a result of arbitrary and provocative acts by Turkey
against Greece. The explanatory
memorandum
of
the Greek Mission [S//217-?. ~IIII!P.Y] gives abundant
evidence fully substantiating Turkey’s
violation of
my country’s sovereign rights and throws ample light

Complaint by Greece against Turkey:
Letter dated 10 August 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Greece to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12167)
2. The PRESIDENT:
This meeting of the Council
has been convened in response to the urgent request
I

12. I submit that this is exactly the situation that
Turkey has tried to create ~~is-ir-~~is Greece, because,
without prior notification the Turkish Government,
through a unilateral decision published in the official
Turkish gazette of 1 November
1973, granted the
Turkish Petroleum Company permits for exploration
and exploitation on the continental shelf of the Aegean
covering also the continental shelf of seven Greek
islands. Taking international law into its own hands,
the Turkish Government sought, through these concessions, to deny any continental shelf to these Greek
islands. It is characteristic of Ankara’s intentions thai:,
by granting concessions lo the west of the Greek
islands, it sought to enclave them in a zone of excluc
sive Turkish economic interests and disrupt the unity
of the Greek State.

on Turkish behaviour and relevant acts. Therefore,
I shall go straight into the essence of the issue.
8. I shall of course give you first the background of
your dispute with Turkey over the continental shelf
of the Aegean. But the one thing I want to state at the
very outset is that it is not my intention to ask the
Council to take a decision on our legal dispute, fol
Greece has already seized the International
Court of
Justice of this matter. My intention is to denounce the
activities of Turkey which jeopardize
peace and
security in the Eastern Mediterranean
and to ask the
Council to call upon Turkey to cease them.
9. 1 come now to the facts. While consultations
were still going on with a view to finding the best way
of solving our dispute over the continental
shelf,
Turkey on 6 August dispatched the research ship
Si.sr~il;-I to the Aegean in order to carry out seismollogical explorations of certain areas of the continental
shelf that Greece is entitled to consider as belonging
to it. Turkey made this decision cold-bloodedly
and
in spite of repeated warnings both from us and from
other parties to the effect that the delimitation
of the
continental shelf can best be achieved through peaceful procedures rather than through ,filit.s rrwomp/is.
The Council is well aware that the situation in the area
is already heavy and fraught with danger because of
the Turkish invasion of Cyprus, which is still continuing. Although Turkey knew this very well, it did
not hesitate to add this new provocation or to take
upon itself the heavy responsibility of a confrontation
between the two countries.

13. The Greek Government, by its note verbale a’f
7 February 1974, denounced the Turkish action, reserved its full sovereign rights on the continental shelf
and the subsoil adjacent to the coast of the abovementioned islands and expressly stated that it could
not recognize the validity of the Turkish Government’s action to grant exploration permits over continental shelf areas appertaining to Greece.
14. The Turkish Government replied that, according
to geomorphological
studies of the sea-bed of the
Aegean Sea, the Greek islands situated near the
Anatolian coasts did not possess a continental shelf
of their own and that all continental shelf in that are;3
ought to accrue to Turkey. It offered to negotiate on
that basis.
15. The Turkish Government thus tried to substantiate the view that the Greek islands float or sit on
some kind of sea-bed that has been specifically assigned to Turkey. The Council no doubt realizes that
if such views were to acquire any currency in international practice, the map of the world would have
to be redrawn according to the fancy of individual
States.

10. I now come to the history of our dispute, in order
to lay before the Council the untiring efforts of the
Greek Government to convince the Turkish Government that our dispute must be solved peacefully.
II.
It is an irrefutable fact that international
order
and the general principles of law, as sanctioned by
international conventions, treaties and custom, stipulate that there can be no distinction
whatsoever between the continental and the insular components of
a State as regards its entitlement to a continental shelf.
This has been enshrined in article 1, subparagraph (b),
of the Geneva Convention of 1958 on the Continental
Shelf.’ According to the 1969 judgement of the International Court of Justice on the .North Sea case,* this
article of the Geneva Convention codified pre-existing
international
customary law binding all States signatory to the Convention. It is no coincidence that the
same fundamental rule is contained in article 128 of
the revised single negotiating text of the Third United
Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea.” It is not
necessary to go into a lengthy analysis in order to
demonstrate the reasons why the international
community is holding fast to these rules. For, otherwise,
the door would be opened for arbitra”ry acts by such
States as might think themselves capable of imposing
their will on others unilaterally.

16. The Greek Government replied that it was open
to negotiations but on the basis of the rules of positive
international law.
17. Between 29 May and 1 June 1974, the Turkish
Government
dispatched into the area the hydrographic vessel Ctrntlorli of the Turkish Navy under
the escort of a fleet of 32 warships and under cover OF
the Turkish Air Force, to carry out magnetometric
exploration of the continental shelf.
18. 1 leave it to the members of the Council to appreciate whether the method employed by Turkey was
the proper one in order to inaugurate a peaceful and
constructive negotiation.
19. On 18 July 1974, the Turkish Government pub.
lished in the Official Turkish gazette a new decision,
whereby it granted new exploration permits CII bloc’
2

to the Turkish Petroleum Company, again to the west
of other Greek islands and over their continental
shelf.

shelf. The sailing of the vessel was heralded by threatening statements warning against any attempt to
interfere with its mission. And this mission was officially described as aiming at the discovery of oil
deposits. ‘rhe areas of the violations are indicated in
detail in the protest note of the Greek Government to
the Turkish Government [ihirl., trppendik
I]. This
situation is rendered more dangerous by the fact that
even though the second phase of the research of
Sismili-l
has not been completed, new violations are
taking place while further phases have already been
announced. The Turkish Prime Minister clearly stated
the day before yesterday that these exploratory activities would continue as originally scheduled, in spite
of any protest from Greece. I wish to stress this point
particularly,
because it is easy to imagine how the
tension will be increasing in the coming days and
weeks. The presence in the area of naval and air force
units of the two countries should also be borne in
mind. Under these circumstances, a mere accident
might suffice to lose control of the situation. I do not
think it is necessary for me to insist on this point in
order to show how dangerous the situation really is.

20. The Greek Government lodged a further vigorous protest against these new flagrant violations by
Turkey of the sovereign rights of Greece and declared
that Greece did not recognize any validity to the
Turkish Government’s
actions. The Turkish Government rejected this protest and, i/rrl~ ll/i(/, claimed
that “the unique gedgraphical configuration and geological structure of the Aegean are accepted facts”.
May I ask, “accepted” by whom, for what purpose
and by virtue of what international law’?
21. At this stage, it became clear that no common
juridical basis could be found between the two parties
for the settlement of the dispute, or, in order to be
more accurate, no juridical basis at all could be perceived as regards the Turkish positions. Consequently, the Greek Government in its efforts to solve
the matter by peaceful means, proposed officially on
27 January 1975, that it be referred to the International
Court of Justice, “as befits two neighbouring countries and fellow-Members
of the United Nations
Organization”
[i/k/.,
uppcntlix
111. This was in line
with United Nations resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, containing the Declaration on Principles
of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations
and Co-operation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, later included in
the Final Act of the Conference on Security and
Co-operation in Europe signed at Helsinki. 1 feel fully
justified in saying that the initiative taken by the Greek
Government has been highly appreciated by all members of the international community.

25. Turkey claims that the areas that are now being
explored by the Turkish research vessel Sisnlik-I are,
contested areas and that therefore the question of
violating Greek sovereign rights does not even arise,
because such rights do not exist in contested areas.
I shall not refer to the opinions of eminent jurists who
ma&e nonsense of this Turkish argument. And I shall
not use them because, as I stated at the very outset,
I am not asking the Council to decide on our legal
argument. The question that the Council will have to
decide is whether these activities are provocative and
constitute a danger to.peace. For us, the areas where
Sismik-/
is operating are not contested. They are part
of the Greek continental shelf. But even if one were
to accept the Turkish theory about “contested areas”,
Turkey would still be in the wrong because even in
contested areas one is not permitted to present .firits
ccccomp/i.v while negotiations are still on, unless one
wishes to perpetrate a provocation with incalculable
consequences+

22. The Turkish Government accepted this proposal
in principle and later reiterated its acceptance in the
joint communiquC issued after the meeting in Brussels
on 31 May 1975 of the Prime Ministers of the two
countries.
23. However, repeated meetings of our two delegations with’a view to narrowing the dispute and defining
the legal issues to be submitted to the Court proved
frustrating. It soon became apparent that the Turkish
Government
was not really interested in settling the
issues at hand but sought rather to prolong the discussions indefinitely.

26. Turkey also claims that the tests carried out are
of a scientific nature, when it is common knowledge
that seismological tests fall clearly under article 2 of
the 1958 Geneva Convention.
27. Turkey finally claims that Greece has also
explored these areas. When, several years ago,
Greece did explore the continental shelf west of its
islands-I
repeat, west of its islands-in the Aegean,
no dispute had arisen with Turkey. And I am calling
on the Turkish representative to inform us whether
Greece has ever committed any provocative act after
the emergence of the dispute. From whatever angle
one looks at recent events, the inescapable fact remains that Turkey decided coldly to jeopardize peace
in the area while the crisis created by the Turkish
invasion of Cyprus in the summer of 1974 is still unsettled.

24. Still, the Greek Government played the game,
firmly but patiently. For, as a responsible member of
the international community,
Greece took the view
that it owed it to itself and to the general welfare and
peace to leave no avenue unexplored that could lead
to the elimination
of a dispute in an area that was
already rife with danger and tension. As already
stated, in the midst of these negotiations the Turkish
Government
dispatched the vessel Sismik-f to carry
out seismological explorations in areas which Greece
is entitled to consider as belonging to its continental
3

33. We are utterly perplexed by the move of the
Greek Government in bringing the Aegean situation
before the Council, because if there is indeed a threat
to peace in the Aegean it is not Turkey but Grelece
which is to be blamed-because
from the very beginning it has been the Greek Governments, with their
impossible dream of making the Aegan an exclusively
Greek lake, that have created dangerous tensions in
the area. Whereas Turkey has always desired to make
the Aegean Sea a region of friendship and co-operation
with Greece, Greek Governments have been on a path
of increasing aggressiveness.

28. Many are the opportunities offered by Greece
to Turkey for the peaceful settlement of our dispute.
They are not confined to our proposal that the matte1
be referred to the International
Court of Justice.
When, after having originally accepted this proposal,
Turkey started to procrastinate and when dark clouds
started gathering over the Aegean, the Greek Prime
Minister proposed to the Prime Minister of Turkey
the conclusion of a pact on the non-use of force. But
Mr. Demirel answered that we ought to solve our differences first and sign the pact later. As if a pact on
the non-use of force is required between two countries
that have solved all their differences. This refusal by
Turkey to accept the Caramanlis proposal is a significant indication of its intentions.

34. Starting some years ago with the militarization
and arming of the Greek islands facing Turkey in the
Aegean-some
of them only a few miles from the
Turkish shores-in flagrant violation of the internstional treaties pertaining to the status of those islnnds,
Greece has tried to stake its claim to the surface, SC;Ibed and air-space of the Aegan as if it were its exc:lusive domain.

29. Our last-minute effort is characteristic
in this
respect. When the Greek Ambassador in Ankara
handed in, last Monday, our second note of protest
[ihid.] against the activities of Sismik-I, he said to
his Turkish interlocutor, on our instructions:

35. The recent military and naval harassment of the
unarmed Turkish research vessel which has been
conducting scientific and naval research outside the
territorial waters of Greece, in the very same manner
as Greece has been doing for some years, is yet anotlhcr
case in point of the aggressive and irresponsible attitude of Greece.

“Greece would not like to be compelled
to have
recourse of the international procedures
that are
available to her. If Sismik-/ ceases its activity
we
shall be able to resume our negotiations.”
Unfortunately,
the Greek Ambassador was speaking
to deaf ears. Turkey rejected this last opportunity
too.
This is the reason why it is necessary that it should
now hear from the Council that it must suspend its
provocative acts. The United Nations was not in tirpe
to stop the tragedy of Cyprus. It can now prevent a
new tragedy in the Aegean. It is in this hope that
Greece brings the matter before the Council.

36. Greece, with a puzzling logic, seems to consider
its allegations and claims over the yet undelimitcd
continental shelf of the Aegean as already acquired
and established sovereign rights. This is all the more
incomprehensible because, by having accepted billatera] negotiations on the dispute-which
are still under
way-Greece has implicitly accepted the fact that the
continental shelf of the Aegean has not yet been tilelimited. On the other hand, the Greek Government
had accepted the continuation
of the negotiating
process, in full knowledge of the Turkish research
programme which is now being carried out.

30. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Turkey, on whom I call.
31. Mr. TiiRKMEN
(Turkey): Mr. President,
at the
outset of my brief statement I should like to congratulate you upon your assumption of the presidency
of the Council. Knowing your distinguished
record,
I feel sure that you will fulfil your mission in an exemplary manner.

37. I do not wish to take more of the time of lthe
members of the Council but I should like to suggest
that they, in their consideration of the remarks of llhe
Foreign Minister of Greece, could also take the time
to look briefly at the map of the region, where lthc
Turkish case speaks for itself.

32. Also at the outset, I should like to express our
regret that my Foreign Minister, who is actually
en
route and is expected to arrive in New York this
evening, has not been given the opportunity
of being
present during the statement of the ‘Foreign Minister
of Greece. My Foreign Minister hopes to have the
opportunity of addressing the Council tomorrow
and
will then be able to explain in some detail the views
of the Turkish Government on the matter now before
the Council. However, today I cannot refrain from
making at least some genera1 remarks on what has just
been said by the Foreign Minister of Greece.

Notrs

’ Officitrt Recorh

of the Third

United

Nnti(m.s

Cmfmwrc’c*
MI

1/w ~/II, Nf I/?L’ Sur, vol. V (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.76.V.Q document A/CONFhZ/WP.B/Rev.I.

4

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
or write to: United Nations,
Sales Section.
New York or Geneva.

SE PROCURER

LES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde cntier. Informez-vous
aup&
des ventes, New York ou Gen&e.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNlES

sent en vente clans les libreiries
et Its agences
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
h : Nations

PUBLICACIONES

LX publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

DE LAS

NACIONES

llnidas
e&n
en venta en librerias
a XI librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00150

d+ositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Seccibn
de Vcntas.

X3-60801-February

1985.-2,2(m
