62

General Assemhly-Sixteenth Seuion

6. 1nvites the specialized agencies and the interested
inter-governmental organizations to send observers to
the conference;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to present to the
conference documentation and recommendations concerning its methods of work and procedures;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for
the necessary staff and facilities which will be required
for the conference ;
9. Refers to the conference chapter II of the report
of the International Law Commission covering the work
of its thirteenth session, together with the records of
::he relevant debates in the General Assembly, as the
basis for its consideration of the question of consular
relations;
10. Expresses the hope that the conference will be
fully attended;

11. Decides to include the item entitled "Consular
relations" in the provisional agenda of its seventeenth
s~ssion to all~w further expr~ssi,ns and exchanges of
v1ews concernmg the draft art1cles on consular relations.
1081st plenary meeting,
18 December 1961.

1686 (XVI). Future work in the field of the codification and progressive development of
international Iaw
The General Assembly·,
Recalling its resolution 1505 (XV) of 12 December
1960,
C onsidering that the conditions prevailing in the
world today give increased importance to the role of
international law in relations among nations,
Emphasizing the important role of codification and
progressive development of international law with a
view to making international law a more effective means
of ~urthering the purposes and principies set forth in
Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations,
Mindful of its responsibilities under Article 13, paragraph 1 a, of th~ Charter to encourage the progressive
development of mternational Iaw and its codification ,
H aving surveyed the present state of international
~w with ~articular r~gard_ to the preparation of a new
hst of top1cs for cod1ficat10n and progressive development of international law,
l. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for the valuable work it has already

accomplished in the codification and progressive development of international law;
2. Takes note of chapter III of the report of the
International Law Commission covering the work of
its thirteenth session ;1
3. Recommends the International Law Commission:
(a) To continue its work in the field of the law of
treaties and of State responsibility and to include on
its priority list the topic of succession of States and
Governments ;
( b) To consider at its fourteenth session its future
programme of work, on the basis of sub-paragraph (a)
above and in the light of the discussion in the Sixth
Committee at the fifteenth and sixteenth sessions of the
General Assembly and of the observations of Member
States submitted pursuant to resolution 1505 (XV),
and to report to the Assembly at its seventeenth session
on the conclusions it has reached ;
4. Decides to place on the provisional agenda of its
seventeenth session the question entitled "Consideration
of principies of international Iaw concerning friendly
relations and co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations".
1081st plenary meeting,
18 December 1961.

1687 (XVI). Question of special missions
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1504 (XV) of 12 December
1960, whereby it referred to the United Nations Conference on Diplomatic Intercourse and Immunities the
draft articles on special missions contained in chapter
III of the report of the International Law Commission
covering the work of its twelfth session, 2
N oting the resolution on special missions adopted by
the United Nations Conference on Diplomatic Intercourse and Immunities at its 4th plenary meeting, held
on 10 April 1%1, recommending that the subject be
referred again to the International Law Commission,3
Requests the International Law Commission, as soon
as it considers it advisable, to stúdy further the subject
of special missions and to report thereon to the General
Assembly.
1081st plenary meeting,
18 December 1961.
• Jbid., Fifteenth Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/4425).
• !bid., Sixteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 71, document
A/4773, para. l.
