A /71/PV.27

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

27th plenary meeting

Thursday, 13 October 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Majesty King
Bhumibol Adulyadej, the late King of Thailand
The President: It is my sad duty to pay tribute to the
memory of the late King of Thailand, His Majesty King
Bhumibol Adulyadej, who passed away on Thursday,
13 October 2016. On behalf of the General Assembly, I
request the representative of the Kingdom of Thailand
to convey our condolences to the royal family, the
Government and the people of Thailand.

the work undertaken by the Council on the appointment
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): It is an honour for me, in my capacity as
President of the Security Council for the month of
October, to address the General Assembly in order to
convey the recommendation of the Security Council
for the appointment of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations.

May I now invite representatives to stand and
observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of
the late King.

At its 7782nd meeting, held in private on 6 October,
the Security Council adopted by acclamation resolution
2311 (2016) concerning the recommendation for
the appointment of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations.

The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.

I shall now read out the text of the resolution.
Resolution 2311 (2016) reads as follows:

The President: A formal tribute in the General
Assembly will be convened at a later date, to
be announced.
Agenda item 113
Appointment of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations
Letter from the President of the
Security Council to the President of the General
Assembly (A/71/531)
Draft resolution (A/71/L.4)
The President: I now call on the President of the
Security Council, who will report to the Assembly on

16-32309 (E)

“The Security Council,
“Having considered the question of the
recommendation for the appointment of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations,
“Recommends to the General Assembly that
Mr. António Guterres be appointed SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations for a term of office
from 1 January 2017 to 31 December 2021.”
In the joint letter of the President of the Security
Council and the President of the General Assembly
dated 15 December 2015, the Council pledged to
conclude its part in the selection process in a timely
manner, so that the newly appointed Secretary-General

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1632309*

A/71/PV.27

would have sufficient time to prepare for the job. The
Council is pleased that, by adopting its recommendation
for the appointment on 6 October, the Council met that
objective. The Security Council believes that early
action on the appointment by the General Assembly
would provide the new Secretary-General with enough
time to prepare for performing his duties.
On behalf of the Security Council, I would like
to express appreciation to all Member States that
nominated candidates as part of the selection process. I
would also like to express appreciation to the candidates
who have actively participated in the process. During
the informal meetings with each of them, the Council
had the opportunity to evaluate their high professional
skills and commitment to the purposes and principles
of the United Nations.
The Security Council adopted resolution 2311
(2016) by acclamation. Accordingly, the members of the
Security Council expressed their unconditional support
for Mr. António Guterres, who, if appointed today, will
head our common Organization.
In conclusion, I would like to thank you, Sir, for
having convened this meeting expeditiously following
the recommendation made to the General Assembly by
the Security Council.
The President: In connection with the
recommendation of the Security Council, the General
Assembly has before it a draft resolution issued as
document A/71/L.4. The draft was prepared following
extensive consultations between me, special advisers
on my behalf, and the United Nations membership.
Throughout those consultations, a number of consistent
priorities held by Member States emerged, and in that
context, I want to thank all of them for their inputs,
which were fundamental in the preparation of the text.
During the drafting process, I was conscious of
the need to reflect the historic advances that had been
made in the process of the selection and appointment of
the Secretary-General, in line with resolutions 69/321
and 70/305. That included the acknowledgement of the
transparent and inclusive process that was undertaken,
from the informal dialogues, which were conducted
between the General Assembly and each of the
candidates, to the unprecedented level of cooperation
between the Presidents of the General Assembly and
the Security Council.
2/11

13/10/2016

The main task was to reflect, within the framework
of the draft resolution on the appointment, the committed
support for the process that was undertaken and the
expectations of Member States. With the reaffirmation
of the role of the General Assembly, the reference to
Chapter XV of the Charter of the United Nations and
the recognition of resolutions 69/321 and 70/305 as the
cornerstones of the process, I am confident that the
text before the Assembly fully reflects the views of
Member States.
After the extensive consultations that I have had
with the membership, it is my understanding that the
General Assembly wishes to proceed with the adoption
of draft resolution A/71/L.4 by acclamation.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt by acclamation draft resolution
A/71/L.4?
Draft resolution A/71/L.4 was
acclamation (resolution 71/4).

adopted

by

The President: I now request the Chief of Protocol
to escort the Secretary-General-designate, His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres, to the platform.
The Chief of Protocol escorted the SecretaryGeneral-designate, Mr. António Guterres, to
the platform.
The President: I have the honour to announce
that His Excellency Mr. António Guterres has been
appointed by acclamation Secretary-General of the
United Nations for a term of office beginning on
1 January 2017 and ending on 31 December 2021.
Today is indeed a momentous day. Since 1946, this
is only the ninth time that the General Assembly has
taken action on the appointment of a new SecretaryGeneral. It is inherently a decision of deep consequence,
as the entire membership agrees to the appointment of
an individual to lead the United Nations. The process
undertaken so as to arrive at today’s decision has been
a historic one.
It was shaped from the outset through committed
engagement on the part of the General Assembly. For
the first time in the history of the United Nations, the
selection and appointment process for the SecretaryGeneral has been guided by the principles of
transparency and inclusivity. The process began with the
first-ever joint call from the Presidents of the General
Assembly and Security Council formally soliciting
16-32309

13/10/2016

candidates for the job. From the outset, it acknowledged
the importance of geographic and gender balance and
explicitly invited the candidacies of women.
It was a process that specifically sought out
candidates who embody a firm commitment to
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, exemplify the highest standards of
efficiency, competence and integrity, and have shown
proven leadership and managerial abilities, extensive
experience in international relations and strong
diplomatic communication and multilingual skills.

A/71/PV.27

be the voice of our collective conscience and humanity
throughout his term.
I assure Mr. Guterres of my full support throughout
the seventy-first session of the General Assembly
and will do everything within my power to facilitate
a smooth transition process. I am pleased to say
that he has accepted my invitation to meet with the
General Assembly on 19 October in order to begin
a dialogue on critical, priority and emerging issues
for the Organization. Once again, congratulations to
Mr. Guterres.

And throughout it all, the process emphasized
the need to secure the best possible candidate for the
role. Thirteen candidates of the highest standards were
presented for consideration, seven of them women. From
the moment of the presentation of their nominations,
their candidatures were subject to full public view
with the joint circulation of letters, the establishment
of a dedicated website and the presentation of each
candidate’s vision for the Organization. All candidates
were given and took the opportunity to participate in
informal dialogues with the United Nations membership,
a process deeply enriched by the engagement of civil
society and the wider global public.

It is now my honour to give the floor to the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.

Throughout the process, a number of key messages
began to resonate from Member States — the desire
to continue to see an independent and courageous
Secretary-General who will make full use of the powers
provided for him in the Charter of the United Nations;
a person who is committed to ensuring that the United
Nations both embraces and exemplifies gender equality
at all levels; a person with the deftness and skills to
innovate and adapt the Organization’s structures,
capacities, culture and capabilities to respond to
today’s major challenges; and the acknowledgment of
the importance of geographic and gender balance in
senior posts.

Above all, to the Secretary-General-designate, I
offer my best wishes and congratulations.

I congratulate Mr. Guterres on having emerged
as the best candidate from such a historic, rigorous
and comprehensive process. Mr. Guterres embodies
the highest standards of competence, integrity and
leadership needed for the position, and he brings with
him vast experience from his time as the Prime Minister
of Portugal and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. His dedication to the ideals and common
values of the United Nations is beyond doubt. I am
confident that Mr. Guterres will serve the global
community with dedication as a moral authority and

Secretary-General-designate Guterres is well
known to all of us in the Hall, but he is perhaps the
best known where it counts most — on the front lines
of armed conflict and humanitarian suffering. For
the past decade, the work of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and other humanitarian
actors has provided a lifeline for millions upon millions
of people forced from their homes. They also received
something else — compassion. The same solidarity
was at the heart of the High Commissioner’s effective
advocacy around the globe.

The Secretary-General: Before turning to our
agenda item, I would like to offer my deep condolences
to the royal family, the Government and the people of
Thailand on the passing of His Majesty King Bhumibol
Adulyadej. His Majesty King Adulyadej was revered by
the people of Thailand as a unifying national leader. He
was also highly respected internationally. At this time
of sorrow and loss, I hope that Thailand will continue to
honour King Adulyadej’s legacy of commitment to the
universal values and respect for human rights.

I commend the Member States not only for their
choice of Secretary-General but also for the way in
which they went about making that choice. The firstever public hearings on the selection of a SecretaryGeneral opened the process to the world. Several highly
qualified women and men were given a unique platform
from which to share their vision and answer questions
from the diplomatic community and civil society. Those
new steps established a new benchmark for openness
and engagement.

16-323093/11

A/71/PV.27

Mr. Guterres also brings deeds and solid political
experience, including his two terms of service as
Prime Minister of Portugal. His political instincts are
those of the United Nations — cooperation for the
common good and shared responsibility for people
and the planet. He recognizes the crucial importance
of women’s empowerment from peace-negotiations
tables to the halls of this house. As an active participant
in the Senior Management Group and the Chief
Executives Board, he understands the inner workings
of our Organization. I have long valued his advice and
admired his spirit of service. He is a wonderful choice
to steer this Organization as we build on the progress
of the past decade, while addressing the insecurity and
uncertainties of today’s world.
The Secretary-General-designate has often shared
his feelings on the privilege of being a part of the
United Nations. Despite all the challenges, he said,
“This is still the best place in the world to work”. After
10 years, I could not agree more. Today’s ceremony is
also poignant for me, since it takes place 10 years after
the day of my own election in 2006. As I prepare to
hand over the baton of leadership, I know that Member
States, the outstanding women and men of the United
Nations and the people of the world are all looking
forward to his tenure with confidence and excitement.
I congratulate him and wish him great success.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
It is now my honour to give the floor to the
representative of the Niger, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of African States.
Mr. Wafy (Niger): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the Group of African States on this important
occasion of the appointment of the next SecretaryGeneral, under agenda item 113.
The African Group welcomes the commitment to
remaining faithful to the General Assembly’s call for
increased transparency and inclusivity in the selection
and appointment of the next Secretary-General, in
accordance with article 97 of the Charter of the United
Nations. It therefore fully endorses the approach taken
in adopting the President’s text by acclamation, which,
among other things, appoints Mr. António Guterres as
Secretary-General for a term of office beginning on
1 January 2017 and ending on 31 December 2021.
4/11

13/10/2016

The African Group extends its heartiest
congratulations to Mr. António Guterres on his
designation to take the helm of the United Nations,
bringing on board a wealth of experience in global
affairs, and it further assures him of the African
Group’s full support and commitment in the discharge
of his mandate. The African Group is particularly
encouraged by the transparency and inclusivity that
guided the selection process, which re-enforced the
legitimacy of the General Assembly and, indeed, the
nomination of Mr. Guterres. Our deepest gratitude goes
out to His Excellency Mr. Mogens Lykketoft, President
of the General Assembly at its seventieth session, for his
exemplary leadership throughout the selection process,
as well as to you, Mr. President, for leading the process
to its logical conclusion.
I cannot conclude without seizing this opportunity
to commend, on behalf of the African Group, SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his laudable achievements,
albeit under very difficult circumstances. Particularly
notable are his enduring legacies of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change.
In conclusion, the African Group looks forward to
the upcoming informal meeting of the General Assembly
plenary with the Secretary-General-designate, to be
held on 19 October, as a unique opportunity to further
engage on issues of priority and interest to the African
Group and more broadly, on how to make the United
Nations fit for purpose.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Asia-Pacific States.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): I have the honour and
privilege today to address the General Assembly
on behalf of the Group of Asia-Pacific States on the
occasion of the adoption of resolution 71/4, which
endorses the Security Council recommendation to
appoint Mr. António Guterres as the ninth SecretaryGeneral for five years beginning 1 January 2017.
I would like to begin by taking this opportunity
to thank our current Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, who over the past 10 years has served the
United Nations with dignity and humility. We are proud
that Mr. Ban is from our region. He has inspired global
development for the future by pushing for advancements
in the areas of women’s empowerment, gender equality,
human rights and climate change. His tireless efforts
16-32309

13/10/2016

resulted, inter alia, in the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, which will enter into force on 4 November.
Also highly commendable was his drive to ensure that
the work of the Millennium Development Goals would
not be lost. He promoted the post-2015 development
agenda, which includes the assurance that no one will
be left behind, by encouraging Member States to adopt
the Sustainable Development Goals to help protect the
planet for future generations.
We would like to thank him for his many years of
service to the Organization, and we wish him well in all
of his future endeavours. We reconfirm our commitment
and support for him as he continues to serve out his
remaining 78 days in office.In this occasion, we would
also like to take the opportunity to thank Mrs. Ban
Soon-taek, who has steadfastly stood by her husband
during his 10 years as Secretary-General and played
an active role by travelling around the world with him
to advocate the ideals of the United Nations. She has
helped to organize and has actively participated in
numerous events to fund humanitarian activities, such
as the United Nations International Bazaar. She also
worked to advance the rights of children, women and
senior citizens by bringing attention to issues such as
autism and violence against women, and for that, we
truly thank her.
I am pleased and honoured, on behalf of the AsiaPacific Group, to extend our sincere congratulations
to Mr. António Guterres on his election as SecretaryGeneral. Mr. Guterres’ election signals an era of change
at the United Nations in the procedure for the selection
of the Secretary-General, which this year involved
public hearings, informal dialogue, a global town hall
meeting and meetings with all United Nations regional
groups. Never has the selection process been more open
and transparent.
Throughout the six straw polls taken by the Security
Council, Mr. Guterres was a clear favourite for the
position. Moreover, Mr. Guterres’ extensive knowledge
and expertise, clearly reflected in the interactive
dialogue held with him in the General Assembly,
enabled him to gain unanimous support from its
Members. Mr. Guterres has presented a clear vision for
the role of the United Nations that provides all Member
States with renewed hope for the future. He brings to
the position a wealth of knowledge, professional skill,
vision, experience and wisdom as a veteran politician
and leader, showing leadership abilities that will serve
him well in the role of Secretary-General.

A/71/PV.27

The Asia-Pacific Group welcomes SecretaryGeneral designate António Guterres and wishes him
success in fulfilling that central role at an exceedingly
critical time in the history of the United Nations.
Mr. Guterres’ undeniable commitment is the stronghold
of the platform and the priorities that he envisions.
The States members of the Asia-Pacific Group pledge
their firm support to him in encountering the new
and emerging challenges that lie ahead. That unified
support embodies the confidence of knowing that the
Secretary-General-designate is well suited to head
our Organization.
We all aspire to put an end to the prolonged
conflicts transpiring in certain parts of our world, which
constitute threats to international peace and security.
We stand with the Secretary-General-designate in his
coming efforts to mediate those grave disputes. We
believe that his leadership, together with our collective
efforts encompassing the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations as an integral tool, will
assist in attaining a peaceful solution and reconciliation.
We remain confident that, in the light of the need
to promote development and growth, the SecretaryGeneral-designate will persevere in achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals, with high hopes for
their ultimate realization. His statesmanship and years
of diplomacy will foster further strengthening of the
structure of the United Nations. While reinforcing
multilateralism, Mr. Guterres will, we trust, engage
in the ongoing reform of the United Nations, as
revitalization will ensure the Organization’s resilience
in tackling the various challenges faced.
Terrorism, violent extremism, xenophobia,
racism, religious intolerance and their ramifications
have led to daunting concerns worldwide. They are
among the foremost issues on which the SecretaryGeneral-designate needs to raise awareness and counter
the resulting threats through international cooperation.
As Mr. Guterres assumes the position of SecretaryGeneral, I wish to quote Sir Isaac Newton, one of the
most historically influential people, with the hope
that it will serve him well in his effort to pacify social
tensions, “We build too many walls and not enough
bridges”. We, the States members of the Asia-Pacific
Group, trust that he will confront relevant issues with
resolute determination. It is our hope that, under his
leadership, we, as nations united, will build the bridges

16-323095/11

A/71/PV.27

needed to pave the way to a peaceful, prosperous and
just world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): I am honoured to make
this statement on behalf of the Group of Eastern
European States. It is my great pleasure to congratulate
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres on his successful
completion of the journey to become the next SecretaryGeneral. His outstanding experience in top positions at
both the national and the international levels and his
vision of effective multilateralism reassure us of his
masterly stewardship of the Organization in the years
to come. We rely on his courage and wisdom to make
an important and lasting contribution to our common
“quest for a peaceful, inclusive and sustainably
developed world, in which international law and
the dignity and worth of the human person are
fully pursued”,
as he stated in his vision statement of 12 April before
the General Assembly.
The selection of Mr. Guterres as Secretary-General
is even more important owing to the transparent and
inclusive process in which he and the other candidates
took part for the first time in the history of the United
Nations. We acknowledge the highly professional
performance on the part of each candidate, including
those from the Eastern European Group.
We further look forward to building upon the
success achieved through the ground-breaking work
on the revitalization of the General Assembly, as
reflected in resolutions 69/321 and 70/305, in terms
of strengthening the Assembly’s accountability,
transparency and institutional memory. We remain
committed to exploring ways of further improving
the process, including by further promoting gender
equality and regional balance in selecting candidates
for positions as high-ranking United Nations officials.
The leadership of the Secretary-General will be
pivotal as we strive to implement the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and address the question
of climate change. His role as the top United Nations
diplomat will be crucial in tackling the looming
humanitarian crises in the world and in negotiating
solutions for countries emerging from conflict, as well
as protracted conflicts and sustaining peace.
6/11

13/10/2016

As the leader serving 7 billion persons around the
globe, his determination to foster respect for human
rights will be decisive. We fully support the holistic
approach of connecting the dots so as to overcome
the challenges among the three pillars of the United
Nations, namely, peace and security, sustainable
development and human rights, by developing policies
to further enhance the role and relevance of the United
Nations.
We thank the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his tireless work and dedication.
The Secretary-General designate, Mr. António
Guterres, will be able to count on unsparing support
and cooperation on the part of our regional Group.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile, who will speak on behalf of the
Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States, I have the honour to welcome and extend our
warmest congratulations to the newly appointed
Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres. His stature
and diplomatic competence, together with his broad
experience in many areas, make him an eminently
suitable person for this demanding key position,
at a time when the international community has
taken the historical commitment to free the human
race from poverty, as set out in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
His 10-year experience as United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees has become more relevant
than ever, as we face large movements of refugees and
migrants, one of our most pressing challenges. We are
confident that Mr. Guterres will undertake his role
in a manner based on independence and committed
leadership, thus instilling the highest standards of
integrity within the United Nations system, while
promoting unity and understanding in seeking the best
global solutions. We are also confident that Mr. Guterres
will introduce a renewed impetus for promoting the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The Latin American and Caribbean Group looks
forward to continuing its close and cooperative
relationship with the United Nations in various fields,
including development, the Sustainable Developments
Goals, climate change, peace and security,
decolonization, human rights and democracy.
16-32309

13/10/2016

Our Group extends its appreciation to all of the
candidates that participated in the selection process,
including in the interactive dialogues with the General
Assembly, contributing to the process’ transparency
and openness. The Group also highlights the role played
by the General Assembly in that process, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and resolutions
69/321 and 70/305, and further stresses the need to
ensure the implementation of the provisions, inter alia,
on the fair and equal distribution of senior posts, based
on gender and geographical balance.
Finally, I wish to convey our Group’s deepest
appreciation to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
continuous efforts and contribution to the success of
the United Nations, under his decade-long leadership.
We look forward to his ongoing leadership until the
conclusion of his term.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, who will speak on behalf of the
Group of Western European and other States.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): On behalf of the
Group of Western European and other States, it is an
honour and a privilege to address the Assembly as we
welcome the appointment of Mr. António Guterres as
the next Secretary-General. Today, Mr. Guterres, the
former Prime Minister of Portugal and former United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, has been
selected to serve as the Head of the Organization.
We offer him our warmest congratulations and look
forward to working with him from January.
From his first day in office, we pledge to provide
our fullest support to Mr. Guterres, and we commit to
assisting him in upholding the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. We look to him to
manage the Secretariat efficiently and effectively and
to advance much-needed reforms so as to enhance the
ability of the United Nations to face the challenges of
the century, and we express our utmost confidence in his
experience, ability and skills to lead this Organization
over the coming years.
In doing so, we also express our deep gratitude to
the outgoing Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, as
he concludes his second term at the end of the year. We
applaud his leadership on the Sustainable Development
Goals, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, on
human rights and on so many other issues over the past

A/71/PV.27

10 years, and we look to him to continue his vital work
until the end of his tenure.
We also pay tribute to the Assembly for the role
it has played in improving the selection process. The
enhancements set out in resolutions 69/321 and 70/305,
in particular, have brought unprecedented transparency,
effectiveness and inclusivity to the selection of the
Secretary-General. Moreover, we welcome the fact
that it was possible to conclude the process quickly,
effectively and consensually in the Security Council,
enabling a smooth transition for Mr. Guterres as well
as sufficient time for him to prepare for his new role.
Together, the Assembly has set a new standard for
the process and should continue to encourage more
transparency and equitability in the future.
In closing, we offer our congratulations again to
Mr. Guterres and look forward to his leadership. His
tenure comes at a time when the challenges to this
Organisation and the multilateral system as a whole
are becoming even more complex. Peace and security
crises are having significant humanitarian, human
rights and development impacts around the world. A
strong United Nations is needed more than ever, and
today we have chosen a strong Secretary-General to
lead it.
It now falls to us, the Member States, to support
Mr. Guterres and to cooperate closely with him on
decisions that can maintain, strengthen and solidify the
role of the United Nations in addressing the greatest
global challenges.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the host country.
Ms. Power (United States of America): As the
proud host country of the United Nations, the United
States joins all the other delegations in this Hall in
welcoming the appointment of António Guterres as the
next Secretary-General.
Let me start by saying a word about SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, who over the past 10 years has
shown that progress can be made by setting ambitious
goals and mobilizing Member States to meet them.
Secretary-General Ban was instrumental in driving the
momentum and the concrete commitments necessary to
achieve both the historic Paris Agreement on Climate
Change and the Sustainable Development Goals. They
are achievements that — if implemented by Member
States — will improve people’s lives for decades to

16-323097/11

A/71/PV.27

come. The United States is profoundly grateful to
Secretary-General Ban for his leadership and his
service to our peoples and to our planet.
The selection of António Guterres as the ninth
Secretary-General is an extraordinary outcome that
matches the world’s growing demands for a strong
United Nations. It is all the more extraordinary
because — let us be honest — all too often at the United
Nations, narrow agendas keep us divided and prevent
us from taking constructive action. I would like to
highlight three ways in which this appointment and the
process that gave rise to it exceeded expectations. This
should inspire us all going forward.
First, given the well-known divisions in the
Security Council, many feared that the Council would
fail to reach consensus on the next Secretary-General.
I confess that I harboured some of those doubts myself,
wondering if I should avoid making Christmas plans
with my family in case the process dragged on and I
would end up spending Christmas Day on our forty-ninth
Security Council straw poll. Others thought — given
the polarization of the Council — that we would agree
on a recommendation to the General Assembly, but
that we would necessarily have to settle for a lowestcommon-denominator candidate, someone who would
avoid taking stands on the world’s most pressing issues.
We have the privilege today of appointing a
supremely qualified candidate as Secretary-General,
but also one who has a passion for using that office as
an independent force to prevent conflict and to alleviate
human suffering. The countries of the world — here
reflecting, I believe, the longings and the urgent needs
of our citizens — are calling on the United Nations, and
by extension, the Secretary-General, to do more than
this institution has ever done before.
For the United Nations to succeed, we are asking
Mr. Guterres to serve as a peacemaker, looking for
ways to end the brutal conflicts in places like Syria,
Yemen, and South Sudan. We are asking him to serve as
a reformer, streamlining the bureaucracy, eliminating
redundancies and making sure that peacekeepers
are willing and able to protect civilians at risk. And
we are asking him to serve as an advocate, rallying
the world to respond to humanitarian and man-made
catastrophes, and defending the human rights of all
people, regardless of their race, creed, nationality,
sexual orientation or gender identity. As challenging as
8/11

13/10/2016

those roles may be, we are confident that Mr. Guterres
can fill them with distinction.
Secondly, there were fears that the decision-making
process for such a critical position would again end up
being narrow, exclusive and shrouded in secrecy. Even
though fewer people smoke cigarettes in 2016, the
image of a few countries huddled in smoke-filled rooms
pervaded. But this year, at long last, the process evolved.
For the first time, those vying for the job had to defend
their visions for a more secure, just and humane future in
informal dialogues that the entire world could watch in
real time. And those conversations mattered — there is
no question that the dialogues in the General Assembly
and elsewhere shaped perceptions and informed
the thinking of the Council and the broader United
Nations membership from the outset. I thank all of the
exceptional candidates who participated in that more
inclusive, more transparent process, and the United
States thanks all Member States that contributed to
making that process so much stronger.
Of course, some envisaged that change would look
a little different in the end. Hopes were high that this
election process would deliver the first-ever woman
Secretary-General. As the only woman Permanent
Representative serving in the current Security Council
and as one of only 37 women Permanent Representatives
out of the 193 Permanent Representatives in the
Organization, I joined others in encouraging a level
playing field for women. And we should consider that
until this year, only three women were ever voted upon
by the Security Council as candidates — three women
over the course of 70 years. This time, seven out of the
13 candidates voted upon by the Security Council were
women. So, over twice as many women were considered
in 2016 as in all of the previous years together.
While being a woman is not among Mr. Guterres’s
many qualifications, he has pledged gender parity at all
levels of the United Nations, with clear benchmarks and
time frames. That builds upon Mr. Guterres’s progress
towards achieving gender parity in the workplace as the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
back when he was the Portuguese Prime Minister.
Thirdly and finally, there was scepticism that we
could find in a single candidate a person who could
simultaneously get Heads of State on the phone to
mobilize coalitions and be a person of the people,
someone who really appreciated — indeed, felt — the
pain of the vulnerable. And vulnerable people do not
16-32309

13/10/2016

A/71/PV.27

just want the United Nations to do and be better; they
need the Organization and for us to be and do better.

that I stand before the Assembly today; those feelings
are now joined by a profound sense of responsibility.

In Mr. Guterres, we have selected a candidate who
brings both head and heart to the job. Former staff of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) have described Mr. Guterres as
so impatient to find out the facts of a crisis that he never
hesitated to call staff in the field, no matter what their
rank or their place in the hierarchy. He always asked
how UNHCR headquarters could serve their needs,
rather than the other way around. When he saw that
UNHCR teams in the field were starved for resources,
he shifted funds to help refugees in need, instead of
adding jobs in Geneva. And he got out from behind
his desk. Mr. Guterres travelled to the refugee camps
and witnessed for himself the current crises and the
pain and suffering of the displaced, even spending the
night in tents in the refugee camps. We have selected
a candidate who is prepared to cut past the jargon and
the acronyms and the sterile briefings, and get real. He
knows that the only measure of our work here is whether
we are or are not helping and supporting real people.

I am grateful, first of all, to the General Assembly
and the Security Council for entrusting me with the
position of Secretary-General of the United Nations in a
remarkable demonstration of consensus and unity. I am
also grateful for the transparency and openness of the
selection process and to the many competent, thoughtful
and dedicated candidates who came forward. I believe
that the new selection process has meant that the true
winner today is the credibility of the United Nations.
The process has also made it very clear to me that,
having been chosen by all Member States, I must be at
the service of them all equally and with no agenda but
the one enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.

In closing, in 1953, the first Secretary-General,
Trygve Lie, who was heavily criticized by both the
Soviet and the United States Governments, was so
frustrated by the limits of his office that his parting
advice to his successor was, “Welcome to the most
impossible job on this Earth”. The job has not grown
easier with time, but it has arguably become even more
important.
I wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and Mrs. Ban again for their tireless, tremendous
service and for their sacrifice. I thank the SecretaryGeneral designate, Mr. Guterres, for taking on this
monumental responsibility. We hope that the unity
that we see today can be sustained, the inclusivity and
transparency of the process extended and the passion of
the Secretary-General-designate and that of SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon embodied in the daily work of
the Organization. We look forward to a partnership that
pays dividends to the people out there who count on us.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. António Guterres, Secretary-General-designate, to
make a statement.
Mr. Guterres: When I heard the Security Council’s
decision to recommend me to the General Assembly, my
feelings could be described by just two words: gratitude
and humility. It is with the same gratitude and humility

I want to express my deep gratitude for the generous
and kind words of the speakers who preceded me, but I
must say that I am fully aware of the challenges that the
United Nations faces and the limitations surrounding
the Secretary-General. The dramatic problems of
today’s complex world can only inspire a humble
approach — one in which the Secretary-General alone
neither has all the answers, nor seeks to impose his
own views and in which the Secretary-General makes
his good offices available, working as a convener, a
mediator, a bridge-builder and an honest broker to help
find solutions that benefit everyone involved.
Over the past 10 years, I have witnessed at first
hand the suffering of the most vulnerable people on
Earth. I have visited war zones and refugee camps
where one might legitimately ask: what has happened
to the dignity and worth of the human person, referred
to in the second preambular paragraph of the Charter?
What has made us immune to the plight of those who
are most socially and economically underprivileged?
All of that makes me feel the acute responsibility to
make human dignity the core of my work and, I trust,
the core of our common work.
It also underscores the importance of gender
equality. I have long been aware of the hurdles that
women face in society, the family and the workplace
just because of their gender. I have witnessed the
violence to which they are subjected during conflict or
while fleeing violence, just because they are women.
I have tried to address that problem through every
public office that I have ever held. The protection and
empowerment of women and gender parity within the

16-323099/11

A/71/PV.27

Organization are and will continue to be a priority
commitment for me.
I have faith in the United Nations — a reformminded United Nations — because I believe in the
universal values that it stands for, namely, peace,
justice, human dignity, tolerance and solidarity. Based
on those values, I believe that diversity in all its forms
is a tremendous asset, not a threat, and that in societies
that are more and more multi-ethnic, multicultural
and multireligious, diversity can bring us together and
should not drive us apart. We must make sure that we
are able to break the alliance between all those terrorist
groups or violent extremists, on one side, and the
expressions of populism and xenophobia, on the other.
They reinforce one another, and we must be able to
fight both of them with determination.
(spoke in French)
Without peace, life is devoid of all its meaning.
Without peace, we cannot ensure the sustainable
development and respect for human rights that, in turn,
underpin peace. Unfortunately, peace today is largely
lacking in our world.
Because of its global reach and the principles
enshrined in the Charter, the United Nations has the
moral obligation and universal right to use diplomacy
to achieve peace as its primary responsibility. That
diplomacy must be able to promote diversity and the
representative character of the United Nations; it
must facilitate a forum for dialogue in a public space
open to all, so that we can learn to work together and
better know and listen to one another; and it must be
able to ease tensions and arrive at peaceful solutions
to conflicts that prevent so many human beings from
leading their lives in a manner worthy of that word.
When I studied history in high school — and I must
say that I studied with passion — almost all wars ended
with victors. But today’s conflicts know only losers.
Wars seem endless; they are becoming increasingly
complex and interconnected, and fuel hatred and
terrorism. At the same time, the suffering that they
cause is morally intolerable, and security is threatened
everywhere. It is our collective responsibility to end
that state of affairs.
I am well aware that among us there are various
views and sometimes competing legitimate interests
that create division and make our unified efforts
towards peace difficult. But the threats to our collective
10/11

13/10/2016

security, the nature of our societies and the survival
of the planet as we know it are such that our common
interest must prevail against all that divides us. Let
us unite for the sake of peace. That is the most urgent
demand of the citizens of the world that we are here
to serve.
(spoke in Spanish)
I would like to convey my appreciation for the
tireless efforts of the peacekeepers who, deployed far
from their homes, defend the principles of the United
Nations. I also would like to call on all Member States
and structures of the Organization for their support
in not allowing repugnant behaviour to damage the
reputation of the heroic efforts carried out in the service
of the United Nations. It is within the United Nations and
under its blue flag that the world can meet together and
build peace, with determination, creativity, solidarity
and compassion.
(spoke in English)
Allow me, before finishing, to salute the SecretaryGeneral, Ban Ki-moon. I had the honour of working
with him throughout many years and have witnessed
his unfailing dedication to the cause of international
public service. I will do my utmost to honour Mr. Ban
Ki-moon’s legacy. What he has achieved, in particular
in relation to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, is absolutely remarkable, and I will do my best
to support the efforts necessary to fully implement what
has been accomplished thus far, thanks to his guidance
and leadership.
I also want to express my admiration for the
dedication and commitment of the United Nations
staff. Having been a staff member for over a decade, I
am thrilled with the prospect of becoming a colleague
once again.
(spoke in French)
The dream of the founders of the United Nations
has yet to be fulfilled. Much has been accomplished,
but the road ahead remains long. We must embark on
that road together, we, the people, in our various roles,
because the goal is within reach — the well-being
of humankind.
The President: I thank the SecretaryGeneral-designate for his statement, and I request the
Chief of Protocol to escort him to room GA-200.
16-32309

13/10/2016

A/71/PV.27

The Secretary-General-designate was escorted
from the General Assembly Hall.

General-designate will be in the West Foyer in 10
minutes to receive felicitations.

The President: Before proceeding further, I would
like to inform members that the oath of office ceremony
will take place at a later date, to be announced. I
would also like to inform members that the Secretary-

We have thus concluded our consideration of
agenda item 113.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

16-3230911/11
