S/PV.7629

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7629th meeting

Tuesday, 23 February 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ramírez Carreño. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of))

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Gasso Matoses
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Post-conflict peacebuilding: review of the peacebuilding architecture
Letter dated 1 February 2016 from the Permanent Representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2016/104)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-04784 (E)
*1604784*

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Post-conflict peacebuilding: review of the
peacebuilding architecture
Letter dated 1 February 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2016/104)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, Botswana,
Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Ecuador,
Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Guatemala,
Hungary, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Kazakhstan, Mexico,
Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, South Africa, Switzerland, Thailand and
Turkey to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following to
participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Macharia
Kamau, Permanent Representative of Kenya and Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission; His Excellency
Mr. Olof Skoog, Permanent Representative of Sweden
and former Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission;
and His Excellency Mr. Gert Rosenthal, Chair of the
Advisory Group of Experts on the review of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Architecture.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
to participate in this meeting: Mrs. Louise Sharene
Bailey, Adviser at the Permanent Observer Mission
of the African Union to the United Nations; His
Excellency Mr. Gonzalo Koncke, Permanent Observer
of the Organization of American States to the United
Nations; and Mr. Carl Hallergard, Chargé d’affaires ad
interim of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
2/71

23/02/2016

the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
previous practice in that regard.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/104, which contains the text of
a letter dated 1 February 2016 from the Permanent
Representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept note on the item
under consideration.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kamau.
Mr. Kamau: First, allow me to congratulate you,
Sir, for your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for February 2016, as well as to commend you
on the manner in which you have conducted the affairs of
the Council. I thank you for organizing this timely open
debate of the Security Council on peacebuilding and for
circulating an informative concept note (S/2016/104,
annex) to guide us. I also thank you for the initiative
of inviting me to address the Security Council in my
capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission.
We at the Peacebuilding Commission welcome
very much not only the opportunity to be here but also
the concept note that you, Sir, circulated for our debate
today. The note clearly spells out some of the crucial
challenges that peacebuilding is facing and why we
must redouble our efforts at better peacebuilding within
the collective United Nations family. We agree with
your note that the Security Council and the General
Assembly have acknowledged, for some time now, that
the Peacebuilding Commission can contribute to the
prevention of the outbreak, escalation, continuation
and recurrence of conflict, as acknowledged by the
landmark resolution 2171 (2014) on conflict prevention,
adopted in 2014. The Peacebuilding Commission and
its configurations continue to work in that vein, and we
remain thankful for the support and acknowledgement
we receive from the Council in that regard.
This debate comes at a crucial moment. As you,
Mr. President, point out in your concept note, the reviews
of the peacebuilding architecture under consideration
in the Security Council and in the General Assembly
call upon Member States to see peacebuilding in
a broader perspective and to face it with greater
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

determination. The review of the peacebuilding
architecture is currently in its final stages, and the
United Nations is being called to re-examine its
entire approach to peacebuilding in the context of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1), which we all adopted in
2015, while remaining true to the principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations. I shall highlight
some of salient elements of the report (see S/2015/490)
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the 2015 review
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture that I
believe deserve the particular attention of the Council
and of the wider membership.
First, the report of the Advisory Group of Experts,
entitled “Challenge of sustaining peace”, reiterates
the need for a comprehensive approach to conflict
prevention and sustainable peace. In my understanding,
the report does not introduce a new concept but merely
restates what we all know needs to be done to achieve
lasting peace — the main purpose for which the United
Nations was created. Its key message is a lesson we have
all learned over the years, namely, that investments in
the prevention of the outbreak, escalation, continuation
and recurrence of conflict are considerably less
expensive and more sustainable than merely reacting
to crises.
Secondly, the current review comes at a time
when there have been increasing calls pressing for
the need to address the fragmentation in the United
Nations system’s efforts and a growing unanimity on
the importance of building coherence in our collective
efforts across the peace and security, development
and human rights engagement of the United Nations
at the intergovernmental and operational levels. The
Peacebuilding Commission, in its advisory role to the
Security Council, stands ready to serve as a bridge
between the Security Council and other principal
intergovernmental organizations, with a view to
strengthening the collaboration and enhancing the
impact of their collective peacebuilding work in
the world.
Thirdly, building lasting peace requires predictable,
sustained and adequate financing to address the root
causes of conflict. According to the report of the
Advisory Group, while countries emerging from
conflict require significant financing over extended
periods, funding is often channelled into short-term
emergency responses that would produce immediate
tangible results. That dilemma often invites the obvious

S/PV.7629

question of whether there could be a reduced need for
emergency conflict responses if peacebuilding and
prevention efforts were prioritized. The United Nations
experience shows the critical role that peacebuilding
efforts and the Peacebuilding Commission can
play in the mobilization of long-term and sustained
international support to critical national capacity needs.
The role of the Peacebuilding Fund in providing
financing to countries at their request has evidently
been important, but remains, by far, limited in its
impact. Clearly, the Fund needs to be enhanced.
Currently, multi-donor pooled funds for peacebuilding
seem to be the single most attractive option for
peacebuilding. However, we would like to call upon all
Member States, including non-traditional donors and
other partners, to consider making or increasing their
multi-year commitments to pooled funds in support of
sustainable peace.
Furthermore, all financing-related proposals in the
report of the Advisory Group, including those aimed
at appropriately resourcing peacebuilding programmes
during transitions, need to be comprehensively
considered by Member States during the current
review. We need to address the predictability and
sustainability of financing. We must consider all the
viable options available to maximize the potential and
the predictability of the Peacebuilding Fund.
The importance of enhanced partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations, as well as
with international financial institutions, in building
peace cannot be overemphasized. The African Union
and European Union (EU) in particular are among
the strategic partners, as Africa remains important
to the United Nations peacebuilding efforts. We shall
work closely with the African Union, the EU and other
regional organizations to ensure that peacebuilding
initiatives are not only regionally owned and reflect
the interests and needs of local populations, but are
also regionally anchored and internationally supported
based on each other’s comparative advantages. The
importance of strengthening World Bank-United
Nations collaboration as a way to promote sustainable
peace and channel resources to peacebuilding is
something we intend to deepen alongside collaboration
with regional financial institutions such as the African
Development Bank.
But while Africa continues to be the priority
destination for peacebuilding activities, we would not

16-047843/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

wish to create the impression here that only Africa is
crying out for peacebuilding interventions. Anyone
who reads the daily newspapers knows that Africa has
no monopoly on violence and the absence of peace, on
the contrary. As time moves on, we will need to ask
ourselves what more the Peacebuilding Commission
can and could do in other parts of the world to deepen
the roots of peace and help stop violence.
As we work together to operationalize the outcome
of the review of the peacebuilding architecture, we shall
need to develop the links between our collective efforts
to build sustainable peace and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. In doing so, the Peacebuilding
Commission, working with the Peacebuilding Support
Office and the United Nations Development Group, will
continue to look for ways to entrench its peacebuilding
efforts in the relevant aspects of the work of the United
Nations and the upcoming quadrennial comprehensive
policy review, which presents a very good opportunity
to deepen that relationship.
In conclusion, I am fully aware of the high
expectations for a more effective Peacebuilding
Commission. The Peacebuilding Commission will work
to leverage the collective weight of its membership,
particularly with the members of the Security Council,
and to bring together partners, regional organizations,
United Nations system actors, academia, civil society and
non-governmental organizations, including women’s
organizations, to contribute to greater coherence and
commitment to building sustainable peace. Together we
will be able to, first, mobilize attention to drivers and
root causes of conflicts that contribute to preventing
the outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence
of conflicts; secondly, bring greater focus and priority
to the regional dimension of building sustainable peace
and provide a platform to promote the perspectives
of regional actors; and, thirdly, but not least, provide
political support to the practical integration of security,
political, human rights and developmental responses
over medium- to long-term engagements.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Kamau for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this timely debate on the review of the
peacebuilding architecture. I also want to thank you for
the invitation to brief the Security Council this morning.
4/71

23/02/2016

I have been a firm supporter of the report (see
S/2015/490) of the Advisory Group of Experts from
the start, and I wish to pay tribute to Ambassador Gert
Rosenthal and his colleagues for their excellent work on
that Review. I am confident that the review can bring
real change to the Organization.
In your concept note (S/2016/104, annex),
Mr. President, you remind us of the fact that the notion
of peacebuilding was introduced by former SecretaryGeneral Boutros Boutros-Ghali in his report “An
Agenda for Peace” (S/24111). I would like take this
opportunity to express our recognition of his services
to world peace and international order.
Equally important, the concept note reminds us of
the conceptual shift in our thinking on peacebuilding,
acknowledged by both the Council and the General
Assembly. Peacebuilding can no longer be confined to
post-conflict recovery. Sustaining peace encompasses
activities aimed at preventing the outburst, resurgence
and continuation of conflict. Validating and solidifying
this shift in mindset and endorsing a corresponding
change in the way the United Nations system is set
up to respond to conflict is the single most important
outcome of the peacebuilding review. That is why this
debate is so timely, as we Member States are in the midst
of defining how to turn the normative developments
and the political momentum into concrete reforms for a
better operational response.
Today, I would like to focus my remarks on the
following areas. First, I will share some conclusions
from my chairmanship of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). I will then touch upon what I
believe are key areas in the review, namely, conflict
prevention, financing for sustaining peace and the role
of regional organizations.
I have had the great fortune and honour to chair
the Peacebuilding Commission during a dynamic
year. The review of the peacebuilding architecture
provided a stimulating backdrop to our work. It gave
the Commission an opportunity to test in practice
how we can improve delivery and become more
useful — because, as the review rightly pointed out,
the Peacebuilding Commission has yet to fully deliver
on the expectations as conceived at its establishment.
The Commission is quite a unique structure at the
United Nations, as well as a flexible body. I believe
there are inherent opportunities for the Commission
to keep evolving and to adopt new approaches, and
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

thereby to come closer to fulfilling its original vision
of bridging the gap between crisis response and longterm development and sustainable peace.
At the outset of our chairmanship, we set out a
number of objectives for the work of the Commission,
including adopting more transparent and strategic
working methods, a more flexible agenda, increasing
inclusivity and improving partnerships with regional
and subregional organizations. We convened several
regional and country-specific discussions concerning
situations outside of the PBC regular agenda.
I have also come to appreciate that the mandate
of the Commission has never been more relevant or
important. Only by addressing the root causes of
conflict, investing in socioeconomic development and
building national capacities will there be lasting peace.
The Peacebuilding Commission has a fundamentally
important role in championing those long-term
and comprehensive approaches. I believe we have
a collective duty to make the PBC as effective as it
can be, especially as the demand for more effective
international response to conflicts remains high.
That brings me to my first message, concerning
the prevention of conflict. There are no excuses for
not heeding the call coming out consistently across the
three reviews on United Nations peace operations. We
must move the prevention of conflict to the centre of
our work. To do so, we must better equip all parts of
the United Nations system to contribute to sustaining
peace, including the United Nations development
system. That entails recognizing that peacebuilding
is an inherently political process that requires sound
political analysis and corresponding conflict-sensitive
programming. Above all, it requires adequate political
and financial support within the Organization, which
brings me to my second message.
If we are serious about sustaining peace, we
need to make sure there are resources to back up our
priorities, as the Chair just said. It is a tragic irony
that, while resources available for peacekeeping and
humanitarian response amount to billions of dollars,
conflict-prevention initiatives, which could save
so many lives and significantly lessen the need for
peacekeeping in the first place, has to scramble for a
fraction of those amounts. I understand that there are
sensitivities around some of the recommendations
pertaining to increased financing, related to assessed
contributions. In my view, we need to look at every

S/PV.7629

option. But no matter what we agree on in a particular
resolution, we should simultaneously look beyond
United Nations mechanisms and find innovative
ways of adequately resourcing peacebuilding efforts.
Part of that involves strengthening national capacity
for domestic revenue-regeneration. We can help
decrease dependence on external resources, which in
turn strengthens national leadership and ownership
of development.
The United Nations does not operate in a vacuum and
is not always the best-placed actor to address threats to
peace. My third message today is therefore that we need
to create stronger partnerships with regional actors and
to strengthen their capacity, since they are often first
responders to conflict. By partnering with regional and
subregional organizations, the United Nations response
will be better informed by local perspectives and better
able to bring such understandings and approaches to
peacebuilding to the fore.
Before concluding, let me add a final thought on
a very positive development recently, namely, the
recognition of the role of young people in peacebuilding.
This agenda is not an add-on, an optional tick-in-the-box
exercise. It is about tapping into and drawing upon the
tremendous potential of young people as a positive
source for peace, in particular in conflict-affected
countries, where youth often make up the majority of
the population and where risk factors around youth
unemployment tend to overshadow the notion of youth
as making potential contributions. By taking forward
resolution 2250 (2015), stewarded by Jordan, and by
adopting more inclusive approaches, we will make sure
that their voices are heard.
I am very grateful to have been invited to address
the Council on several occasions during the past year.
I can only encourage the Security Council to reach out
to the Peacebuilding Commission more actively and to
look to the Peacebuilding Commission as a body that
can complement and add value to the Council’s work
through a comprehensive approach to sustaining peace.
Lastly, while I might have stepped down from the
chairmanship of the PBC, my commitment and, more
important, the commitment of the Swedish Government
to sustaining peace, to multilateralism and to the
United Nations remains as strong as ever. The Council
can count on us, as we together take the necessary steps
to implement these reforms aimed at building a more
effective United Nations.

16-047845/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Skoog for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Rosenthal.
Mr. Rosenthal (spoke in Spanish): I thank you,
Mr. President, for having invited me to participate
in this open debate of the Security Council and for
the concept note (S/2016/104, annex) that you have
presented to us. Speaking first in a personal capacity,
I am pleased to be back in the Chamber, where my last
appearance was as a representative of a Member State,
a little over two years ago.
I shall now speak on behalf of the seven members
of the Advisory Group of Experts.
(spoke in English)
In a five-minute statement, I can touch only on
some of the most salient features of what is now known
as the report (see S/2015/4990) of the Advisory Group
of Experts. As will be recalled, the report was initiated
by Member States through a joint resolution of the
Security Council and the General Assembly. That is
as it should be, because what we conventionally think
of as peacebuilding has roots in the mandates of not
only the Council but also of the two other principal
inter-governmental organs. We will also recall that the
review of the peacebuilding activities of the United
Nations contemplated two phases. Our report provides
the collective and unvarnished opinion of seven
independent specialists on how the United Nations
is performing its peacebuilding activities. Our rather
critical conclusions and recommendations are aimed
at improving that performance. What are our main
conclusions?
First, we need to rethink what we mean by
peacebuilding. Both of the previous briefers touched
upon that. In fact, in the agenda items of the Council the
term is always preceded by the adjective post-conflict.
In spite of the fact that the Council recognized as early
as 2001 that peacebuilding can and should occur during
the full cycle of conflict — before, during and post — we
keep addressing the matter as something that should
occur after the guns fall silent, which unfortunately has
meant its relegation to the end of the line in prioritysetting. We propose the term “sustainable peace” as
preferable and as the needed evolution in mindset,
but any other expression will do. The main point is
that the United Nations as a whole must put a much
greater accent on preventive measures. In fact, much
6/71

23/02/2016

of the present peacebuilding efforts aim to address root
causes in the broader context of pre-empting a lapse or
relapse into violent conflict. The determination in 2005
was to ensure that such efforts became central. But we
found that, regrettably, that has not been the case.
Secondly, what makes that broader view somewhat
dysfunctional in relation to the present arrangements
regarding the purview of each of the principal
inter-governmental organs is that we seem to live in a
culture of virtual silos. As we all know, the Security
Council deals with international peace and security,
and the General Assembly and Economic and Social
Council address, among other aspects, issues that fall
in the domain of the human rights and development
pillars. But distinct areas of preventing conflict
or dealing with post-conflict situations fall within
the purview of different organs. In our report, we
stress the need for all three organs to discharge their
responsibilities in a coordinated and coherent manner,
each keeping within the confines of its mandates.
We believe that the Peacebuilding Commission, in its
capacity as an advisory body to all organs, can play
a key role in proposing how that coordination can be
brought about in operational and practical terms. Those
include regularly convening a broader array of actors
for inclusive conversations about the challenges of
sustaining peace over the longer-term and distilling
that advice for the use of all organs.
Thirdly, our discussions on peacebuilding centre
too much on the institutional and organizational
aspects in New York, when building sustainable peace
can happen only on the ground — where we found that,
in spite of some progress achieved towards delivering
as one, the United Nations still faces very serious
challenges in enhancing its effectiveness and relevance.
Fourthly — and this is something obvious, but
not always sufficiently understood — reconciliation,
capacity-building, institution-building and strategic
planning can take only place in situ, led by domestic
stakeholders through what we call inclusive national
ownership. The United Nations can enable, but it cannot
build, peace on its own.
Fifthly, the United Nations is usually not the only,
or even often the most important, external actor in
peacebuilding situations. It must improve its capacity
to partner with regional organizations, as well as
with bilateral and multilateral financial institutions.
It must also interact with non-State actors that are
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

present at the request of the host Government and with
domestic stakeholders.
Sixthly, peacebuilding requires long-term development
financing, which will invariably be a good investment
owing to its intrinsic benefits and to the degree that it
contributes to preventing conflicts. The United Nations
will not be called upon to be a source of significant
financial assistance, but clearly it can be hugely
important as a catalyst for such assistance, especially
through more intense use of the Peacebuilding Fund.
Finally, the report includes numerous specific
recommendations to round out the points I have
mentioned, but I cannot delve into those owing to
the lack of time. I should mention, however, that our
recommendations are not limited to the institutions
established in 2005; they cover as well detailed
policies to make the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office useful elements in a systemic approach on
the part of the United Nations to achieve what we
call sustainable peace. I should end by stating that
our conceptual framework is very much consistent
with Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1). In
other words, we place peacebuilding in the broader
context of the United Nations central mission.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Rosenthal for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): I have the honour to
deliver this joint statement on behalf of the delegations
of Egypt, Spain and Ukraine. For the purpose of brevity
and efficiency, a more detailed written version of this
statement will be circulated.
We would like to commend you, Mr. President,
for having organized this debate on the theme “Postconflict peacebuilding: review of the peacebuilding
architecture”, at a critical juncture in the
intergovernmental process of the peacebuilding review.
The ongoing review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture takes place at a defining moment for the
Organization. With the increasing number of violent
conflicts and their changing nature, the existing tools
and approaches that the United Nations uses and applies
in its response are being called into question. Hence
the need for Member States and the United Nations

S/PV.7629

leadership to consider measures leading to real change
in the prevailing mindset within the United Nations,
and also for strengthening the capacity of the broader
United Nations peacebuilding architecture. We hope
that this debate will contribute to reaching consensus on
such measures through the intergovernmental process.
The report (see S/2015/490) of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture, prepared under the leadership of
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal, concludes that, unless we
succeed in breaking the barriers within the Organization
between the principle organs of the United Nations and
between and within the Secretariat, agencies, funds
and programmes of the United Nations, we will fail
the people that we have been mandated to serve. It
is in the Council’s interest to consider, with urgency,
measures to discourage the division and fragmentation
of approaches, in order to protect the multi-billion
dollar investment we have in peacekeeping missions
against the risk of lapse or relapse into conflict. In
recent memory, the tragic cases of South Sudan and the
Central African Republic serve as stark illustrations of
such risks.
The United Nations system must give priority to
enabling countries to put in place effective and inclusive
national and local mechanisms and institutions that can
address the socioeconomic and political root causes and
drivers of violent conflict, including issues related to
the promotion and protection of human rights and the
assignment of a prominent role for women in all stages
of peace consolidation. That will be the most effective
way to pursue prevention. It is therefore imperative
to introduce policies, structures and mandates that
primarily cater to the development capacity of
national stakeholders.
Preventive diplomacy also represents a major
tool of deterrence that the Security Council should
deploy more frequently. It should do that by utilizing
the good offices of the Secretary-General and his
mandated responsibility to draw the Council’s attention
to situations that could threaten international peace
and security, and by utilizing partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations. To that end,
we believe that the Council must recommit to the spirit
of Chapters VI and VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, thereby making a critical contribution to the
building and sustaining of peace. In that vein, the
Council should consistently respond to the requests of
parties for assistance in the implementation of peace

16-047847/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

agreements. The most recent response to the request
from Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia serves as a good example for future Council
contributions to the prevention of relapse into conflict.
Despite the commendable contributions made over
the past decade by the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office to maintaining our attention on situations and
needs that would otherwise have fallen off the radar, we
must plead guilty to having underutilized those tools.
We must seize the opportunity offered by the three
reviews of United Nations peacekeeping operations
to ensure that the three components of our broader
peacebuilding architecture play a more central role in
catalyzing political commitment on the part of Member
States to promoting coherence within and beyond the
United Nations system and in mobilizing human and
financial resources.
With the reforms proposed by the report of
the Advisory Group of Experts with regard to the
working methods and functions of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Security Council should draw upon the
Advisory Group’s advice when a situation with which
the Council is seized is no longer characterized as a crisis
but should still be considered fragile and deserving of
more dedicated, targeted and sustained attention.
Peacebuilding-related investments should start
early as the opportunities emerge throughout the arc
of a crisis. That will help build the foundation for an
inclusive political settlement and for key institutions
early on. More predictable funding for a broad range
of early and targeted engagement remains critical for
building and sustaining peace. In that regard, we believe
that the recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Group deserve greater circulation and serious
consideration on the part of Member States.
We truly hope that we can soon reach consensus
on a draft resolution that will formalize the review
and authorize efforts to effect the needed changes.
However, no resolution stands a chance of making a real
difference unless all Member States and the seniormost
leadership of the United Nations stand ready to renew
their commitment to saving this and succeeding
generations from the scourge of war.
As we recently paid tribute to Boutrous Boutrous
Ghali, I will conclude with a quote from his 1992 “An
Agenda for Peace: Preventive Diplomacy, Peacemaking
and Peacekeeping”:
8/71

23/02/2016

“Reform is a continuing process, and
improvement can have no limit ... The pace set
must therefore be increased if the United Nations
is to keep ahead of the acceleration of history that
characterizes this age. We must be guided not by
precedents alone, however wise these may be, but
by the needs of the future and by the shape and
content that we wish to give it.” (S/24111, para. 85)
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, and Venezuela
for convening this timely and important debate on
the theme “Post-conflict peacebuilding: review of the
peacebuilding architecture”, as we are in the final
stages of the intergovernmental process to which
we, Angola and Australia have been appointed by
the Presidents of General Assembly and the Security
Council respectively. As already mentioned, a draft
resolution is under negotiation, and we aim to secure
its adoption soon by the General Assembly and the
Security Council, in conformity with the mandate
received from the Presidents of the General Assembly
and Security Council.
I am very pleased to see Ambassador Rosenthal,
Chair of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review
of the United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture,
back in the Council Chamber, and I thank him for
sharing with the Council his views on how we should
move forward regarding peacebuilding. The Advisory
Panel’s excellent report (see S/2015/490) provides
a comprehensive assessment of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture. I would also like to
thank my friends Ambassador Macharia Kamau and
Ambassador Olof Skoog, current and previous Chairs
of the Peacebuilding Commission. I am very pleased
that they have shared their views with the Council to
guide our debate this morning.
Finally, when I look at the list of Member States
whose representatives inscribed their names to
participate in this open debate, I am also pleased to see
that the membership believes that our theme has great
significance, both for the Council’s work and for the
international community itself. The maintenance of
peace is indeed what we need to do.
In establishing the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office 10 years ago, the General Assembly and the
Security Council had as their objective to provide the
United Nations with the institutional, financial and
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

structural capacity to support countries emerging
from conflict. The Peacebuilding Commission has
played an important role in assisting States on its
agenda and is a forum for sharing of experiences, best
practices and expertise in post-conflict situations.
In a world facing continuous threats to peace and
the proliferation of conflicts, regular reviews of the
peacebuilding architecture are critical to ensuring that
the United Nations system is adapted to contemporary
challenges. As such, we would like to focus on two
aspects stressed in the report of the Advisory Group,
namely, the need for a change in mindset with regard to
the role of peacebuilding in the United Nations system
and the need to adjust the approaches to peacebuilding.
As the report of the Advisory Group points out,
in the report entitled “An Agenda for Peace” (S/24111)
peacebuilding is a logical follow-up to peacekeeping
and peacemaking, with a main objective of preventing
a relapse into conflict once a peace settlement had been
secured. According to the Advisory Group, the new
mindset in peacebuilding should be based on the concept
of sustaining peace, built on a vision that peacebuilding
is aimed at preventing the outbreak and recurrence of
armed conflict, and therefore encompasses a wide
range of political, developmental, humanitarian and
human rights programmes and mechanisms. Sustaining
peace is a permanent undertaking before, during and
after conflict.
With regard to the responsibility of the United
Nations system, and based on the outlined objectives,
peacebuilding covers the three pillars and the main
organs of the United Nations whose activity is devoted
to the prevention of armed conflict and the maintenance
of peace, while promoting the high values and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. In
the past 10 years, the Peacebuilding Commission has
been striving to connect the activities of those organs
by identifying the root causes of conflict, creating
a favourable environment for trust among parties
to a conflict, strengthening States’ capacities and
promoting the inclusive participation of a wide range of
national stakeholders.
In Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire, Haiti, Kosovo, Liberia,
Timor-Leste and Sierra Leone, the United Nations has
helped to consolidate peace by promoting inclusive
socioeconomic development, economic growth,
poverty eradication, the rule of law and human rights.
As part of the United Nations comprehensive activities,

S/PV.7629

peacebuilding must be understood as an evolving
concept based on the need to constantly adapt to the
reality on the ground. That has been stressed once
again today. Peacebuilding takes place on the ground,
where conflicts have to be dealt with, and must
entail time frames for political transformation after
violent conflict.
With regard to time frames, based on Angola’s
experience, we believe that the achievement of peace
has a dynamic of its own. Each country has specificities
that define the time needed to address root causes and
avoid a relapse into conflict. In that regard, while facing
delays in the political transition of a given country, the
Security Council can either look into the deep-rooted
causes of such delays and contribute constructively to
address them, or adopt a rigid position by increasing
pressure on the parties and seeking strict compliance
with an agreed time frame and a negotiated peace
settlement. We believe that by taking the appropriate
time to resolve outstanding disputes and accepting the
need to adapt the time frames of peace agreements to
the existing challenges might significantly contribute
to sustaining an unsustainable peace.
To conclude, I would like to like to once again
underscore that which is at stake in the current review
of the peacebuilding architecture, namely, the strategy
of the United Nations system in addressing conflict
prevention, the root causes of conflict and the creation of
sustainable peaceful societies in a context of diversity,
challenges and continuous threats to international peace
and security. That is a goal that international authorities
and international partners, including international,
regional and subregional organizations, should address
together through coordinated efforts. It is our shared
responsibility, and this is the right time to fulfil it.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We thank the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela for convening this
meeting and thank the briefers — Ambassadors Kamau,
Skoog and Rosenthal.
In the past two decades, our understanding of what
makes for effective peacebuilding has grown markedly.
It is now accepted that effective political transitions
and national reconciliation processes, the reform and
strengthening of security and rule of law institutions
and the creation of employment and economic
opportunities can all be critical for sustaining peace.
Similarly, as Ambassador Rosenthal again reminded us,
and notwithstanding our post-conflict focus in the title

16-047849/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

of the agenda item, peacebuilding is now recognized as
something that underlies every step in the conflict cycle,
not only as something that follows at the end of conflict
resolution and peacekeeping activities. We also better
acknowledge now the central importance of national
ownership to the long-term success of peacebuilding
efforts. At the same time, we have learned a great deal
about what not to do, and have identified areas where
we need to do better. Today I will highlight four areas
where New Zealand believes that we, as the Council,
need to improve our collective performance.
First, we support the call by the Advisory Group
of Experts for the Council to play a more active role
in peacebuilding. In our view, the Council must focus
on key areas of comparative advantage and integrate
peacebuilding objectives into mission planning from
the earliest stages. While the Council is not bestplaced to provide overall leadership of United Nations
peacebuilding efforts, it plays a critical role in mandating
early peacebuilding tasks and mobilizing the necessary
resources in many immediate post-conflict settings.
Secondly, there needs to be more consistent and
meaningful engagement between the Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission. New Zealand has been one
of many countries to call for that since the Commission’s
establishment, in 2005. It should not be a question
of powers or prerogatives; both the Commission and
the Council benefit by sharing their knowledge and
expertise. Making doctrinal distinctions between the
two bodies’ respective competencies is a barrier to the
integrated, joined-up approach that should be our aim
and should be the norm. We have been pleased to see
positive examples, such as the briefing by the Chair
of the Guinea-Bissau country-specific configuration
during our discussions on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
last week (see S/PV.7624). We strongly support his
involvement in the Council mission to Guinea-Bissau
next week. We want to see greater engagement between
the Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
Additionally, the Council could benefit from the
Commission’s advice on issues such as designing
meaningful benchmarks to measure the completion of
peacebuilding mandates.
Thirdly, as all of the briefers emphasized, the
Council needs to better recognize the essential role of
partnerships in achieving and sustaining peacebuilding
gains, particularly in regard to institutional capacitybuilding. We still have some way to go to consistently
10/71

23/02/2016

achieve national ownership in practice. We support
the recommendation of the Advisory Group to use
mechanisms such as peacebuilding compacts to
foster improved understanding and more meaningful
ownership of programmes by national stakeholders.
New Zealand has seen such agreements benefit regional
peacebuilding missions in our own region.
Equally important is the need for better coordination
with other peacebuilding actors — including United
Nations agencies, international financial institutions,
non-governmental organizations and bilateral donors — to
promote coherence in international assistance. United
Nations country teams have a central role to play in this
regard, particularly during peace operation transitions,
when coordination with longer-term development
partners is critical for ensuring that peacebuilding gains
are sustained beyond the life of the mission. We support
the Advisory Group’s recommendation to strengthen
the offices of the Resident Coordinators during such
transitions, even on a temporary basis, to assist with
taking forward and reallocating the peacebuilding
tasks of departing missions.
Fourthly, as others have also emphasized, the
fragmentation of peacebuilding efforts across the United
Nations system needs to be addressed. Competing
mandates, funding sources and accountabilities can
pose enormous challenges for achieving and sustaining
unity of vision and effort across different United
Nations entities.
The Advisory Group has outlined a range of
recommendations to address this, including more
integrated strategic planning, more accountable senior
leadership and stronger peacebuilding expertise in
critical areas. We encourage the Secretary-General to
take these forward.
Let me conclude by commending the efforts
of Australia and Angola as co-facilitators of the
intergovernmental consultations on the 2015 review of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture. We look
forward to considering a Security Council resolution in
response to the review in the near future.
In the coming year, important decisions are expected
with regard to the transitions in Liberia, Haiti and Côte
d’Ivoire that will strongly influence the prospects for
sustaining the hard-fought peacebuilding gains in those
countries. Let us ensure that we draw on the lessons we
have learned when making those decisions.
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the initiative of Venezuela to convene this
open debate of the Security Council on the review of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture. I thank
the Permanent Representative of Kenya, Ambassador
Kamau; the Permanent Representative of Sweden,
Ambassador Skoog; and Ambassador Rosenthal for
their respective briefings.
A few days ago, we mourned with a heavy heart
the passing of Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, former
Secretary-General of the United Nations. In 1992, in
his report entitled “An Agenda for Peace” (S/24111),
he introduced the concept of peacebuilding. In 2005,
the General Assembly and the Security Council
adopted respective resolutions deciding to establish the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), the Peacebuilding
Fund and the Peacebuilding Support Office, marking
a historic step by the United Nations in the area
of peacebuilding.
In recent years, the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture has been actively supporting reconstruction
and State-building in post-conflict countries and
assisted West African countries in coping with the Ebola
epidemic. United Nations peacebuilding practices in
countries such as Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste have
already become success stories in this regard.

S/PV.7629

The idea that peacebuilding actions can take over
most — or indeed even all — of the role that should be
played by the host country Government is not desirable.
Secondly, the peacebuilding architecture should
serve as a communication platform between the host
country and the stakeholders of the international
community. Peacebuilding is a systems project that
includes multiple areas such as political, security
and social development, and involves multiple actors,
including the host-country Government, international
financial institutions and regional organizations.
International financial institutions should focus on
helping the countries concerned to improve their
capability to generate and mobilize resources and
provide a solid basis for future development.
The African Union and other regional organizations
should give full play to their geographical advantages
and explore and formulate regional solutions for
peacebuilding. The United Nations should enhance
coordination and allow all actors to fully leverage their
respective advantages and expertise, so as to create an
effective division of labour and synergies.

China would like to elaborate on the following points.

Thirdly, we must proceed from the actual needs of the
countries concerned and adopt a tailor-made approach.
Post-conflict countries have different national realities.
Even in the same country, peacebuilding needs and
priorities may vary from one stage to another. When
formulating work plans for peacebuilding, we must
take into full consideration the local conditions, respect
the views of the host country, pay attention to its actual
needs and ensure that our plans and work are in full
alignment with the overall national strategy and priority
development areas. In the process of implementation,
there should be regular evaluation of its effectiveness
on the ground so that timely adjustments and additional
measures can be taken in accordance with the needs of
the host country.

First, we must adhere to the “host-country-led and
host-country-driven” principle. Peacebuilding efforts
must be based on the consent of the host country
and be tasked with enhancing the capacity-building
capabilities of the host country; our goal should be to
achieve lasting peace and stable development in the
countries concerned. The international community
must respect the sovereignty and ownership of postconflict countries, give full play to the initiatives of the
countries concerned and provide constructive support
and assistance to these countries.

Fourthly, we must attach importance to the
communication and connection between peacebuilding
and peacekeeping operations. In conflict-stricken
countries where peacekeepers have been deployed,
peacekeeping missions are familiar with the local
situation and have access to a wealth of information and
intelligence. United Nations peacebuilding efforts must
focus on strengthening connections with peacekeeping
operations so as to ensure the sharing of resources. In
the final stage of a peacekeeping mission’s lifespan,
the mission should seek to ensure and maintain the

At present, regional conflicts are producing major
spillover effects, and traditional and non-traditional
security threats are interwoven. Some post-conflict
countries are facing the risk of the resurgence of war.
How to improve our work in the area of peacebuilding,
consolidate the fruits of the process and achieve lasting
peace are the major topics to be explored by the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture.

16-0478411/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

lasting stability of the host country and enhance its
communication with the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, so as to ensure that peacebuilding efforts
can be carried out smoothly after the departure of
the mission.
Fifthly, we must give full play to the important role
of the Peacebuilding Commission. The PBC comprises
members of the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council. The
PBC is well informed in many areas and has an in-depth
understanding of peacebuilding work in particular
countries. The Peacebuilding Commission should
consider further strengthening its ties with the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council so as to actively advice on issues such
as the consolidation of peace, enhancing the capacity
of host countries and developing country-specific
mechanisms. The Security Council should enhance its
communication with the PBC and its country-specific
configurations so as to provide better guidance in
this area.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I join earlier speakers
in thanking you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting, which represents a timely opportunity
to take stock of the ongoing work on reviewing the
peacebuilding architecture. I thank you also for the
informative concept note (S/2016/104, annex). I wish
also to thank the briefers, namely, ambassador Kamau of
Kenya, Ambassador Skoog of Sweden and Ambassador
Rosenthal for their respective presentations. As a
current member of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), Malaysia subscribes to a number of points and
issues elaborated by the briefers. I wish also to further
contribute to discussions with the following points.
As stressed by the briefers, 2015 and 2016 are crucial
for the peacebuilding agenda, not least in respect of the
ongoing peacebuilding architecture review process.
I take this opportunity to express support for Angola
and Australia in leading the ongoing intergovernmental
negotiations on the review outcome. We are confident
that the comprehensive, transparent and inclusive
approach of the co-Chairs will yield an outcome that
enjoys broad support and consensus among all Member
States, partners and stakeholders.
The year 2015 saw a significant and positive shift
in the PBC’s approach, particularly with regard to its
advocacy role. The Commission’s engagement with
States not on its formal agenda, namely, Burkina
12/71

23/02/2016

Faso, Papua New Guinea and Somalia, demonstrated
that the PBC has the flexibility to engage outside a
predetermined scope.
It is noteworthy that the Commission was early
able to adopt a regional approach in supporting United
Nations efforts to respond to the Ebola outbreak in
West Africa. Such engagement indicates that the
PBC possesses the latent ability to act in a preventive
capacity.
It is important that the ongoing review exercise
recognize this potential and consider the necessary
measures to maintain or strengthen it further. We fully
agree withe Ambassador Kamau’s observations that in
the long run investments in preventing the outbreak,
escalation, continuation and recurrence of conflict are
considerably less costly and sustainable than those
associated with reacting and responding to crises. In
the long term, strengthening the PBC’s preventive
capacity and role also contributes to deepening a
culture of prevention within the United Nations system
and on the shared Charter-mandated responsibility of
sustaining peace.
The concurrent reviews of the peacebuilding
architecture, of United Nations peace operations and
of resolution 1325 (2000) present an opportunity to
address the challenge of possible fragmentation as
well as to promote better synergy, coordination and
complementarity in the work of the relevant bodies,
agencies and mechanisms of the United Nations
towards achieving the core objective of promoting
and sustaining peace. The three review processes
share an underlying aspect, namely, the pursuit of an
integrated approach that links development, human
rights and security while remaining fully mindful of
the primacy of politics in peacebuilding efforts and the
peace process. In that context, my delegation wishes to
underscore the linkages and the need for peacebuilding
architecture review outcomes to be aligned with the
goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1).
The eradication of hunger and poverty, economic
revitalizaton and stabilization, including by increasing
the revenue-generating capacity of countries in
transition, must be counted among the core objectives
of peacebuilding initiatives. At the same time, we also
support proposals to strengthen the participation of
women and youth in peacebuilding. Therefore, overall
peacebuilding efforts should incorporate inclusive
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

approaches and policies involving all stakeholders of
conflict-affected countries.
We also call for enhanced coordination and
concerted efforts by United Nations agencies to address
fragmentation and avoid working in silos, as reflected
in the various reports of the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture,
the Peacebuilding Commission and resolution 1325
(2000). We furthermore believe that there is room in
the review process for recommendations to enhance
the PBC’s engagement and collaboration with regional
organizations and actors, as well as with international
financial institutions, including through more effective
partnerships with such actors.
In that regard, the conclusions emanating from
the Commission’s meeting on transition finance and
peacebuilding in Somalia on 2 November 2015 could
prove instructive. In recognizing the woeful state
of funding for peacebuilding initiatives, Malaysia
reaffirms its support for the recommendation of the
Advisory Group of Experts that 1 per cent of total
contributions to the United Nations peacekeeping
operations and special political missions budgets
be allocated to the Peacebuilding Fund, not only as
a symbolic gesture but also as seed funding towards
ensuring predictable and sustainable funding for future
peacebuilding efforts and activities.
With a view to delivering as one, it is equally
important that the relationship between the Commission
and the Security Council be strengthened. Certain
proposals on reinforcing the Commission’s advisory
role to the Security Council, including by increasing
formal and informal dialogue, closer engagement with
penholders and greater coordination and planning of
all activities, including meetings and field visits with
the Security Council presidency, can ensure that the
Council integrates important peacebuilding objectives
in its deliberations. In our view, that requires only
procedural tweaks.
In conclusion, Malaysia believes that the present
review process affords us a crucial opportunity to
improve the mandate and function of the PBC, which
is a unique entity with enormous potential. The review
of the peacebuilding architecture must position the
PBC so that it is better able to leverage its strengths in
advocacy and in promoting and sustaining peace, not
only in post-conflict scenarios but also in a preventive
capacity. As such we are hopeful that the review

S/PV.7629

outcome will be adopted in a timely manner with a view
to enhancing the PBC’s work, including in its relations
with the Council.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my sincere appreciation to the Permanent
Representatives of Kenya and Sweden — current
and former Chairs of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) — as well as Ambassador Rosenthal, for sharing
their insightful views with us.
(spoke in Spanish)
It is a great pleasure to see Ambassador Rosenthal
here today.
(spoke in English)
I am also pleased to see the Permanent
Representative of Brazil, also a former Chair of the
PBC, in the Chamber today. I thank the Permanent
Representative of Angola, who spoke earlier, and the
Permanent Representative of Australia in moving the
review process forward.
Thanks to the initiative of the Venezuelan
presidency, we are meeting in an open format where
both Security Council members and non-Council
members are expressing their views. I find that most
fitting, given the nature of today’s topic. The long list of
speakers and the large attendance in the Chamber today
also demonstrate the high interest. Having chaired
the PBC Working Group on Lessons Learned for the
past two years and having now served in the Security
Council for two months, I would like to make a few
points on coordination between the Security Council
and the PBC.
The PBC was establishsed jointly by the Security
Council and the General Assembly out of the recognition
that the three pillars of the United Nations — namely,
peace and security, development and human rights — are
interlinked and mutually reinforcing. The PBC was
established to complement the peacebuilding efforts
of United Nations institutions. Ten years have now
passed since the PBC’s establishment. Now is the time
for us to make the Commission a body that can better
perform its intended function as an advisory body to
the Security Council.
In peacebuilding, the roles of the Security Council
and the PBC are differentiated but complementary. The
Security Council discharges its responsibility mainly
in conflict resolution. The strength of the PBC, on the

16-0478413/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

other hand, lies in its long-term endeavours to lay the
groundwork for peace. During my chairmanship of the
Working Group on Lessons-Learned, that is exactly what
we intended to do by highlighting the PBC’s strengths.
The Group discussed challenges faced by post-conflict
countries during and after United Nations mission
draw-down and the importance of institution-building
as a key priority in conflict-affected countries.
The Group was firmly convinced that strengthening
core State institutions that provide security, justice,
public administration and basic social services was
fundamental to a successful transition from postconflict situations to lasting peace. Such lessons learned
and the remaining challenges are summarized in the
two final reports of the Working Group on Lessons
Learned. The reports are an embodiment of the PBC’s
mandated advisory role, and I hope they will be fully
utilized in future discussions of the Security Council
and the PBC, and in the ongoing review and beyond.
The PBC can be better employed for the prevention of
lapses and relapses into conflicts as well. The PBC Chair
and the Chairs of the country-specific configurations
of the PBC can provide timely information and early
warning to the Security Council. In that context, let me
recall that inviting the PBC Chairs to Security Council
meetings is something that has already been agreed
in the past presidential notes in 2010 and 2013. The
PBC Chairs should therefore be invited to participate
in Security Council debates, in accordance with those
notes, for greater coherence in peacebuilding efforts. I
promise to do so during Japan’s presidency.
If a conflict occurs, more resources and energy will
be required. Securing sustained attention and resources
for peacebuilding and conflict prevention is very
important. There is no denying that the Peacebuilding
Fund has proved itself to be an important financial tool
for supporting critical peacebuilding processes in many
post-conflict countries. Japan appreciates the Fund’s
active performance. Recognizing both the usefulness
and the current difficulties faced by the Fund, Japan
will contribute an additional $3.5 million to the Fund by
the end of March. That will make our total contribution
to the Fund $46 million. I wish to join the Chair of the
PBC, Ambassador Kamau, in encouraging Member
States, including non-traditional donors, to consider
making voluntary contributions to the Peacebuilding
Fund. That said, Japan does not believe in the “assessed
contribution” option. We are concerned that the Fund’s
comparative advantage in being able to respond rapidly
14/71

23/02/2016

and flexibly would be greatly undermined if we were to
choose that option.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
share with the Council what we wish to do during our
Council presidency in the month of July. Our Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Fumio Kishida, announced
earlier today that Japan wishes to hold an open debate
on the theme of peacebuilding in Africa in the month of
July, and the Minister looks forward to presiding over
the meeting himself. That will demonstrate Japan’s
dedication and determination to further contribute to
greater coherence in United Nations peacebuilding
efforts, both at the policy level and on the ground.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I thank
the President of the Security Council for having
taken the initiative to organize this open debate on
the theme, “Post-conflict peacebuilding, review of
the peacebuilding architecture”, and for also having
provided a valuable concept note (S/2016/104, annex) to
guide our discussion.
Allow me also to thank and congratulate the Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), Ambassador
Macharia Kamau; his predecessor in that eminent
endeavour, Ambassador Olof Skoog; the Chair of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and former Chair of the PBC, Ambassador
Antonio de Aguiar Patriota; as well as the Chair of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture, Ambassador Gert
Rosenthal, for their significant contributions.
My delegation is pleased that this review has
coincided with the full review of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations, as well as the review of the
implementation of the Security Council resolution
on women and peace and security. The Organization
must fully draw upon the singular opportunity offered
by those reviews, which are so closely linked, so
as to reorient our actions and strategies for a more
coordinated and consistent approach and effectively
tackle the numerous challenges to international peace
and security.
The prevention of any return to war and the
commitment to building peace in the long term so as to
lastingly rehabilitate societies emerging from conflict
were the basis for the concept and goal of creating the
United Nations peacekeeping architecture. As early
as in 1992, in “An Agenda for Peace”, Mr. Boutros
Boutros-Ghali — at that time Secretary-General of
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

the United Nations — who has recently left us and to
whom we would like to once again pay heartfelt tribute,
defined post-conflict peacebuilding as
“action to identify and support structures which
will tend to strengthen and solidify peace in order
to avoid a relapse into conflict” (S/24111, para. 21).
Although at that time peacebuilding was understood
first and foremost in terms of military demobilization
and political transition, the peacebuilding agenda
and activities have continued to grow increasingly
important and complex since then, with, in particular,
the 1995 publication of Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali’s
supplement to “An Agenda for Peace” (S/1995/1) and,
more significantly, with the implementation in 2005 of
the Peacebuilding Commission architecture.
Those tools have certainly allowed us, inter
alia, to integrate the development dimension into the
management of post-conflict situations. Nonetheless,
we note that such United Nations endeavours to assist
the countries in need to extricate themselves from war
and move towards lasting peace have not yet reached
their full potential. That is why Senegal welcomes
with great interest the report of the Advisory Group
of Experts (see S/2015/490), which sheds light on the
challenges as well as the measures to be taken to fill
the gaps. One of the salient points of the report of
the Advisory Group of Experts is that peacebuilding
has been relegated to a peripheral activity. It does not
enjoy sufficient financing and comes in only after the
fact and in a fragmented manner. That is symptomatic
of the gap between the declared ambition and the
actual interest that we accord to peacebuilding. That
is the reason that the delegation of Senegal calls for
the development of a more voluntary, consistent and
comprehensive approach, so as to break up the silos that
have led to fragmentation in United Nations system’s
actions and efforts.
The efforts to ensure better coordination and
consistency in our actions should go hand in hand
with more dynamic interaction among the PBC, the
main bodies of the United Nations and the funds and
programmes, as well as with international, regional
and local partners. It is only in that manner that we
will manage to strengthen synergies and ensure that
there is better impact on the ground. In that regard,
my delegation would particularly like to emphasize
the importance of providing greater impetus to the
interaction between the Security Council and the

S/PV.7629

PBC. We are of the view that the Council should allow
the PBC to play its advisory role in a more extensive
manner through more frequent recourse to its services,
in particular in the areas of advice, awareness-raising
and resource mobilization. Such a comprehensive
approach should also result in the development of
an integrated strategy that combines several fields,
including security, sustainable development, human
rights, including gender equality, and the rule of law.
To address the existing gaps in the area of
peacebuilding, three fundamental aspects within
the framework of the review — namely, financing,
national ownership and cooperation with regional
organizations — should capture our attention. While
countries emerging from conflict are in need of longterm and considerable financing, we have found
that such financing remains limited, unpredictable
and difficult to mobilize.In order to ensure that
peace is lasting, security must go hand in hand with
development. Lessons drawn from the peacebuilding
processes in Africa, in particular in Guinea-Bissau,
give us a full idea of how important that is. Countries in
the process of peacebuilding need resources to finance
projects that can create wealth and jobs, in particular for
young people and women, who have a key role to play
in the economic and social recovery of the impacted
countries.
According to the report of the Advisory Group
of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture, the Peacebuilding Fund is simply
insufficient to create, by itself, the necessary impact
and is far from achieving its goal of being a catalyst
for the flow of more significant resources from other
sources. Furthermore, my delegation supports the
recommendation of the Advisory Group of Experts that
the General Assembly consider adopting measures to
ensure that basic financing amounting to $100 million,
which symbolically represents about 1 per cent of
the entire United Nations budget for peacekeeping
operations, be earmarked for peacebuilding on an
annual basis. It would be drawn from contributions
under the Organization’s regular budget.
The experience of Guinea-Bissau also demonstrates
the need to rebuild confidence among various national
stakeholders and make the restoration of confidence one
of the national priorities in the peacebuilding process.
The principle of national ownership should guide
all peacebuilding efforts, so as to ensure that there is

16-0478415/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

better harmony among the offers of assistance and the
goals in national peacebuilding plans, because it is up to
the country concerned itself to define its priorities. The
Peacebuilding Commission cannot do it for countries.
We must also attach due importance to
strengthening cooperation between the Peacebuilding
Commission and regional organizations, in particular
the African Union. Given that all of the six countries on
the Commission’s agenda are in Africa, it would only
be logical to strengthen the partnership between the
African Union and the Peacebuilding Commission, in
particular with regard to development, by considering
the nature and challenges of peacebuilding in Africa
and by ensuring a rational sharing of the tasks and roles
involved in providing support to the relevant countries
and a better structured dialogue on the best way for the
PBC to support the countries already receiving support
from the Organization in that regard.
In conclusion, I would like to launch an appeal
for better implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
which reaffirms the crucial role played by women
in peacebuilding as active participants in all stages
of conflict prevention, the settlement of disputes,
peacebuilding and development. Women are an asset
for peace and reconciliation and should be better
integrated into peacebuilding processes. The success
achieved in bringing women on board in the rebuilding
processes in Sierra Leone, Liberia and Rwanda should
guide us to mainstream and strengthen those practices
in all countries. In an effort to integrate the women and
peace and security agenda, and in recognition of the
importance of the presence of some of the countries
of West Africa on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the countries of the region, with the
support of the United Nations, adopted in 2010 the
Dakar Declaration on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) in West Africa, as well as a related regional
plan of action.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
peacebuilding. I would also like to thank Ambassadors
Kamau, Skoog and Rosenthal for their briefings and for
their important work to assist the world’s most fragile
countries in building sustainable peace.
This meeting is especially important in the light of
the ongoing review of the United Nations peacekeeping
architecture — an architecture that Member States
developed over a decade ago. Three of the most crucial
16/71

23/02/2016

tenets at that time remain the core of our efforts today,
namely, sustaining international attention to countries
emerging from conflict, developing more effective
strategies to build peace and continuing to mobilize
the necessary resources to prevent a relapse into
violent conflict.
The United States continues to support the goals
of the peacebuilding architecture in service of the
important objectives of ensuring that we not only
respond to symptoms, but also address root causes;
ensure that we are not only responding to war, but that we
help to actually build peace; and ensure that the United
Nations system is well-positioned to strategically and
effectively address the needs of countries and regions,
not just while civilians are under attack, but in the days,
months and years after a conflict has ended.
While we continue to support those goals, we
also believe that, fundamentally, the peacebuilding
architecture has not lived up to its mandate or fully
fulfilled the role that it was created to perform. We have
diagnosed the problem many times in many different
forums. Virtually every conflict-affected country
considered by the Council — from Haiti to Liberia — has
struggled with consolidating peace in the aftermath
of conflict. We have seen the devastating human and
financial consequences of deadly cycles of relapse in
recent years, from the Central African Republic to
South Sudan to Burundi. We know that the United
Nations must do a better job of consolidating peace and
preventing such relapses, but we have failed to translate
our shared understanding of the problem into practical,
achievable and impactful changes in how we actually do
business so as address those challenges. That is why we
agree with many of the assessments and support many of
the recommendations of the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture,
including the conclusion that peacebuilding remains
underrecognized, underprioritized and underresourced
globally within the United Nations system. With the
ongoing peacebuilding architecture review in mind, I
would like to lay out the vision of the United States for
what a strong, coordinated and effective peacebuilding
architecture should look like.
First, the primary challenge is not necessarily
a lack of resources — which is too often our first
port of call when efforts at the United Nations are
underperforming — it is a lack of coherence. The
complex nature of conflict means that United Nations
entities must work in a more coordinated fashion.
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

S/PV.7629

Conflict prevention, conflict management and postconflict stabilization efforts by the various parts of
the United Nations system must go hand in hand if
peacebuilding efforts are to succeed.

translate into actions. Smaller, flexible and informal
focus groupings of Member States that are willing to
put diplomatic muscle and resources into advancing
peace in a particular country would serve us all well.

We have seen examples recently in Sri Lanka and
in Sierra Leone of how an internally coherent approach
can meaningfully help countries recover from conflict.
With an initial commitment of $3 million from the
Peacebuilding Fund, several United Nations entities,
including the Department of Political Affairs, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the United Nations Development
Programme and the Peacebuilding Support Office,
along with the United Nations Resident Coordinator and
the United Nations country team, are working together
with the Government of Sri Lanka to promote effective
transitional justice mechanisms that are sensitive to
the different ways in which conflict has affected Sri
Lankan men and women. Importantly, local Sri Lankan
provincial councils are receiving capacity-building
so as to help them address grievances on the part of
internally displaced persons, members of minority
groups and other vulnerable populations by facilitating
their resettlement on land once occupied by the military.

Of course, we also urge the Peacebuilding
Commission to continue to work closely with
regional and multilateral organizations, including the
international financial institutions, in peacebuilding
efforts. The recent briefing from the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank representatives
to the PBC Burundi configuration exemplifies how
the Peacebuilding Commission provides a really
crucial link between United Nations Headquarters
and the international financial institutions whose
economic expertise in the field is essential to postconflict contexts.

In Sierra Leone, the integrative work of successive
United Nations missions, the country team and the
Sierra Leone Peacebuilding Commission countryspecific configuration have been critical to breaking
the cycle of violence and have provided space for
Sierra Leoneans to focus on prosperity, development
and democratic elections instead of war, isolation and
conflict. Sierra Leone has held three peaceful and
credible elections since the end of the civil war in
2002, and new institutions are rising to the challenge
of being responsive to its citizens. Support from the
United Nations, including the sustained engagement of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) country-specific
configuration and its admirable leadership from the
Canadian Mission, has been critical to that transition.
The United States also envisions a Peacebuilding
Commission that can broaden its reach across the United
Nations and the broader international community. We
support changes to the Peacebuilding Commission’s
country-specific configurations so that they are
smaller, more flexible, informal and better tailored
groupings among Member States. The last thing we
need at the United Nations is another set of meetings in
which diplomats gather to express their concerns about
the same problems over and over. We need ideas that

Our vision for the peacebuilding architecture
includes a continued role for the Peacebuilding Fund,
which we have long viewed as a nimble and effective rapid
response tool for conflict prevention and peacebuilding
support. The Peacebuilding Fund was among the first
to fund a new multipartner trust fund in Colombia to
respond to stabilitization and peacebuilding needs. With
that initiative, the Peacebuilding Fund is serving as an
effective rapid-response tool for conflict prevention
and peacebuilding support. The Peacebuilding Fund,
along with the United Nations special monitoring
and verification mission, the United Nations country
team and other multilateral donors will play a critical
role helping Colombia transition into a post-accord
environment. We believe that the Peacebuilding Fund’s
work in Colombia will help generate tangible and
inclusive peace dividends to boost public confidence
in the peace process and help generate the conditions
necessary to implement the peace accords.
We know there are no easy solutions for societies
recovering from conflict. We also know that only
through coherence of effort, seriousness of purpose
and more flexibility in approach can the United Nations
system more fully seize all opportunities to continue
to build our capacity to consolidate peace. We see
the ongoing peacebuilding architecture review as a
valuable opportunity to do just that.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate. I also
want to thank Ambassadors Kamau, Skoog and
Rosenthal for their thoughtful contributions to this
debate and to this agenda.

16-0478417/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

John F. Kennedy once said, “the mere absence of
war is not peace”. His words over half a century ago
go to the heart of the issue we are discussing today,
the issue of peacebuilding. Today it is no longer
enough just to stop the fighting. How many issues on
the Security Council’s agenda are a result of countries
relapsing into conflict? How many are due to leaders
failing to capitalize on the absence of war, or failing to
build peace and prosperity for their citizens? Today I
would like to talk about Burundi, a country that sadly
fits that mold.
As Security Council members saw at first-hand last
month, that small, poor yet beautiful country has suffered
a great deal. Just over a decade since the end of the civil
war — a war that claimed 300,000 lives — it now stands
on the precipice of civil war again. It is clear that the
dividends of 11 years of peace have been squandered. In
response, we in the Security Council have been united
in our demands to President Nkurunziza to de-escalate
the tensions, begin dialogue with the opposition and
agree to a deployment of some form of international
presence, as originally proposed by the African Union.
But as we drove through Bujumbura last month, I could
not help but think whether there was more that we — the
Council, the United Nations, regional actors — could
have done to prevent a return to violence. I hope that in
the Chamber today we can all consider what more we
can do in the future to prevent what we saw in Burundi
from happening again elsewhere.
We have plenty to guide us — reviews of
peacekeeping, of peacebuilding, of women and peace
and security, all agreed last year. But if we are to
avoid a failure in peacebuilding, whether in Burundi
or elsewhere, people on the ground need more that just
words on paper. They need meaningful action from the
Council and others. I see five steps to take.
First, a key theme of those review reports is the
centrality of political will at the national and the
international levels to build and sustain peace. But
even when the Council is united, as we have been
on Burundi, our efforts can be dampened by a lack
of political will by just one person — in this case
President Nkurunziza. We therefore need to bring
pressure to bear on those who refuse to find common
ground, who will not engage in dialogue, who exhibit
no trace of the political will needed to sustain peace.
To do so, let us recognize that the Council is not alone
in the fight. Burundi shows us the vital importance of
regional organizations, such as the African Union. We
18/71

23/02/2016

need to continue and enhance that close collaboration
with regional organizations, and we should draw on the
support and advice of the Peacebuilding Commission
too, as our briefers today advised us.
Secondly, it is clear that crisis have often been
brought before the Council too late for effective
preventive action. We need to improve our ability to
tackle potential risks to stability before they escalate.
To do so, we need to match early warning with early
action. That is the best way to prevent enormous human
suffering, and it is also much more cost effective than
dealing with conflicts and their aftermath. Can we say
honestly that we achieved that on Burundi? We visited
twice in a year. Did we not we all see the warning
signs? I learned from our visit that improved horizon
scanning was really of no use on its own. We have
to do something as a result. The Council needs to be
proactive and action-oriented and to mobilize the tools
at our disposal to prevent relapses into violence.
Thirdly, we need to improve our ability to sustain
peace after the fighting has stopped. We must avoid
the peacebuilding gap when peacekeeping missions
transition out of a country and international attention
falls away. Perhaps that is the greatest lesson to learn
from Burundi. Sustaining engagement is challenging.
The Peacebuilding Commission provides a good way
to continue the political support and to draw together
the United Nations system and Member States and
the international financial institutions. Similarly, the
Peacebuilding Fund does excellent work, and I would
like to encourage all Member States to join us in making
voluntary contributions to that effective tool.
Fourthly, building peace must mean building
peace for all — for men, women, children, minorities,
the vulnerable, for those in Government and for those
in opposition. The peacebuilding review tells us
that building and sustaining peace rests on a social
consensus behind that peace. That is why inclusive
dialogue is so important in Burundi. And so we
welcome the Secretary-General’s visit to Burundi
today and the progress he has made on that inclusive
dialogue. More broadly, as we provide practical support
for development, for services and for jobs in countries
emerging from conflict, let us all do so in a way that
fosters inclusivity.
Fifthly, and finally, we need a whole-of-system
approach that bridges the usual United Nations silos
so that the system together is more than the sum of
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

its parts. When the Security Council reaches across
those divides, it is not encroachment; it is necessary
joining up. I encourage other bodies too to join up
across the gaps, and I point to goal 16 of the Sustainable
Development Goals of doing that.
If we can take those five steps, we can build
something really sustainable and, in doing so, ensure
that the absence of war, as John F. Kennedy put it,
really does lead to a more permanent peace.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I should
also like to begin by thanking Ambassadors Kamau,
Skoog and Rosenthal for their respective valuable
contributions to this debate.
Peacebuilding is an essential subject, and we all
agree on highlighting its importance. We are also in
full agreement that the United Nations needs to do
more in this area. In that regard, today’s open debate
is a very relevant and timely topic. The report (see
S/2015/490) of the Advisory Group of Experts on the
Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture, issued in
June 2015, includes a number of interesting proposals.
The draft resolution on the peacebuilding architecture
that is currently being debated in the General Assembly
is also an opportunity to improve United Nations action
in this area. For France, that improvement needs to be
structured around the following points.
First of all, we must ensure that the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) fully complements and supports
Security Council efforts. That is key to ensuring a
fully coherent message from the United Nations on
the different situations of which we are seized. For
example, the Peacebuilding Commission could play
an important role in maintaining political mobilization
on specific situations, and thus could assist in the
implementation of actions undertaken. In that regard,
the Peacebuilding Commission can help mobilize the
partners involved in implementing Council resolutions,
such as donors, the United Nations system and the
international organizations.
In addition, in some cases the Peacebuilding
Commission plays a much appreciated advisory role
vis-à-vis the Security Council, including through field
visits by its members. The work of the Commission
must be guided in that direction so that it can
effectively support the Council’s work. For example,
we appreciate the role played by Morocco as Chair
of the Central African Republic country-specific
configuration and its efforts to support the financing of

S/PV.7629

elections and the Special Criminal Court. Such projects
are concrete and assist in the stabilization of the
Central African Republic, as decided by the Security
Council in coordination with transitional authorities,
but their implementation requires monitoring and
support that only the Central African Republic country
configuration can effectively provide. Similarly,
regular visits to the Great Lakes region organized by the
Swiss chairmanship of the Burundi configuration are
particularly useful and welcome, to the extent that they
operate in the framework of excellent complementarity
with initiatives taken by the Council to find a solution
to the crisis in Burundi.
It is equally important to ensure that the
Peacebuilding Commission organizes its work in the
most effective way possible to ensure flexibility in
reviewing records and also to focus in its meetings on
operational and concrete issues. From that point of view,
I would like to congratulate the Swedish Ambassador
for his work in that area during Sweden’s chairmanship
of the Commission. I also congratulate the Ambassador
of Kenya on his election as head of the PBC and wish
him every success in his chairmanship.
Finally, with regard to financing, we welcome the
activities of the Peacebuilding Fund. It is also is essential
to maintain the voluntary nature of contributions to
continue to ensure genuine transparency and monitoring
of the commitments of the Fund. However, it must also
be acknowledged that the efficacy of peacebuilding is
not merely a financial issue. From that perspective, it
is important to emphasize efforts to coordinate on the
ground the work of the United Nations in the area of
peacebuilding, as well as with international financial
institutions. In that regard, the role of the Resident
Coordinator must be supported and strengthened.
France is particularly committed to strengthening
United Nations efforts in the area of peacebuilding.
We hope that today’s debate and discussions on the
General Assembly draft resolution will contribute to
this objective shared by all.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
I would like to thank you, Sir, for having convened
today’s meeting. This is a timely exchange of views that
we hope will help us find a common denominator during
the current talks on a draft resolution in the General
Assembly and in Security Council on the reform of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture.

16-0478419/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

23/02/2016

We carefully listened to the briefings by the
current and outgoing Chairs of the Peacebuilding
Commission — the Permanent Representatives of
Sweden and Kenya — as well as by Mr. Gert Rosenthal,
Chair of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review
of the United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture.

lasting peace, as they can and must do their utmost to
assist the peace process, shoulder responsibility and
more fully realize their constructive potential. That is
why inclusive national processes and a single vision
within countries based on shared responsibility for
lasting peace are of critical importance.

Peacebuilding systems are one of the most
important instruments of the United Nations for
effectively resolving conflicts, stabilizing post-conflict
situations and preventing new outbreaks of disastrous
crises. We welcome the contribution made to the
process by the report of the Advisory Group of Experts
(see S/2015/490). The document offers a basis on which
Member States can take informed decisions. Currently,
there are ongoing discussions at the inter-State level
regarding which of the constructive recommendations
could be implemented in practice. The report stresses
the need for peacebuilding efforts at all stages of the
conflict cycle.

We recognize the productive role of women in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, as well as
the importance of their equitable participation in that
process. However, we believe that excessive focus
on the gender issue is counterproductive, as there is
no direct link with the root causes of conflict — and
eradicating such root causes is the main task.

Without a doubt, preventing the resumption of
conflict takes up much of the international agenda.
Seventy years ago, the task was enshrined in Chapter
I of the Charter of the United Nations, and the
Organization subsequently took additional decisions on
that important sphere of activity, which strengthened
the basis for international efforts in that area. We think
it is necessary to draw on the expertise and know-how
we have garnered over time.
Furthermore, the report of the Group of Experts calls
on States to look into the concept of sustaining peace,
which concerns reconciliation and building a common
vision of a society that only national stakeholders
can undertake. The United Nations and international
entities can support and facilitate the process, but not
lead it. We fully agree that the primary responsibility
for defining priorities and implementing strategies is
borne by States themselves and that corresponding
international efforts should be focused, first of all, on
capacity-building in affected countries. That assistance
should be provided to States upon request, in line with
their action plans and based on the national sovereignty
and independence of States.
We are sure that the principle of national
responsibility is the linchpin in peacebuilding
efforts. In current crises, which are often domestic,
national Governments continue to bear the primary
responsibility for their people’s security. At the same
time, societies themselves play a key role in creating
20/71

With regard to the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) — a
singular, intergovernmental advisory body — plays a key
role. We support its efforts to increase the effectiveness
and coordination of international assistance to countries
that have requested such assistance or to those countries
that are placed on its agenda by the Security Council.
We believe that the PBC will continue to increase
the quality of its advisory assistance to the Security
Council regarding countries within the remit of both
bodies. We expect that the work conducted by the Group
of Experts will, in the final stage, be carried forward
by Member States through specific steps to increase
the Commission’s effectiveness, while preserving
its mandate in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 60/180 and Council resolution 1645 (2005).
We also note the role of the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF), which is an important mechanism for urgent
financing that brings in long-term resources for aid
in rebuilding and development. We have constantly
advocated the country principle in the distribution
of the PBF’s funds. It is important that the work of
the Fund be buoyed by relevant financial resources.
Member States need to take a look at the possibility
of more actively and voluntarily providing assistance.
Each year, Russia provides the Fund with $2 million,
with a total contribution of $12 million. It would be
useful to take a closer look at all existing possibilities
for raising funds, but the idea of moving the PBF to
the regular budget is contradictory. That step would not
only create an additional load for payers in a difficult
economic context, but would also strip the Fund of its
chief advantage, which is effectiveness and flexibility
in chanelling funds to meet the urgent needs of States
calling for assistance. On the whole, we would like
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

to see PBC interaction with international financial
institutions be bolstered.
While many initiatives developed outside the
United Nations merit our attention in general, they
cannot be automatically considered to be already
approved and officially adopted by the Organization,
and that definitely applies to the so-called New Deal for
Engagement in Fragile States, launched in line with the
policies of the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development.
In conclusion, would like to emphasize that the
issue of adapting the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture to modern realities requires a responsible,
balanced and in-depth discussion. It is vital that we
achieve the kind of result that will help to build peace
rather than create new risks.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking the presidency of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela for convening today’s
open debate and for the concept note on the subject
(S/2016/104, annex). I would also like to commend
Ambassadors Kamau, Skoog and Rosenthal for their
informative briefings.
Uruguay views the reform of our peacebuilding
architecture as an integral part of the broader review
process of the peace and security components of the
United Nations, and we believe it is essential that
we adapt its peace and security activities to the new
challenges presented by the international scene. In that
context, we support the other review efforts currently
under way concerning peacekeeping operations and
the women and peace and security agenda, since we
believe it is crucial to ensure that they are conducted in
concordance and coherently so as to optimize the use of
existing resources.
Peacebuilding is a complex process, in both the
medium and long terms, encompassing a very broad
spectrum of tasks and actors that have to be integrated
and coordinated with the Government of the country
concerned in the creation of dialogue and peace
processes that are inclusive and representative of society
as a whole. Respect for human rights, strengthening
the rule of law and creating economic development are
central to the work of peacebuilding. In that regard,
supporting the Government institutions that provide
essential services, reintegrating those returning to their
homes, creating jobs as quickly as possible, restoring
basic infrastructure and various aspects of economic

S/PV.7629

revitalization are all priorities without which sustained
peacebuilding is impossible. My country believes that
in such cases, developing national capacities should be
the focus of all international efforts from the earliest
stages of the process.
We should also emphasize the role of peacekeeping
staff in the early stages of peacebuilding in key areas
such as the provision of security and strengthening
of the rule of law; disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration; security-sector reform and even
the expansion of State authority. Such support is
particularly crucial in the early stages, when a country
is transitioning to the consolidation phase or when the
tasks of both maintaining and building peace must be
carried out simultaneously.
Uruguay agrees with the view expressed in
Venezuela’s concept note of the role that regional and
subregional organizations, along with international
financial institutions, should play in helping to create
an environment conducive to lasting peace in countries
emerging from conflict, and we emphasize the
importance of developing strategic alliances between
them and the United Nations.
Uruguay would like to stress the key role of women
in building and maintaining peace, to which end we
must ensure their recruitment to political leadership
roles in United Nations peacebuilding programmes and
strategies. In that regard, it is crucial to ensure that the
Peacebuilding Commission systematically incorporates
a gender perspective into all of its regulatory and
promotion activities, in collaboration with UN-Women.
The report (see S/2015/490) of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture, chaired by Ambassador Rosenthal,
includes highly relevant recommendations that have
been discussed and analysed in the context of the
negotiations being co-facilitated by the delegations
of Angola and Australia. Peacebuilding should be
addressed as an inherently political process that
requires the active participation of the State concerned
and a long-term commitment from the United Nations
system. In that context, we must respect the principle
of national ownership, in the belief that achieving longterm sustainable peace depends largely on forging a
comprehensive partnership that includes national actors
from the country in question. Peacebuilding cannot be
limited to post-conflict situations as long as its goal

16-0478421/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

23/02/2016

is to prevent the emergence of conflict as well as its
recurrence or continuation.

operations. The painful question that many of us must
ask is: have they died in vain?

Within the peacebuilding architecture, the
Commission is a fundamental tool for ensuring timely
and sustained support to countries during critical
stages of their development, while recognizing their
specific needs and situations. The review process
is an opportunity to strengthen the Commission’s
performance while improving its role as an adviser to
the Security Council and the General Assembly. We
should make use of its advisory role to the Council more
often, especially in the case of States with situations on
the Council’s agenda and those that have been assigned
country teams.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

Uruguay considers the Peacebuilding Commission’s
lack of predictable funding a major challenge. It should
be able to rely on sufficient resources, which is why
Uruguay supports the recommendation of the Advisory
Group that the Commission be assigned a symbolic 1 per
cent of the overall budget for peacekeeping operations.
So far, I have listed the areas that we think need
to be reformed if we are to make the peacebuilding
architecture more effective. But in all sincerity, I have
to say that it is impossible to contemplate this issue
without calling attention to the irresponsibility — for
that is what it is — of some of the rulers of some of
the countries that are either part of the Peacebuilding
Commission’s programmes or the object of
peacekeeping operations. Most of their time is spent
playing sterile political games in their attempts to cling
to power, pure and simple, rather than facing up to the
immense challenges ahead of them with civic courage.
Some of us are tired. We are sick of seeing whole
societies suffering from hunger, insecurity, disease
and violations of their personal dignity and most basic
rights when they are not being persecuted, jailed or
killed, while their rulers fight to keep or seize power,
and in their quest for it cancel, postpone and manipulate
elections, change or attempt to change constitutions and
foment grotesque nationalisms or religious or ethnic
rivalries, shamelessly violating the solemn promises
they have made to their peoples or the international
community. The international community has given
some of those countries not only effort, material goods
and vast amounts of money but also, and far more
important, the lives of the servants of humanitarian
organizations and those deployed in peacekeeping
22/71

We would like to express our appreciation for their
excellent briefings to Ambassador Macharia Kamau,
Permanent Representative of Kenya and Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission; Ambassador Olof Skoog,
former Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission; and
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal, Chair of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture. We also thank Ambassador De Aguiar
Patriota, Permanent Representative of Brazil, for his
invaluable support during his time as Chair of the
Commission. We would like to thank everyone for their
participation in today’s open debate on peacebuilding,
which is being held concurrently with a major
intergovernmental negotiation process in the General
Assembly, facilitated by Ambassadors Gillian Bird
and Gaspar Martins, the Permanent Representatives of
Australia and Angola.
Peacebuilding involves a range of long-term
political, institutional and development activities that
seek to address the root causes of conflicts, prevent
them from recurring and achieve sustainable and lasting
peace. The visionary 1992 report of Secretary-General
Boutros Boutros-Ghali “An Agenda for Peace” (S/24111)
laid the foundation for the United Nations system to
establish what came to be known as the peacebuilding
architecture, made up of the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office. Last year, on occasion of the tenth anniversary
of the establishment of that architecture, the report (see
S/2015/490) of the Advisory Group of Experts on the
Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture examined
the activities of that architecture over recent years. The
conclusions of the report prompt us to reflect deeply on
how the United Nations addresses peacebuilding.
Peacebuilding processes are non-linear and are
much more lengthy and costly than anticipated in 2005,
when the peacebuilding architecture was established.
We are talking about structural changes that could
take up to a generation to bear fruit. That requires
the Organization to update and adapt its projections
and its models to achieve lasting peace in countries
in post-conflict situations. We must leave behind
templates that call for mechanical and unnecessarily
rigid and overly accelerated peacebuilding processes.
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Mediation processes, peace agreements, the drafting of
constitutions and the holding of elections need to be
much more representative and inclusive of local aspects,
as well as more cognizant of the political context of the
countries in question.
In addition, peacebuilding processes must be
accompanied by the ongoing political presence and
attention of the United Nations. Although capacityand institution-building in countries in post-conflict
situations indeed require technical expertise,
peacebuilding is first and foremost an inherently
political process. As some case studies have revealed,
once peacekeeping operations or special political
missions withdraw from the field, we see a substantive
political divestment on the part of the United Nations
system. That approach cannot continue. In order to be
effective and durable, peacebuilding processes require
sustained funding and political attention for prolonged
periods. That reality ought to be a priority for the States
Members of the Organization, which should take the
necessary steps to address it.
The United Nations currently devotes little political
attention and few resources to peacebuilding. That is
directly related to the budgetary allocation of resources
and represents one of the causes of the relapses into
conflict in many countries. The United Nations tends
to be reactive when addressing conflicts, favouring the
use of short-term security and humanitarian measures
to the detriment of long-term actions that could address
the root causes of conflict. That is clearly reflected
in the distribution of resources: while the budget for
humanitarian assistance has reached $24.5 billion and
the budget for peacekeeping operations is $8 billion, the
budget of the Peacebuilding Fund is a mere $100 million
per year, to distributed among 22 countries.
On the topic of peacebuilding, the Security Council
has a great deal to do with regard to the manner in
which it deals with conflicts. It seems the Security
Council has a predilection for implementing Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, instead of
Chapters devoted to the prevention of conflict, which
further exacerbates the situation in post-conflict
countries. Few cases illustrate that pattern as clearly
as does the case of Libya. Following the adoption of
resolution 1973 (2011) and the establishment a no-fly
zone, an international military coalition authorized
by the Security Council spent billions of dollars to
overthrow the Libyan Government. After the military
intervention in Libya, as had occurred earlier in Iraq,

S/PV.7629

the country entered into a prolonged, ongoing state of
political instability — without institutions, without
infrastructure, without public services, without
security, without means of survival and without a stable
economy — but with the most sophisticated weapons
on the market, the presence of non-State armed groups,
the division of the country and the ensuing political
and economic instability. The need for peacebuilding
in those brotherly Arab countries is one of the main
challenges and responsibilities of the United Nations,
and in particular of the Security Council.
The crisis of migrants crossing the Mediterranean
Sea from North Africa — who risk their lives and those
of their children — is a harrowing indicator of the
need to strengthen the peacebuilding architecture. The
majority of those migrants come from African countries
that have emerged from conflict but are unable to build
peace, re-establish the minimal conditions necessary
for a decent life for people or to rebuild their societies
or their economies.
Peacebuilding will be possible only to the extent
that the root causes of conflict are addressed; otherwise,
we will face increasing and recurring conflicts rooted
primarily in the weakness of State institutions in postconflict countries. We should place greater emphasis on
reactivating sustainable socioeconomic development in
countries in post-conflict situations. We cannot expect
to build peace if at the same time we ignore the need
of the people to meet their most basic socioeconomic
needs, secure the means to earn a living and provide
the basis for inclusive development with social justice.
Therefore, giving people the means to join the economy
and integrate into society and creating the foundation
for inclusive, sustainable and equitable growth should
be part of any peacebuilding process. However, little
or no attention at all is directed towards meeting
those needs. There is not even clarity in studies or
in institutional practice on how to re-energize the
economies and institutions of countries emerging
from conflict. For Venezuela, that is one of the central
issues of peacebuilding, which should be given the
requisite attention.
On the other hand, the recovery of countries
emerging from conflicts must not include coercive
measures on the part of international institutions that
place onerous and unfair conditions on those countries,
particularly if those measures violate the country’s
sovereignty. There is a need for more resources to the
socioeconomic development of countries emerging

16-0478423/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

from conflict that include differentiated and beneficial
conditions. Preferential and differentiated conditions
should be established in the international financial
system in order to provide direct support to countries
that have brought war to an end and do not want to go
back to the path of conflict. In particular, we have been
very concerned that countries emerging from conflict
should have the necessary capacities to manage their
own economies and natural resources — a necessity for
all our countries.
As Latin Americans, we find two cases to be
emblematic cases, namely, those of Haiti and Colombia.
The case of Haiti serves to illustrate the need to
maintain both respect for a country’s sovereignty and
ongoing support to help it overcome terrible economic
conditions left after so many years of conflict. And the
case of Colombia gives us hope that the international
community will help the Colombian people to navigate
peace and create the necessary social and economic
conditions so that such a heartbreaking conflict never
again reoccurs.
I would like once again to acknowledge the vision
of the late former Secretary-General Boutros BoutrosGhali, whom we pay tribute to. We sincerely hope
that today’s open debate will lead us to think further
about how the international community and the United
Nations can address peacebuilding and contribute to
the consultation and negotiation processes to take place
in other United Nations organs.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I would like to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to a maximum of four minutes, so that
the Council can carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to distribute their texts in writing and deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber. I
would also like to appeal to speakers to deliver their
statements at a reasonable speed, so that the interpreters
can perform their job as precisely as possible. I wish to
inform all concerned that we will be continuing this
open debate right through the lunch hour, as we have a
very large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Igor
Lukšić, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs and European Integration of Montenegro.
24/71

23/02/2016

Mr. Lukšić (Montenegro): Montenegro is pleased is
pleased to contribute to this important open debate and
commends Venezuela’s strong commitment to the issue
before us. We thank the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture for
its valuable review report (see S/2015/490), as well as
today’s briefers for their valuable presentations, which
have reminded us of the relevance of this agenda item
to the Security Council.
Montenegro aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the observer of the European Union.
However, I would like to make some additional remarks
in my national capacity.
The challenges that we face today are real and
serious. The effects of the evolving nature of modern
conflicts and the more complex security landscape will
be felt for years to come, but the landmark achievements
of the past year, especially those marked by the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1), offer hope and an opportunity
to make substantial changes for the common good. The
three reviews initiated under the peace and security
pillar are also critical to our work within those valuable
guidelines and to efforts to improve our response to the
changing global security environment. The time has
come, therefore, for challenges to be addressed more
decisively by a strengthened and more effective United
Nations, as the vision of our founding fathers has not
yet been fully carried out. Allow me to concentrate on
several issues.
I find the Advisory Group of Experts’ report
particularly relevant to our discussion today and as well
as to our future activities with regard to peacebuilding.
It is striking that, after all of our accumulated experience
and institutional memory, we have stated today that
peace is underrecognized, underprioritized and
underresourced, not only globally but also within the
United Nations. That especially concerns the prevention
of conflicts, and that is why I would like to underline
the significance of the United Nations early detection
and early warning mechanisms. The Security Council
must consider how to make better use of the options at
its disposal for preventing the emergence of conflicts.
We believe that a shift from the perception of failures to
act to a culture of prevention or early action continues
to be essential and require political will and leadership
on the part of all actors. Montenegro highly values the
Human Rights Up Front initiative and strongly supports
efforts to make it a greater priority. Mediation must
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

S/PV.7629

also receive greater attention and resources, because it
represents such a cost-effective tool.

values of the respect for life, justice, solidarity, human
rights and equality between women and men.

Another aspect to consider is the establishment
of closer and more frequent dialogues between the
Security Council and the Geneva-based human rights
architecture, especially with special procedures mandate
holders and with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. Their capacities and
recommendations can prove to be valuable in directing
attention to the human rights violations and risk
factors that could cause the escalation of crises. As a
member State of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
Montenegro believes that the Commission’s potential
could be better exploited by keeping in mind its unique
role. We also believe that it is necessary to further
improve the complementarity of the work carried out by
the PBC and the Security Council, in order to maximize
their joint impact in preventing conflict and in sustaining
peace. The cooperation partnership between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
the area of peacebuilding should also be strengthened,
based on each party’s comparative advantage, with a
view to enhancing their global impact. They possess
valuable assets, such as knowledge and understanding
of the crisis; but, of equal importance, they ensure the
involvement of the countries that are directly affected.

We should keep in mind that the risk of extremism,
terrorism, organized crime and conflict increases where
people have no education and no hope for the future, and
where there is exclusion and a lack of development. It
drives migration from countries emerging from conflict,
experiencing fragile peace and institution-building, and
where reform is of crucial importance. The promotion
of efforts to sustain peace must be broadly shared and
involve all groups of society, particularly women and
youth. We should recognize women as vital assets for
societies, and not simply as victims. The potential of
youth should also be utilized and not undermined, as
is often the case. We believe that it is crucial to involve
women and youth in the peacebuilding process as
stakeholders and decision-makers. That enables them
to acquire ownership of the policies that affect them
and all of us.

It is a fact that development is considered to be the
best resilience-builder of all. That is why achieving
sustainable development is seen as an essential
conflict-prevention tool. Addressing human rights
violations as early as possible and ensuring respect
for human rights are also crucial to peacebuilding.
That brings us to the very pertinent, yet challenging,
issue of the interconnectedness and reinforcement of
the three pillars of the United Nations. There is an
obvious need for a more comprehensive and integrated
approach to peacebuilding through peace and security
development and human rights engagement within the
prescribed mandates. We must work towards enhancing
partnerships among the main United Nations bodies in
order to avoid fragmentation and build coherence in
collective efforts at intergovernmental and operational
levels. Without that kind of approach, our progress
will be limited in its results and effects. However, the
maintenance of international peace and security is not
only a task to be carried out by the United Nations and
other international organizations. It is a process of
individual, collective and institutional transformation, a
process of inclusive development based on the universal

Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): Hungary supports all
efforts aimed at making peacebuilding more effective
and recognizes the need to apply a holistic and
integrated approach to sustaining peace. I wish to
thank Venezuela for having convened this very timely
open debate.

Montenegro will continue to play its part in
efforts to contribute to a more effective peacebuilding
architecture and ensure a comprehensive approach
to peacebuilding.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.

While we fully support the statement to be delivered
later on behalf of the European Union, please allow me
to add several observations in my national capacity.
First, we believe that much stronger emphasis
should be placed on conflict prevention through early
engagement and by using all available tools for early
warning and political mediation in order to prevent
the outbreak or escalation of conflicts. We fully
believe that peacebuilding must be understood as an
inherently political process that requires strengthening
the synergy among the related efforts of conflict
prevention, peacemaking, peacekeeping, recovery and
development. Hungary also particularly welcomes the
call for strengthening the role of global and regional
partnerships aimed at peacebuilding, with a special
focus on prevention and mediation. We believe that

16-0478425/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

there is a need to further strengthen the formal and
informal mechanisms of engagement at the strategic
level, including, if possible, through the adoption
by the Security Council of a clearer methodology
for consulting with its counterparts at the regional
and subregional levels. We are of the view that the
great potential for effective partnerships between the
United Nations and international financial institutions
should be fully utilized. In addition, we consider the
engagement of civil society, religious leaders, local
communities and women and youth groups as also being
essential in assisting the realization of sustained peace.

23/02/2016

Mrs. Bailey: Like other speakers before me,
let me start by commending you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important Security Council open
debate on the theme “Post-conflict peacebuilding:
review of the peacebuilding architecture”. I would
also like to thank the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Ambassador Kamau; the former Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador
Skoog; as well as Ambassador De Aguiar Patriota and
Ambassador Rosenthal, for their respective briefings.

The Hungarian Government is of the view that,
in order to be successful in preventing conflicts or
rebuilding conflict-torn countries, we must tackle the
root causes. Hungary, as co-Chair of the Open Working
Group on Sustainable Development Goals, worked
with Member States to ensure that Goal 16 explicitly
recognized the linkage between peace, inclusion,
sustainable development, justice and accountability.

Today’s open debate is very timely, as we are
reaching the final stages of the review process of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture. The African
Union (AU) attaches importance to that process, which
represents, in our view, an excellent opportunity not
only to improve the orientation and functioning of
the institutional components of the peacebuilding
architecture, but also to strengthen its effectiveness in
helping the countries concerned to lay the foundation
for durable peace and development.

The importance of women’s participation in
peacebuilding cannot be overemphasized. Women are
crucial partners in the transition from war to peace.
They are key agents for promoting social cohesion,
political legitimacy and economic recovery. That is
especially relevant in places where peace has broken
down and conflict has shifted the focus away from
cooperation towards division and hatred. We hope that
the outcome of the peacebuilding review process will
adequately recognize that fact.

As everyone is aware, Africa has been the major
regional focus of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture over the past decade. All of the countries on
the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission are from
Africa. African countries have received approximately
80 per cent of the Peacebuilding Fund’s allocations over
the period 2007 to 2014. Therefore, the experience of the
African countries on the Peacebuilding Commission’s
agenda offers a vital source of lessons learned that
could benefit the ongoing review process.

In that context, I would also like to stress that
education in general — in particular that of women,
youth and marginalized groups — also has an important
role to play, both in preventing conflicts and in postconflict peacebuilding. We deem the realization of
the right to education to be the cornerstone of lasting
peace, since ignorance, misunderstanding, the erosion
of culture and the loss of cultural identity are often the
starting points for fanaticism and conflicts.

Despite the general improvement in the conflict
situations on the continent, recent experiences have
clearly shown that the risk of relapse into conflict
remains very high and that the peacebuilding gains are
still very fragile, in particular during the early stages
of a transition, as demonstrated by the Ebola crisis
in West Africa. It is important, therefore, to identify
policies and programmes that allow three initiatives
to be undertaken: first, addressing the root causes
of conflicts; secondly, speeding up reconstruction
activities; and, thirdly, consolidating peace, thereby
preventing a return to violence.

Let me conclude my statement by emphasizing
that ensuring accountability for serious international
crimes — given its proven deterrent effect — should
be a key component of peacebuilding efforts. Bringing
perpetrators to justice helps to heal the wounds of
societies torn apart by such crimes.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the African Union.
26/71

Throughout that process, international support
will amount to little if no corresponding effort exists
to mobilize adequate resources for the implementation
of the priorities defined. Needless to say, the challenges
facing countries emerging from conflict are enormous.
They often include the need to transform war16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

weakened economies and highly polarized political
and social relations, as well as the need to strengthen
the State apparatus so that Governments can fulfil the
roles critical to social and economic well-being. No
significant progress can be made without adequate
financial resources and technical assistance to assist
the countries concerned in facing those challenges.
Over the past decade, the African Union has
increasingly affirmed its readiness and capacity to
engage in peacebuilding activities based on the African
Union post-conflict reconstruction and development
policy, adopted in 2006, as well as on the relevant
provisions of the protocol relating to the establishment
of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union.
As part of the implementation of the policy, the AU
Commission has undertaken a number of measures.
They include the identification of experts to be included
in an African experts database on peacebuilding, the
development of guidelines for the implementation
of specific activities related to the policy and the
organization of assessment missions to countries
emerging from conflict. The AU has also raised funds
to support quick-impact projects in countries emerging
from conflict, including Liberia, Côte d’Ivoire, the
Comoros and South Sudan, so as to lay the foundation
for long-term sustainable development. In addition,
in 2012, the AU launched the African Solidarity
Initiative, which is aimed at mobilizing a higher level
of support, particularly from Africa, for post-conflict
reconstruction and development efforts. The initiative
was designed to encourage, motivate and empower
African countries to begin systematically offering
assistance to post-conflict countries.
In that context, the AU Peace and Security Council
made the following suggestions to the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) for advancing the
partnership between the two institutions, based on the
principles of complementarity, comparative advantage
and collaboration:
First, the PBC and the AU should cooperate to
develop a common assessment of the nature and scope
of the peacebuilding challenges facing the countries
concerned. They should also agree on a division of
tasks, with each institution responsible for providing
support in the peacebuilding sphere.
Secondly, the PBC and the AU should develop a
more frequent and structured dialogue. In that regard,
the first engagement between the PBC and the African

S/PV.7629

Union’s Peace and Security Council, in 2014, should be
followed up and become institutionalized so as to gain
greater coherence on strategic priorities between the
PBC and the PSC.
Thirdly, the high-level exchanges between the AU
and the PBC need to be underpinned by a desk-to-desk
exchange between the Peacebuilding Support Office,
the relevant departments of the AU Commission and
the relevant parts of regional mechanisms.
Fourthly, the PBC should encourage AU efforts,
including by supporting the African Solidarity Initiative
in developing its database of support from African
countries to other countries emerging from conflict.
In conclusion, the AU hopes that the ongoing
United Nations review will provide concrete results that
will improve the implementation of the noble agenda of
peacebuilding. For its part, the AU remains committed
to assuming its responsibilities in that regard in full
cooperation with the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank today’s
briefers and commend the presidency of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela for convening this open debate
on the review of the peacebuilding architecture at a time
when we are at a crossroads, confronted by protracted
conflicts, violent extremism, cyberinsecurity and
destabilized societies — problems that are in turn
aggravated by climate change, cross-border economic
shocks, transnational crime and massive population
flows. We therefore need to assess the performance
and impact of the peacebuilding architecture thus far
in preventing conflicts and providing human security.
My delegation supports the recommendations
contained in the report (see S/2015/490) of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture aimed at the full realization of the
peacebuilding architecture’s functions, resources and
modes of engagement, as well as its links with the
United Nations system.
First, peacebuilding needs to be associated
primarily with the post-conflict phase, but it must also
be integrated from the very start in all United Nations
efforts involving conflict-prevention and -resolution
mechanisms.

16-0478427/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Secondly, the original design and interventions
should be more comprehensive and long-term so as to
suit contemporary and future environments, as well as
be able to adapt to the changing nature of conflicts.
Therefore, the Security Council must work closely with
the Peacebuilding Commission to ensure the proper
financing and use of the resources of the Peacebuilding
Fund and field support offices.
Thirdly, it is critical that the United Nations system
achieve greater internal coherence among its agencies
and country teams on the ground, as well as with host
countries and regional structures and organizations.
National ownership, the mobilization of civil society
and close cooperation with Special Representatives,
special missions and peacekeeping operations are also
crucial to a successful peacebuilding architecture.
The peacebuilding architecture should fully
incorporate the goals and principles of the Human
Rights Council and the responsibility to protect, inter
alia, by adopting tailor-made strategies. No two conflict
situations are the same, as each one is tied to multiple
different domestic and international actors with varied
agendas. Hence, the peacebuilding architecture requires
multisectoral and interdisciplinary strategies aimed
at national and local ownership, capacity-building,
inclusive institution-building, mutual accountability
and risk management, as well as at building resilience.
That involves the intersection of security and
development, with distinct pillars, including reforms in
public safety, the rule of law, good governance, justice,
human rights, reconciliation and ending impunity. In
addition, other key priorities include socioeconomic
reconstruction and psychosocial rehabilitation.
In order to ensure peace and security, my country,
Kazakhstan,
is
undertaking
multidimensional
measures at the national, regional and international
levels in the fields of preventive diplomacy, economic
and social development and inter-ethnic and
interreligious dialogue. We have adopted our National
Strategy 2050, which provides the conditions needed
for the ongoing equitable and inclusive political and
economic development of the country in order to lay
the groundwork for social stability.
We are strengthening inter-ethnic and interreligious
unity by fostering dialogue and cooperation among the
130 nationalities residing in the country through the
Assembly of People of Kazakhstan and the triennial
Congress of the Leaders of World and Traditional
28/71

23/02/2016

Religions. We strongly believe that religion, morality,
ethics and tolerance foster peace and stability, and we
have therefore initiated a high-level forum on religions
for peace, to be held in May in New York, under the
patronage of the President of the General Assembly.
Last year President Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan
proposed the elaboration of a global development
strategy to eliminate conflicts for all time, and the
allocation of 1 per cent of national military expenditures
to the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals
Fund.
In addition, Kazakhstan provides humanitarian
and development assistance to the most vulnerable
countries. I hope that the ongoing joint initiatives
between my Government and the United Nations
Development Programme in Africa and the Economic
and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific in the
Pacific region on behalf of the small island developing
States and our work with the Caribbean Community
demonstrate our continuing commitment to peace,
security, stability and prosperity.
We are determined to share in the efforts of the
global community to build a more environmentally
friendly world, with a particular focus on water,
energy and nuclear security, which are the pillars of
my country’s campaign for election to a non-permanent
seat in the Security Council for the term 2017-2018. We
are strongly committed to contributing to the extent
possible to the Council’s peacebuilding mandate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Hallergard: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.
I would like to thank the Venezuelan presidency of
the Security Council for organizing this timely open
debate on the review of the peacebuilding architecture
and for providing the Council and the United Nations
as a whole with this opportunity to reflect on ways to
improve and strengthen the performance and impact
of the peacebuilding architecture. Allow me also to
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

thank Ambassador Kamau, Ambassador Skoog and
Ambassador Rosenthal for their valuable briefings.
The European Union reiterates the great importance
it attaches to an ambitious outcome of the review and
will continue to be actively engaged in the process.
We fully subscribe to the conclusions of the report
(see S/2015/490) of the Advisory Group of Experts on
the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture that a
change in mindset is needed. Peacebuilding is no longer
to be seen as a post-conflict activity, as the challenge
of sustaining peace covers the complete cycle of our
engagement. Given the recurrent nature of violent
conflict, sustaining peace equals conflict prevention in
many cases.
Once again, we would like to underscore the
utmost importance of linking the peacebuilding review
to the Secretary-General’s review of peace operations,
the review of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, and the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1), including the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda on financing for sustainable
development. Linking the recommendations of those
crucial reviews and processes should help to ensure
maximum coherence in United Nations actions. In that
regard, we welcome the high-level thematic debate to be
held by the President of the General Assembly in May,
as well as the invitation on the part of the Economic
and Social Council to pursue its cooperation with the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), which should take
into account the follow-up and review processes for
the 2030 Agenda, including the role of the High-level
Political Forum on Sustainable Development.
Peacebuilding was conceived in order to address the
gap between security and development in fragile postconflict countries. A basic premise is that peacebuilding
should be carried out at the country level and always
adjusted to the specific country context. To be truly
effective in its response in fragile States, the United
Nations system needs to work in a more integrated,
flexible and coordinated fashion, at both the country
and the Headquarters levels, and give more weight to
prevention and early-warning tools. There are already
good examples of strengthened cooperation between
United Nations entities in the field of peacebuilding
and conflict prevention, in particular through the
joint United Nations Development Programme/
Department of Political Affairs programme on building
national capacities for conflict prevention. Lessons

S/PV.7629

and experiences from that programme could offer an
opportunity for useful reflection on a more integrated
and flexible United Nations approach to peacebuilding.
Peacebuilding is an inherently political process that
should be carried out on the basis of a long-term vision
and a holistic approach. It should address the structural
causes of conflict as well as the contemporary risks
of recurrence, provide for inclusive and participatory
political processes, build strong and effective
institutions capable of addressing the root causes of
conflict and be responsive to people’s needs. It should
promote inclusive national ownership on the part of the
Government, the opposition and civil society, using a
bottom-up approach.
Special attention should be paid to vulnerable
or excluded groups, including ethnic or religious
minorities, political opposition groups, youth and other
segments of society that are at particular risk. The
role of women in peace consolidation should be given
particular attention, in terms of both participation
and representation, taking into account the principles
outlined in the 2030 Agenda and resolution 1325 (2000).
That is important, both in its own right and because
we know that by doing so we increase the chances of
sustaining peace. The human rights dimension should,
in general, be integrated into peacebuilding, both as
an overall objective and as an important early-warning
tool.
In addition, the analytical capacities of the
Peacebuilding Commission should be strengthened in
order to better monitor ongoing activities and assess
the impact of the international efforts on the ground.
The cooperation of the PBC with the authorities of
the host State is important with the aim of promoting
national ownership of the peacebuilding efforts and the
transfer of responsibilities from United Nations actors
to national authorities.
The PBC’s greatest comparative advantage is its
convening power: the ability to call to task a large
number of Member States, regional and subregional
organizations and help reconcile their approaches.
But its ability to deliver this political added value is
hampered by a number of factors. Some countryspecific configurations of the PBC have taken a more
flexible and politically attuned approach, and lessons
should be learned from these experiences. Different,
especially lighter, modes of engagement for the PBC
should be envisaged.

16-0478429/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

23/02/2016

With regard to securing more predictable financing
for peacebuilding, the EU believes it is important to
address the silo approach of the donor community. The
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) has achieved significant
results, but the PBF is a small-scale strategic fund that
has to be followed and complemented by longer-term
commitments from other financing sources, which may
be bilateral or multilateral, including multilateral and
regional development banks. For its part, the EU has
already engaged in joint funding for peacebuilding
projects via our Instrument contributing to Stability
and Peace, and further opportunities for joint funding
should be explored.

Close strategic and operational partnerships
between the United Nations and international, regional
and subregional organizations and international
financial institutions are also required in order to address
the challenge of sustaining peace. The EU believes that
this should be part of an ongoing dialogue between the
United and those organizations and go beyond holding
annual dialogues or high-level working meetings.

The EU is keen to work in increasing partnership
with the United Nations, including on the ground. The
EU and the United Nations are as development actors
collaborating closely in the field and are also engaged
in a dialogue on conflict prevention that should be
built on to further identify comparative advantages
and opportunities for partnership. This includes raising
the importance of prevention and early warning on
the political agenda, including through international
networks such as the International Dialogue on
Peacebuilding and State-building.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.

In addition, the EU and the United Nations have
built a strong and continuously evolving partnership
in crisis management. EU Common Security and
Defence Policy (CSDP) missions, such as the European
Union military mission to contribute to the training
of the Malian Armed Forces, the European Union
Capacity Building Mission in Mali and the European
Union CSDP Military Advisory Mission in the Central
African Republic, focusing on security-sector reform
and capacity-building, contribute to peacebuilding
processes in a complementary way to United Nations
peace operations.
More generally, in the context of its comprehensive
approach to external conflict and crises, which aims
to enhance the coherence, effectiveness and impact of
the EU’s policy and action, the European Union seeks
to develop close coordination with the relevant United
Nations entities on the ground. This is in particular
the case already for peacebuilding or State-building
projects such as support for accountability mechanisms,
the criminal justice chain and community policing. A
shared conflict analysis is a good starting point for
such cooperation.
30/71

We look forward to the review producing bold,
concrete and focused outcomes to improve the
architecture so as to ensure effective, well-coordinated
and complementary peacebuilding efforts throughout
the United Nations system.

Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this open debate on a subject that is vital to current
discussions in our Organization. I should like also to
thank Ambassadors Rosenthal, Kamau and Skoog for
their very valuable contributions to today’s debate.
The year 2015 was key to refocusing the actions of
the United Nations in the areas of peacebuilding and
peacekeeping, through the review of the peacebuilding
architecture, the work of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations and the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2015/716), all of which constitute key tools in
refocusing the strategies of the United Nations for
action on and support for the process of reform that we
have undertaken.
I should like to highlight three actions in
that context.
First, there is a need to expand the scope of the
concept of peacebuilding to include sustainable peace,
as Ambassador Rosenthal said, on the understanding
that each case is different, because not all processes are
equal, and the United Nations must tailor its actions to
the particular requirements of each situation.
The strategy of reacting to crises in an international
situation that is increasingly complex is neither sufficient
nor sustainable for the United Nations; peacebuilding
must be a focus before, during and following conflicts.
Secondly, preventive action accompanied by
inclusive national ownership is the best alternative for
countries that find themselves on the verge of conflicts
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

and that decide to seek the support of United Nations.
This helps to prevent the human and economic toll of
a confrontation. In that respect, we would reiterate the
importance of institutionalizing women’s participation
in peace and reconciliation processes.
Thirdly, we need to promote coherence in terms
of peacebuilding strategies and resources throughout
the United Nations system and its principal organs,
including the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council. Ambassador
Rosenthal has called for action to break down silos
so as to strengthen support for and the advisory role
played by the Peacebuilding Commission, with the
assistance of the Peacebuilding Support Office and the
Peacebuilding Fund.
Ensuring that there is an impact on the ground,
as has been described very clearly by some speakers
here, and responding to expectations and mandates will
be possible only if we have sufficient, predictable and
sustainable resources for peacebuilding on the very long
road travelled by countries emerging from conflict. We
must adjust our priorities if we truly wish to achieve
sustainable peace and deepen our associations with
various actors, including the international financial
institutions and regional and subregional organizations,
which must play a more relevant role in peacebuilding.
That is what we are doing today in the context of our
own regional organization, the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States, in the peace process
in Colombia, for which the Security Council fittingly
expressed its support.
Colombia is convinced that in order to enhance
the impact of the Organization’s peacebuilding
efforts, peacebuilding must go hand in hand with the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1). The
universal, indivisible and comprehensive nature of the
Agenda is a reflection of the fact that there can be no
sustainable development without peace and no peace
without sustainable development.
We nations that know full well the difficulties
involved in achieving peace are well aware that the
road is not easy, but we are convinced that we will
be able to reach our goal. My country, Colombia, has
undertaken a number of innovative, sometimes risky,
political processes and actions, in a sort of collective
endeavour aimed at achieving a sustainable peace after
some 50 years of conflict. It is Colombia’s hope that it

S/PV.7629

will be one of the many success stories in the context
of achieving peace and that the lessons that we have
learned will make a contribution to those that, like us,
are on the path towards peacebuilding.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to congratulate the Mission of Venezuela
for having brought to the attention of the Security
Council an issue that is very important to Brazil.
(spoke in English)
Let me thank the current Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), Ambassador Kamau of Kenya,
as well as Ambassador Olof Skoog of Sweden and
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal of Guatemala for setting
the right tone for this debate today.
This open debate is timely, as it takes place at the
intergovernmental stage of the review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture. We have before
us a unique opportunity to provide the appropriate
normative framework and resources for the United
Nations to fulfil its core objective of sustaining peace.
Because of its universal membership, the General
Assembly should play a leading role in this debate.
As rightly underscored in the concept note
(S/2016/104, annex) circulated for this meeting, the
notion of peacebuilding has evolved since the adoption
of General Assembly resolution 60/180 and Security
Council resolutions 1645 (2005) and 1646 (2005). In
that regard, I would like to acknowledge the valuable
work undertaken by the Chair of the Advisory Group of
Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture,
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal, which sheds light on the
fundamental debate regarding how to strengthen the
United Nations approach to sustaining peace.
The Advisory Group’s report (see S/2015/490)
underscores that the peacebuilding architecture
cannot be understood as exclusively limited to the
Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding Fund
and the Peacebuilding Support Office. With regard to
the concept of sustaining peace, the report stresses the
importance of a broader and more integrated approach
to peacebuilding, which would require the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council to work in partnership, each within
the particular purview and scope conferred on it by
the Charter of the United Nations. With respect to the

16-0478431/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

four areas suggested for debate in the concept note, we
would like to highlight the following issues.
Brazil is convinced that the lack of adequate and
predictable financing is a fundamental challenge
to long-term peacebuilding efforts. It is therefore
critical that we agree on the need to strengthen the
Peacebuilding Fund by directing resources to it from
assessed contributions. It is also important to enable
peacekeeping missions to utilize resources from their
budgets to finance programmatic activities.
We also concur that sustaining peace requires longterm engagement on the part of the United Nations
system. A comprehensive approach to sustaining
peace should address the need for eradicating poverty,
promoting socioeconomic development and gender
equality, building full-fledged institutions, promoting
national reconciliation, improving governance and
developing more inclusive societies. Those strategies
for peacebuilding should be implemented in close
coordination with national authorities, while taking
into account the priorities established and the need for
national ownership at all stages.
Another aspect to be emphasized is the importance
of development in peacebuilding. The United Nations
experience in conflict situations has demonstrated that
sustainable peace requires a comprehensive approach
to security, which involves considering the root causes
of conflict and the social and economic situation on
the ground.
Following the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution
70/1), we now have a multilateral framework for
promoting sustainable development. We should bear in
mind that the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
are of a universal nature. In that sense, Goal 16, which
speaks of promoting peaceful and inclusive societies
for sustainable development and of providing access
to justice for all and building effective, accountable
and inclusive institutions at all levels, is aimed at all
Member States. An interpretation according to which
Goal 16 is directed only at conflict and post-conflict
situations would disregard the universality of the SDGs
and could indirectly lead to the mistaken assumption
that violence and instability exist mainly in poor or less
developed regions.
Brazil is of the view that the Peacebuilding
Commission has a unique role to play in its advisory
capacity to the Security Council, the Economic
32/71

23/02/2016

and Social Council and the General Assembly, and
is well positioned to serve as an integrative forum
for discussing the development-related aspects of
sustaining peace. It should also be stressed that
sustaining peace is a task that encompasses the three
pillars of the United Nations, which are interdependent
and mutually reinforcing. We commend the fact that the
current Chair of the PBC and former Chair of the Open
Working Group on the SDGs, Ambassador Macharia
Kamau, is already bringing his considerable expertise
amassed in the area of sustainable development to the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission.
On the role of regional and subregional organizations
in peacebuilding, Brazil supports enhancing cooperation
in that area and building on the example of regional
arrangements made for peacekeeping under Chapter
VIII of the Charter. Regional and subregional partners
are usually well placed to have a better understanding
of the situation on the ground and could positively
influence it. However, a case-by-case analysis of the
convenience of such arrangements should always
be conducted.
Finally, I would like to stress the importance of the
other two review processes launched by the SecretaryGeneral, namely, that on United Nations peacekeeping
and that on women and peace and security, and the
need to ensure coherence among their outcomes. It is
noteworthy that the three reports on those processes
propose to advance the primacy of politics and conflict
prevention. Brazil fully supports those goals, which we
believe should constitute the basis for revamping the
peace and security pillar of the Organization.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): As we meet today in the
Security Council, we all know — all too well — how
fleeting peace can be. As the Secretary-General has
reminded us time and again, countries that experience
armed conflict often remain at risk of relapsing into
violence for years after the conflict has ended. Some
90 per cent of conflicts between 2000 and 2009
occurred in countries that had previously experienced
civil war.
We meet with the benefit of the insights provided
by three seminal reports concluded in 2015 — that of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture (see S/2015/490), the review
of United Nations peace operations (see S/2015/446),
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

and the Global Study on the implementation of United
Nations Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
(S/2015/716). Like others, I welcome the participation
of Ambassador Rosenthal, Chair of the Advisory Group
of Experts, in today’s debate. Together, those reports
lay out a clear framework for how the United Nations
can better work to achieve the goal of the Charter of the
United Nations of saving succeeding generations from
the scourge of war.
Central to that vision is the need to achieve
sustainable peace, which is not a nebulous concept.
Rather, it clarifies the fact that in order to achieve
just, meaningful and lasting peace we must prioritize
peacebuilding across the complete cycle of United
Nations engagement, from conflict prevention and
resolution through to reconciliation and recovery.
Sustainable peace requires us to take a longer-term
perspective in our efforts to maintain international
peace and security. It requires intergovernmental and
operational coherence among the principal United
Nations organs and United Nations agencies and
between Headquarters and the field. That needs to
be supported by integrated analysis, planning, policy
development and implementation.
Sustaining peace requires drawing together the
United Nations political, peace and security, human
rights, development and humanitarian arms, and
demands a whole-of-the-United Nations approach.
Fundamentally, it recognizes that to be sustainable,
peace must be nationally owned and inclusive of all,
particularly women, youth and civil society. And it
acknowledges that the scale of the challenge requires
close strategic and operational partnerships between the
United Nations and other key stakeholders, including
regional and subregional organizations, multilateral
financial institutions and the private sector.
As co-Chair of the intergovernmental phase of the
review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture,
along with the Ambassador of Angola, Australia was
given the task of translating the widely supported vision
for United Nations peacebuilding set out in the Advisory
Group of Experts report into parallel draft resolutions
of the Security Council and General Assembly. Our
consultations are ongoing. We have been pleased by the
constructive spirit in which they are being held and the
strong demand that we are hearing from Member States
for a more comprehensive approach to United Nations
peacebuilding. That includes broad acknowledgement

S/PV.7629

that adequate, predictable and sustained financing
is essential to support United Nations system-wide
peacebuilding efforts.
I would like to conclude by stating that today’s
debate is not about the scale or nature of the crises
facing the world, or whether the human cost of those
crises is too high. Those aspects are a given. The
question is how we seize the opportunity before us to
change how we conceive of and do peacebuilding and
how we ensure that our most vulnerable people — those
in conflict-affected countries — are not left behind in
our implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1).
Sustaining peace represents a crucial change in
mindset with regard to how the United Nations does
peacebuilding. It is not a new concept. Rather, it goes
to the very heart of the goals of the Charter. Australia
is committed to working closely with all Member States
to find consensus in that effort.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I wish to thank the President and
his delegation for convening this open debate, which
gives us an opportunity to discuss the review of the
peacebuilding architecture and United Nations efforts
to sustain peace.
Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union and wishes to add
the following remarks in its national capacity.
The year 2016 is one of opportunities to strengthen
the capacity of the United Nations to deliver as one.
It is our responsibility to improve the peacebuilding
efforts of the whole United Nations system — first
and foremost by ensuring coherent action on the part
of all the relevant stakeholders. In that perspective,
it is of the utmost importance to take an integrated
approach to the three major reviews under way — the
future of peacekeeping, the role of women in peace and
security, and the architecture of peacebuilding. In that
connection, I would like to thank Ambassador Rosenthal
for the very important report (see S/2015/490) produced
by the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacekeeping Architecture.
As a member of the Organizational Committee of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), Italy is confident
that, under the leadership of the new Chair, Ambassador
Macharia Kamau of Kenya, the former Chair from

16-0478433/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Sweden and the Chairs of the country-specific
configurations, this will be another year of significant
achievements. In addition, the ambitious outcome of
the review, which we expect to see reflected in the draft
resolution on the subject to be prepared by the end of
March, will pave the way for a strengthened PBC.
There is growing awareness of the importance
of the PBC’s bridging role through its preventive and
multidimensional approach to conflict in the face of
rapidly changing security challenges. Massive migration
flows, climate change and human rights violations are
notable examples of crisis drivers, and their growing
impact on international peace and security deserves
our attention. In that framework, Italy believes that the
ongoing review of the peacebuilding architecture, under
the leadership of Australia and Angola, should reshape
the PBC to make it a more complete tool, thereby
enhancing the overall capacity of the United Nations in
the field of preventive diplomacy. Peacebuilding must
happen before a conflict erupts. The PBC can play an
important role in bringing together all the relevant
stakeholders, both inside and outside the United
Nations. We therefore support a closer relationship
between the Security Council and the PBC, which we
consider a valuable tool available to the Council to
enhance its capacity at preventive diplomacy. As a first
practical measure, we believe that closer cooperation
between the Security Council and the PBC could be
ensured by inviting the Chairs of the country-specific
configurations to participate in Council meetings,
as appropriate.
However, the United Nations should not be seen
as the sole peacebuilding actor, but rather as the main
global enabler of partnerships to sustain peace. It can
and must ensure greater cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, multilateral institutions and
non-governmental organizations, among which there
are many active in the field of preventive diplomacy. The
United Nations development system has a fundamental
role to play in that regard, as its work on the field is
based on a fruitful collaboration with all actors.
While virtually all Member States acknowledge the
importance of long-term solutions to conflict, resources
and the necessary political attention to peacebuilding
are sorely lacking. There is widespread agreement on
the need to secure more predictable funding. In that
connection, as recently announced, Italy has decided
to resume its contributions to the Peacebuilding
Fund throughout 2016, and is committed to ensuring
34/71

23/02/2016

more predictable funds for peacebuilding as a whole.
But we also need to deploy alternative resources
for peacebuilding activities, which can include
non-monetary contributions as well as contributions
from the private sector. We should foster cooperation
within the United Nations system, with the World Bank
and with other regional and international financial
institutions in order to assist affected countries in
the mobilization and use of domestic resources for
economic and social development. That is of course
essential for preventing both the risk of conflict and
relapsing into conflict.
I will conclude by highlighting an issue that Italy
believes is at the core of building peaceful and inclusive
societies, namely, the protection and safeguarding of
cultural heritage. The preservation of cultural heritage,
in particular from terrorist acts and trafficking, and the
promotion of and respect for cultural diversity are key
elements in reconciliation and peacebuilding processes.
No society can flourish without culture; no mutual
relationship can be established without respecting
people’s history and soul. For those reasons, building on
numerous previous activities, on 16 February Italy and
UNESCO signed a landmark agreement to establish a
task force to protect ancient cultural artefacts in crisis
areas. Such Blue Helmets of culture, as we have called
them, are a tangible sign of Italy’s commitment to the
Unite for Heritage campaign.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Bogaert (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
Venezuela for organizing this open debate.
Belgium aligns itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union. We wish to add some
remarks based on, inter alia, our participation in the
Burundi and Central African Republic configurations
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
Since the establishment of the peacebuilding
architecture, the peacebuilding paradigm has changed
substantially. At the policy level, the challenges
linked to involvement in conflict-affected countries
have been the subject of special attention, notably
within the framework of international networks such
as the New Deal for Engagement in Fragilе States
and the International Dialogue on Peacebuilding and
State-building.
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

The review of the peacebuilding architecture comes
several months after the adoption of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly
resolution 70/1), which entails a series of interrelated
Goals, including those on ensuring sustainable
peace, promoting peaceful and inclusive societies,
providing access to justice for all and strengthening
accountable and effective institutions. However, fragile
countries and those affected by conflict are precisely
those that have made the least progress towards the
achievement of the previous Millennium Development
Goals. Special attention to those countries and to the
challenges that they face in terms of peacebuilding
will be all the more necessary in order to ensure their
inclusive development through sustainable peace.
Belgium has therefore decided to allocate 50 per cent of
its official development assistance to fragile and least
developed countries.
That brings me to several thoughts on the work of
the Security Council and its follow-up to the situations
brought to its attention. These thoughts have also
been inspired by our contribution to the review of
peacekeeping operations. It will also be important
to take into account the review process regarding
resolution 1325 (2000) and the results of the upcoming
World Humanitarian Summit.
Ensuring lasting peace requires better and increased
investment in conflict prevention in order to prevent
countries from sliding into, or back into, conflict. While
progress has certainly been made, the situations that
have the attention of the Security Council — including
several protracted crises, the incredibly severe
humanitarian consequences of which have had a
devastating impact on civilians — demonstrate that
such efforts are not enough. Belgium therefore calls for
greater attention to be paid to the root causes, as well
as to the factors and early signs of conflict, based on
factual analysis.
Transition and exit strategies for peacekeeping
operations should also be better organized around
political processes, which should include disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, security-sector
reform, transitional justice, the strengthening of
institutions and capacity-building. Those processes
exceed the lifetime of the missions and illustrate the
need to better reflect the dimensions of peacebuilding
and development in an integrated approach to
sustainable peace. They also imply a political
commitment on the part of the host country to the

S/PV.7629

goals of the actions taken to achieve lasting peace, as
well as an inclusive dialogue with stakeholders on the
national plan. The role of civil society and women in
that inclusive dialogue will be crucial.
That leads me to mention the notion of coherence
and coordination in the activities of those involved
in peacebuilding. Given the scale and nature of the
conflicts that we encounter, a more coherent and
integrated approach and better coordination is needed,
both at Headquarters and in the field.
Based on those considerations, Belgium calls for a
far-reaching review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. As an advisory body of the Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission can certainly add value in
terms of early warning, conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and transition in harmony, acting in close
coordination with stakeholders at Headquarters and
in the field. In any event, we must strengthen the
interaction between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): I would like to thank
Venezuela for initiating this open debate on the
review of the peacebuilding architecture. This is a
timely opportunity to discuss how to build peace in a
challenging global context. With conflicts dramatically
increasing in number and changing in nature, there is
an urgency to develop a more fit-for-purpose United
Nations response.
Romania associates itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I would like now to make a few remarks from my
national perspective.
Former Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld
once said that the United Nations was created not to
lead humankind to heaven, but to save humanity from
hell. Indeed, the United Nations has saved millions
of lives from wars, poverty, diseases and starvation.
Today, its role is once again being dramatically tested
by the multiplication of threats posed to international
peace and security. In less than 10 years, the number
of major civil wars has almost tripled. More than
1.5 billion people live in countries affected by violent
conflicts. The nature of conflicts has changed as
well. We are witnessing the volatility of borders, the
disintegration of States, trafficking in natural resources

16-0478435/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

that finance terrorist groups and appalling violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law. In
many cases, the lack of solid institutions and fair and
transparent governance, and the presence of corruption
and the mismanagement of public funds, which cost
the global economy $2.6 trillion, have made States
vulnerable to terrorism and violent extremist groups.
Solving crises is costly, both financially and in terms
of human resources, and quite often the relapse of
countries into conflict is almost predictable.
More than ever, peacebuilding is intrinsically
linked to conflict-prevention. Preventing conflict is
considerably less expensive than responding to it after
the fact. It is also less divisive in the international
community, including in the Security Council, than
finding solutions after the outbreak of crisis. The United
Nations has at its disposal an impressive array of tools
to build peace. We see them in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution
70/1), in particular in Sustainable Development Goal
16, on peace, justice and strong institutions.
As last week we paid our respect to the late former
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, let me quote
from his 1996 An Agenda for Democratization, which
emphasizes the links between peace, development
and democracy:
“Without democratic institutions to channel popular
pressures for development and reform, popular
unrest and instability will result. The reality is that
no State can long ... have the potential to pursue
a successful and sustainable development strategy,
if its citizens are prohibited from participating
actively and substantially in its political processes
and economic, social and cultural development.”
( para. 25)
The reviews of peacebuilding and peace operations, the
report on mediation, the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism and his Human
Rights Up Front initiative are part of that same vision.
Building peace requires an integrated and crosscutting approach, because its multidimensional nature
poses challenges of coherence. We believe, therefore,
that increased involvement on the part of the Security
Council in preventive actions could help generate
strategic planning for peacebuilding.
Romania has invested in preventive diplomacy,
conflict prevention, peacebuilding and mediation. Ever
36/71

23/02/2016

since we became an official development assistance
donor country in 2007, we have devoted resources,
including at the United Nations level, to capacitybuilding for public institutions, election assistance,
public order, the campaign against corruption, youth
and education. As a Security Council member in
2005, Romania promoted resolution 1631 (2005), on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security. We think that much added value will come
from further developing partnerships with regional
organizations as an important tool for building trust in
conflict prevention and in post-conflict reconstruction.
In that respect, we also think that increased Security
Council engagement with regional organizations,
consistent with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, will bring a more focused and integrated
perspective to peacebuilding.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said at the launch
of his report for the coming World Humanitarian
Summit in Istanbul,
“We need to restore trust in our global order and
show those millions left behind in conflicts, in
chronic need and in constant fear, the solidarity
they deserve and expect from us.”
I believe we can do that only through peace and
stability. It requires good governance, opportunities
for young people and fighting violent extremism.
Those are the main challenges to a sustainable
peacebuilding architecture.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We thank Venezuela for
organizing today’s open debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding. In a world beset with conflicts, turmoil
and suffering, this is an opportune moment to discuss
that important subject.
Pakistan was among the pioneers promoting the idea
of a dedicated United Nations institutional mechanism
for peacebuilding. In 2004, Pakistan first proposed an
ad hoc arrangement to draw various United Nations
bodies together to address complex crises. Building on
that, Pakistan actively participated in discussions on
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) during the 2005
World Summit and the subsequent negotiations on and
adoption of General Assembly resolution 60/180, which
established the Commission.
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Peacebuilding works best, we feel, as an integral
part of a continuum — from conflict prevention
to peacekeeping to post-conflict reconstruction.
Peacekeepers, as early peacebuilders, help to lay the
foundation for durable peace. Unfortunately, the focus
of the international community has remained on the
conflict phase alone — so long as media attention is
focused there as well — to the detriment of the other
two phases. The support of the international community
often wanes with the departure of television crews in
the aftermath of conflict, which leaves the country
concerned with weak State institutions, a power
vacuum, a weak economy and a lack of financial
resources — the confluence of which is a recipe for a
descent into chaos.
Today, the bulk of peacekeeping resources are
deployed in multidimensional missions. Resolution
2086 (2013), adopted during Pakistan’s presidency of
the Security Council in January 2013, was a landmark
in that regard. It reinforced the strategic relationship
between peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
The Peacebuilding Commission has not been able to
live up to its promise. While it is an essential component
for supporting peacebuilding activities, including postconflict stabilization and the strengthening of the
capacity of Governments, national and local institutions
and transitional or other authorities, critical evaluation
and stocktaking is necessary.
The report (see S/2015/490) of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture is comprehensive and very thoughtful.
We commend Ambassador Gert Rosenthal and the
members of the Advisory Group for their work.
The report rightly places emphasis on prioritizing
peacebuilding, enhancing PBC’s interaction with the
principal organs of the United Nations and the need for
political, security and development actors to support
each other in striving for sustainable peace.
The failure to prioritize leads to tragic cycles of
relapse into turmoil and conflict. Addressing the root
causes of conflict is extremely important to avoid its
recurrence, but that obviously requires long-term
commitment and adequate and predictable financing.
Strengthened peacebuilding is in the interest of us
all. To achieve that, we need to give attention to the
following.
First, we must prioritize prevention. It may be
axiomatic to say this, but it remains true that the

S/PV.7629

best way to deal with growing humanitarian needs is
to address their root causes. Secondly, there should
be a holistic approach to sustaining peace, which
must involve conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
post-conflict recovery and reconstruction. Thirdly,
domestic resource mobilization needs to be given due
importance while working on enhancing international
financial support for peacebuilding and ensuring
its predictability. Fourthly, greater collaboration
should be encouraged between the United Nations
and the World Bank Group and other regional and
international partners in order to assist countries in the
mobilization and effective use of domestic resources.
Fifthly, inclusive national ownership is essential. In
the final analysis, only national actors can drive peace
processes. Sixthly, the PBC should present the Security
Council with concise, realistic and context-specific
recommendations and benchmarks, and the Council
should regularly request and draw upon the advice of the
Commission, especially while discussing mandates and
reviewing peacekeeping operations. Finally, for issues
such as the timing of mission transitions, decisions
should be based on discussions between among the
Security Council, the Secretariat, the relevant troopcontributing countries and national authorities in
conflict-afflicted countries.
Countries emerging from conflict face imposing
challenges as they seek to overcome the legacy of war
and find a durable path to peace and security. As we move
towards the final stage of the peacebuilding architecture
review process, what is critical is the acknowledgement
that the objective of those review efforts should be to
revitalize the peacebuilding mechanism to better assist
States and societies to recover from conflict and avoid
a calamitous return to violence.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): Today’s open
debate is both timely and practically relevant, as the
Security Council and the General Assembly are in the
process of reviewing the peacebuilding architecture,
with the objective of adopting parallel and identical
draft resolutions that will set out the framework of
United Nations peacebuilding for the next five years.
I commend the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
for choosing for this open debate a topic that can
contribute in a concrete and meaningful manner to
the ongoing intergovernmental negotiation process
on peacebuilding.

16-0478437/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

The Advisory Group of Experts on the
Review of Peacebuilding Architecture, chaired by
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal of Guatemala, produced a
comprehensive and aspirational report (see S/2015/490)
that contains key recommendations on how the United
Nations can improve its approach to peacebuilding. I
once again commend the Advisory Group of Experts’
efforts to provide us with a framework of ideas to tackle
the challenges that peacebuilding is facing.
In response to some of the questions raised in your
concept note (S/2016/104, annex), Sir, I wish to make
comments on two specific points.
First, one of the key challenges identified in
the report of the Advisory Group of Experts is that
peacebuilding is left as an afterthought: underprioritized, under-resourced and undertaken only after
the guns fall silent. We share that assessment and are of
the view that peacebuilding is not only a post-conflict
activity, but should be undertaken throughout the
conflict cycle. As such, it requires sustained political
attention. The Peacebuilding Commission, as an
intergovernmental advisory body, can play a crucial
role in sustaining international attention to countries at
risk of lapsing or relapsing into conflict.
To have an impact, political commitment must
be matched by adequate and predictable funding for
peacebuilding efforts. However, the Peacebuilding
Fund continues to face financial shortfalls. We must
find a way to better finance peacebuilding activities.
The Security Council and the General Assembly should
explore resource mobilization through partnership with
the private sector, along with strengthened partnership
with the international financial institutions and regional
development banks. The proposal of the Advisory Group
of Experts to support the Peacebuilding Fund through an
assessed contribution also merits careful consideration.
Secondly, many of the conflicts that we witness
around the world are rooted in underlying socioeconomic
problems, be it poverty, social injustice or inequalities.
Thailand firmly believes that peace cannot be sustained
in the absence of sustainable and inclusive development;
it is about giving due regard to the needs and livelihoods
of the people and their communities.
We cannot wait until the guns fall silent to start
development work. For conflict-affected countries, the
United Nations can play a crucial role in laying the
necessary groundwork for a transition from conflict to
normalcy. Our peacekeeping experience in the former
38/71

23/02/2016

East Timor, and more recently in Darfur, has shown
that peacekeepers can undertake peacebuilding efforts
that have an impact. Through the implementation
of various development and quick-impact projects,
peacekeepers can significantly contribute to alleviating
socioeconomic grievances of the local population.
I wish to conclude my remarks by expressing
my appreciation to the Permanent Representatives
of Angola and Australia, in their capacities as the
co-facilitators of the intergovernmental negotiations on
the review of the peacebuilding architecture, for their
able leadership. The Kingdom of Thailand remains
fully committed to extending support and cooperation
to the co-facilitators in this process.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Sandoval Cojulún (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala is grateful for the holding of this
open debate and for the briefings by the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Machiera
Kamau, and of the former Chair of the Commission,
Ambassador Olof Skoog. We are also grateful for the
leadership of Ambassador Gert Rosenthal as Chair of
the Advisory Group of Expers on the Review of the
Peacekeeping Architecture.
My delegation shares the ideas contained in the
concept note (S/2016/104, annex ) in the sense that the
United Nations can play a key role in preventing armed
conflicts from beginning, resuming or continuing. We
wish to highlight that we see peacebuilding mainly
as an effort to prevent conflict. Even in post-conflict
situations we seek to prevent further recurrence of
conflict, and peacebuilding can serve to prevent
conflicts from arising at all.
We also share the view that the recent failures of
the Organization have served to highlight the need
to review in a broad and comprehensive manner the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture. As we
have repeatedly stated, peacekeeping missions should
be understood as a task in which only interested
national stakeholders should feel ownership. The
United Nations and international actors may support
and facilitate the process, but they cannot direct it.
On that basis, Guatemala proudly supports various
missions with military personnel in order to contribute
to international peace and security. We support what
was highlighted in the report (see S/2105/490) of the
Advisory Group of Experts, in the sense that the United
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Nations should have better operational strategies to
have a closer relationship with international financial
institutions and regional and subregional organizations.
We see the holding of this open debate as being
very timely. It creates a space to discuss and hear the
different positions on peacebuilding. This exercise
is particularly relevant in the light of the current
negotiations of the draft resolution on the review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture.
We stress the importance of delegations using
the recommendations and observations made by the
Advisory Group of Experts as a solid and supportive
basis for discussion. We are aware that during
negotiations, the Organization’s States Members will
face major challenges in reaching consensus on major
issues, such as the inclusion of human rights, funding
for peacebuilding and defining various concepts, such
as sustainable peace.
Given that the concept of peacebuilding has
been on the Organization’s agenda since 1992 and
that international contexts are not static, Member
States have a valuable opportunity to engage in an
analytical discussion, based on lessons learned, on the
peacebuilding architecture of the Organization. It is
therefore imperative to remind the Council that greater
efforts are needed to prevent conflicts. The numbers
leave no room for interpretation. Investing in prevention
will prevent above all the loss of human lives. but it will
also allow for a better use of the Organization’s limited
financial resources and better performance. That point
provides clarity about the importance that Member
States should give to the Peacebuilding Fund and to
strengthening coordination with both the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Support Office.
Guatemala stresses the need for the Council to
ensure that any mandate for peacebuilding missions
emphasizes that the importance of such missions
being integrated within the United Nations system as a
whole, including the Human Rights Council, in order to
implement sustainable peace on the ground.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Schieb (Germany): I would like to thank
Venezuela for having convened today’s open debate.
Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

S/PV.7629

What is the challenge before the Security Council?
In the light of the multiplication of conflicts and failing
States, the challenge is to reshape the Peacebuilding
Commission to adequately address not only postconflict situations, but also the prevention of conflicts
with the support of the Peacebuilding Support Office
and an adequately financed Peacebuilding Fund.
Five years ago, we failed to allow the Peacebuilding
Commission to evolve after we had discovered that
gaps existed between our collective aspirations and the
realities in practice. Instead of adopting a substantive
draft resolution, we just welcomed the report of the
experts reviewing the Peacebuilding Commission, and
we did not endorse a single one of the recommendations
contained in the report. Given the current review
prepared by the Group of Experts headed by Ambassador
Gert Rosenthal, we now have the opportunity to finally
enact the necessary changes.
First, the mandate of the Peacebuilding
Commission needs to be enhanced to also encompass
crisis prevention, not only the aftermath of a conflict.
Secondly, the Peacebuilding Commission must
work more closely with the Security Council. However,
that can be achieved only if the Security Council
actively involves the Peacebuilding Commission in its
work on crisis prevention and peacebuilding and if the
Peacebuilding Commission has something to offer to
the Security Council. As the report of the Advisory
Group stipulates, the Security Council
“should regularly request and draw upon
the Peacebuilding Commission’s advice on
the peacebuilding dimensions of mandates”.
(S/2015/490, p.4)
Thirdly, we also must overcome the bureaucratic
approach to peacebuilding enshrined in the country
configurations of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Some challenges, such as Ebola, demand a regional
response, and therefore call for action beyond the
limitations of one specific country configuration. That
does not mean that we need to create new structures.
We need to use the existing ones more efficiently
through better cooperation with host countries,
enhanced coordination with other United Nations
agencies on the ground and more partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations, as well as with
international financial institutions. The Peacebuilding
Commission is a product of internal and institutional
learning within the United Nations. It draws upon the

16-0478439/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

complex and often interrelated challenges associated
with conflict resolution, peacebuilding, reconciliation
and development. We just need to improve it.
Peacebuilding does not come for free. Predictable
financing is an important prerequisite that had been
voiced even before the Rosenthal report. Germany
has been one of the main donors contributing to the
Peacebuilding Fund in the past, and it will continue to
be a predictable voluntary contributor in the future. In
2016, we will substantially increase our contribution to
the Peacebuilding Fund.
Let me reaffirm that Germany firmly supports
the ongoing negotiations on a joint draft resolution
by the General Assembly and the Security Council
designed to improve the peacebuilding architecture.
Germany also looks forward to continue working with
the Peacebuilding Commission to best respond to the
needs of countries in crisis and help solidify peace in
the aftermath of conflict.
Last but not least, Germany would like to use this
opportunity to pay tribute to former Secretary-General
Boutros Boutros-Ghali. It was his 1992 “Agenda for
Peace” (S/24111) that prepared the ground for many of
the concepts and initiatives we are discussing to this
very day.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mrs. Kassangana-Jakubowska (Poland): Poland
considers today’s debate to be an important initiative
to reflect on the ongoing process of the review of the
peacebuilding architecture. We fully agree with a
view of Venezuelan presidency that lack of a proper
attitude to peacebuilding contributes considerably to
the resurgence of conflicts.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I would like to offer some additional remarks in my
national capacity.
The social and economic development of countries
in conflict or post-conflict situations is especially
significant for the lasting success of peacebuilding
efforts. That is why it is so important to successfully
implement the ambitious 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) and to
effectively reflect on why the Millennium Development
Goals were not realized in full.
40/71

23/02/2016

We are convinced that the maintenance of
international peace and security cannot be discussed
in isolation from the issue of good governance. The
international community should fully acknowledge
that there is a strong nexus between good governance
principles — which include impartiality, transparency,
accountability and combating corruption — on one hand,
and United Nations actions undertaken with a view to
assisting States in preventing, resolving and recovering
from military conflicts, on the other. Promoting good
governance, including through security sector reform,
tackling political, social and economic exclusion,
promoting human rights and opportunities for all are
incredibly important to guaranteeing stability, security
and peace. All such issues should have proper weight
and place in the reflection process on the future of
peacebuilding activities.
The United Nations has a unique responsibility
for sustaining peace and security, but the scale and
gravity of challenges today means that the United
Nations cannot act alone. The role of regional and
subregional organizations in peacebuilding cannot be
underestimated. In that regard, we would like to stress
the importance of coherence and complementarity
in order to ensure better effectiveness of actions
between United Nations and regional actors. We fully
support the idea of partnerships in the peacebuilding
area between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations, similar to those that exist
in peacekeeping. Peacebuilding needs just as much
attention.
The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) is the most
important element of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. We agree with the conclusion of the report
(see S/2015/490) of the Advisory Group of Experts on
the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture, headed
by Ambassador Rosenthal, that the PBC should improve
its coordination with key United Nations bodies. We
should remember that the deepening of the PBC’s
relationship with the relevant United Nations bodies,
such as the General Assembly, the Security Council and
the Economic and Social Council, depends upon their
approach to peacebuilding and their eagerness to draw
on the PBC’s knowledge. As appropriate, therefore,
those bodies should seek out the PBC’s expertise and
assistance with the goal of maximizing the impact of
the United Nations in post-conflict situations.
We recently witnessed a very good example of efforts
by the Security Council to draw on the PBC’s specific
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

expertise during the open briefing (see S/PV.7624)
on Guinea-Bissau earlier this month. The work of the
Guinea-Bissau country-specific configuration of the
PBC, under the intelligent chairmanship of Ambassador
De Aguiar Patriota of Brazil, is an excellent example
of a much-needed comprehensive approach to
peacebuilding, involving close cooperation between
the PBC, the Secretariat, the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States. We
hope that such a streamlined effort will enable them to
safeguard that country’s achievements in stabilization
and development.
There can be no doubt that we need a high level
of coherence and complementarity in all three of the
review processes under way in the area of international
peace and security. The momentum during the
intergovernmental phase must be kept up, and the
role of the General Assembly in that process will be
extremely important. That is why we would like to
commend the initiative of the President of the Assembly
in organizing a high-level thematic debate, to be held in
May, designed to identify synergies between the three
review processes. We believe that will help to improve
United Nations action on peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Alday González (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s open debate, and the briefers for their interesting
views.
Ten years after the Organization’s establishment of
its peacebuilding architecture, we continue to face the
challenge of finding the best way to achieve sustainable
peace that can help to heal the scars caused by armed
conflict, rebuild the countries and regions concerned,
along with their institutions responsible for protecting
fundamental rights, and provide basic humanitarian
services, security and justice.
The lessons learned over the past decade have
shown us that, if peacebuilding is to succeed, it requires
a comprehensive strategy for addressing conflicts that
can establish a consistent, solid and direct link between
peace and security and human rights and development.
Those elements, together with prevention, formed the
preliminary framework for peacekeeping in 2005,
and today they continue to be crucial to its longterm viability and effectiveness. In that context, the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General

S/PV.7629

Assembly resolution 70/1) should play a key role in
focusing the United Nations system’s efforts.
Mexico would like to acknowledge the work of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture, led by Ambassador
Rosenthal, as well as the efforts of the Permanent
Representatives of Angola and Australia to follow up
on and bring coherence to our discussions on the issue
in both the General Assembly and the Council. If we are
to make progress towards our goal, it is essential that,
as recommended by the Advisory Group, we change the
epicentre of our peacebuilding efforts from the current
reactive perspective to a preventive one. The emphasis
on that aspect is consistent with the recommendations
and definition of critical pathways that are being
discussed in the other review processes currently under
way, and our shared goal should therefore be to translate
the recommendations into action.
To reverse 10 years of inertia and obstacles placed
in the way of the peacebuilding architecture, we will
need coherent, systematic, collective efforts aimed at
ending the disjunctions in the main intergovernmental
bodies of the United Nations whose responsibility
it is to change the paradigm in favour of sustainable
peace — the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council. The United
Nations presence must be constant or else, as with any
other vacuum, it runs the risk of being occupied by
others.
Given the challenges and complexity of today’s
conflicts, the role and added value of the Peacebuilding
Commission should be exploited, enhanced and
strengthened. The Security Council should make
frequent use of the Commission’s advisory capacity
in reviewing the mandates of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions, as well as in designing
transition strategies with the timeliness and long-term
vision essential to peacekeeping. The Commission
should be a platform for bringing to the Council’s
attention the views of all of the relevant actors at the
national, regional and international levels, including
donors, agendas and the agencies of the United Nations
system.
Peacebuilding requires the political, technical and
financial support of the international community. It
also requires nonvengeful justice, and for that we need
the mechanisms that can provide it. The absence of that
kind of support for peacebuilding and peacekeeping,

16-0478441/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

particularly when it comes to the root causes of a crisis,
can result in significant challenges when it comes to
preventing the outbreak or resurgence of a conflict.
Mexico appreciates the Advisory Group’s
recommendation that our peacebuilding instruments
should always work together with regional and
subregional organizations in their prevention efforts,
whenever their constitutive bodies allow it. We also
believe that key stakeholders, such as civil society
and international financial institutions, should back
the Organization’s efforts and contribute positively
to supporting national priority areas, encouraging
economic development and lessening the risks of
investing in countries that are rebuilding. Requests
and mandates to do more should be backed up with
appropriate resources and strategic planning aimed
at improving the efficiency and effectiveness of the
work. We believe that it is vital to ensure that those
intergovernmental processes result in a thorough
analysis of the financial arrangements for the entire
peacebuilding architecture and in concrete action
aimed at strengthening those arrangements, including
accountability mechanisms.
This period of review of various bodies and
commissions is an ideal opportunity for revisiting
and revitalizing the Organization’s conceptual and
operational approach to peacebuilding. We should take
advantage of this five-year opportunity to review in
depth the areas of our peacebuilding architecture that
need more attention and reinforcement, taking into
account proposals that favour political and inclusive
solutions over military ones. In that regard, I would
like to take this opportunity to welcome, and express
Mexico’s full support for, the establishment and
deployment of the new United Nations special political
mission to Colombia, authorized on 25 January. We
hope that the mission, which will contribute not just to
the peace process in Colombia but also to the security
and stability of the entire region, will develop along the
lines I have mentioned and will serve as an example for
future special political missions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I would like to thank the
Venezuelan presidency for convening today’s meeting.
It is a great opportunity for Member States to share their
views on the ongoing review process. I would also like
42/71

23/02/2016

to thank Ambassadors Macharia Kamau, Olof Skoog
and Gert Rosenthal for their introductory briefings.
I would like to briefly share with the Council
some views based on the framework of the four areas
identified in the President’s concept note (S/2016/104,
annex).
First, with regard tp the lack of attention to
peacebuilding, we think that, although the concept of
peacebuilding is not present in the Charter of the United
Nations, it is utterly consistent with its letter and spirit.
From our perspective, the efforts that emanate from the
current peacebuilding architecture could, however, be
immensely improved. We should begin by addressing
the question of the lack of adequate resources. As
expressed by the Advisory Group of Experts on the
Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture, providing
the Peacebuilding Fund annually with a symbolic 1 per
cent of the value of the total United Nations budget
for peace operations as core funding from assessed
contributions would help close the gap between
mandates and programme resources.
Secondly, regarding peacebuilding time frames,
we have two contradictory notions of time frame: that
of the United Nations, punctuated by successive yearly
sessions, and that of human beings in post-conflict
situations. The first is guided by calendaring priorities
and performance, and the second is hard to assess in
terms of controlled or arithmetic data, except for the
time required for national reconciliation and framed
social interactions to produce their expected positive
effects.
Thirdly, the importance of development in
peacebuilding is a sine qua non for lasting peace.
Where there is development, there is the possibility
of peace. Where there are issues of poverty and
disenfranchisement, there cannot be peace or stability.
Allow me also to stress the correlation with the rule of
law at the national and international levels, as, without
the rule of law, development and therefore peace in a
post-conflict situation could be short-lived.
Fourthly, the important role of regional and
subregional organizations in peacebuilding is
something we totally support, encourage and concur
with. Indeed, in the context of the African Union, we
clearly highlighted this element in our submission
following the invitation by the co-facilitators of the
United Nations peacebuilding review to Member States
to provide written contributions.
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

I take this opportunity to thank the Permanent
Representatives of Angola and Australia for their
open and transparent stewardship of the process. In
the Algerian submission, we underlined, among other
issues, the work that needs to be done in order to ensure
that the peacebuilding architecture is well connected
with and complementary to the African Union PostConflict Reconstruction and Development Framework
and the African Solidarity Initiative. I would like
to take this opportunity to wish full success to the
co-facilitators of the 2015 review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, Ambassadors Bird and
Gaspar Martins, in their endeavour, whose outcome is
expected to be submitted by the end of next month.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See.
Brother Carroll (Holy See): My delegation
wishes to thank the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
for having convened this open debate on “Postconflict peacebuilding: review of the peacebuilding
architecture”.
Eleven years ago, drawing on the experience of
the first 50 years of the United Nations, the High-level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change identified a
key institutional gap: there was no place in the United
Nations system explicitly designed to avoid State
collapse and the slide to war or to assist countries in
their transition from war to peace. Consequently,
following the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General
Assembly resolution 60/1), the General Assembly
and the Security Council created the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) as a subsidiary body of both United
Nations organs. Afterwards, the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF) was put in place, and a Peacebuilding Support
Office (PBSO) was also created.
The PBC and the PBSO should be praised for the
work accomplished in many countries, while the PBF
deserves generous and constant financial support from
the Member States. However, the conclusions of the
Secretary-General’s Advisory Group of Experts on the
Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture (S/2015/490)
show the complexity and difficulty of peacebuilding
efforts. The ability of the PBC to engage with the
host Government as well as civil society and the most
important stakeholders on the ground in the conduct
and implementation of coordinated actions remains
crucial and difficult. In addition, there are several

S/PV.7629

factors that are largely dependent on the substantive
and coordinated engagement of the Security Council
and other United Nations bodies in each situation.
Furthermore, the ultimate success of peacebuilding
relies on the attention given to the PBC by the whole
international community.
Appropriately, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
(General Assembly resolution 69/313, annex) and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) address the special needs for
financial, trade and development assistance of countries
in post-conflict situations. Goal 16 of that Agenda is
devoted to the promotion of peaceful and inclusive
societies, and all its targets are relevant for situations of
post-conflict. However, in his address to the seventieth
session of the General Assembly, Pope Francis noted:
“Solemn commitments...are not enough, even though
they are a necessary step towards solutions...Our
world demands of all Government leaders a will that
is effective, practical and constant, with concrete steps
and immediate measures”, not forgetting that “above
and beyond our plans and programmes, we are dealing
with real men and women...who live, struggle and
suffer, and are often forced to live in great poverty,
deprived of all rights” (A/70/PV.3, p. 4).
The Addis Ababa Action Agenda recognizes the
importance to achieving sustainable development
of delivering quality education to all girls and boys,
including migrant and refugee children and those in
conflict and post-conflict situations, and providing
safe, non-violent, inclusive and effective learning
environments for all. The same Agenda stresses that
capacity development will be integral to achieving
the post-2015 development agenda. It calls for
enhanced international support and the establishment
of multi-stakeholder partnerships for implementing
effective and targeted capacity-building, especially in
countries in conflict and post-conflict situations. In his
speech to the General Assembly, Pope Francis noted
that integral human development
“presupposes and requires the right to
education — also for girls, who are excluded
in certain places — which is ensured first and
foremost by respecting and reinforcing the primary
right of the family to educate its children, as well as
the right of churches and social groups to support
and assist families in the education of their boys
and girls. Education conceived in this way is the

16-0478443/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

23/02/2016

basis for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda”
(A/70/PV.3, p. 4).

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.

The Holy See, as a subject of international law, has
always been a promoter of peace between countries,
actively participating in the work of the United Nations,
while the local churches have always been a factor of
reconciliation at the national level. Churches, as well
as many faith-based organizations and development
non-governmental organizations, have always been at
the vanguard of pacification and the reconstruction of
regions and countries struck by wars and conflicts.

Mrs. Von Steiger Weber (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes the holding of this debate and
particularly appreciates the current attention that is
being devoted to the peacebuilding architecture.

Moreover, the nearly 100,000 elementary
schools and secondary schools as well as colleges
and universities throughout the world that are run by
Catholic organizations are an essential contribution to
the building and maintenance of peace. The Catholic
health-care network encompasses more than 25,000
hospitals; dispensaries; clinics; homes for the elderly,
the chronically ill or disabled; orphanages; and childcare centres. All are a part of maintaining local,
stable and secure environments, which are essential
for the comprehensive approach to peacebuilding
recommended in the 2015 review. The actions of the
Holy See and of Catholic institutions worldwide are
fully consistent with the pleas of the Council and other
United Nations forums to limit the use of arms and
implement strategies of dialogue and negotiation, to
bridge the way to peaceful coexistence in diversity and
to use the world’s industrial might and technological
prowess to bring about the peacebuilding aspirations
of all.
In his recent visit to Mexico, Pope Francis
addressed the civil authorities and the diplomatic corps
and discussed the building blocks of peace. He stated,
“[l]eaders of social, cultural and political life
have the particular duty to offer all citizens the
opportunity to be worthy contributors to their
own future, within their families and in all areas
where human social interaction takes place. In that
way, they help citizens to have real access to the
material and spiritual goods that are indispensable:
adequate housing, dignified employment, food,
true justice, effective security and a healthy and
peaceful environment.”
It seems to my delegation that those words of Pope
Francis speak to the very essence of the peacebuilding
architecture, which we are discussing here today.
44/71

In 2015, the United Nations had to confront a great
number of crises and conflicts, and what is more, it had
to do so within the context of budgetary constraints.
At the same time, the review of the peacebuilding
architecture, the peace operations review, the review
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
and the successful negotiations on the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly
resolution 70/1) provided an opportunity to scrutinize
activities aimed at sustaining peace and to recalibrate
the operational methods of the United Nations.
One of the most pervasive insights resulting from
those processes is that a fragmented approach is not
sustainable. The United Nations must extend its vision
beyond the existing silos and strengthen the coherence
of its actions, both substantively and structurally and
with regard to external partners. The same rationale
played an important role in the establishment of the
peacebuilding architecture in 2005. Ten years later,
why is it then so difficult for us to adopt a coherent
approach to maintaining peace? Our conclusion is that
first, the United Nations has yet to tap its full potential
with regard to peacebuilding and that, secondly, the
peacebuilding architecture and its mandate are more
relevant than ever.
Switzerland welcomes the draft resolution on the
peacebuilding review that is currently being discussed
by Member States. The text reflects the findings of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture and the inputs from
Member States, which have been collected in inclusive
consultations before and during the negotiation
process. Furthermore, building on the experience that
the peacebuilding architecture has acquired over the
past 10 years, the draft resolution constitutes a strong
vision for the future. Some aspects of that vision are
hardly new, such as the call for increased coherence,
which is to be realized not only through shared analysis
and planning but also through joint programming. With
regard to programming, there are valuable examples
from which we can learn, such as the concerted efforts
of the United Nations Development Programme and the
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

S/PV.7629

Department of Political Affairs, or those of the global
focal point for the police, justice and corrections.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.

Other aspects of that vision for the peacebuilding
architecture embody an evolution. In our view, the
most important aspects in that evolution are the
notions of sustaining peace over the long term and the
architecture’s preventive potential. We are convinced
that the peacebuilding architecture can contribute to
preventing the occurrence and recurrence of armed
conflicts, and we fully support references thereto
in the draft resolution. Furthermore, strengthening
partnerships — particular those with the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund — the importance
of inclusive national ownership, respect for human
rights, the meaningful involvement of women at all
stages of peace processes, transitional justice, training
and capacity-building should be prominently reflected
in the draft resolution. We also believe that the text
of the draft resolution should clearly refer to the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and underscore the
importance of being better able to predict the funding
required for peacebuilding. A comprehensive and
substantive resolution would provide the peacebuilding
architecture with the necessary tools to implement
its mandate with renewed vigour. We therefore fully
support the thrust of the draft resolution.

Ms. Yparraguirre (Philippines): We congratulate
the presidency of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
for convening this open debate.

A reinforced peacebuilding architecture would not
infringe upon the unique role of the Security Council as
outlined in the Charter of the United Nations. Rather,
the impetus given by the draft resolution, once adopted,
will enable the peacebuilding architecture, and in
particular the Peacebuilding Commission, to better
assume its advisory role vis-à-vis the Security Council
and its accompanying role in assisting conflict-affected
countries. The Peacebuilding Commission can,
moreover, represent added value in situations in which
the United Nations takes a light footprint approach. It
can broaden the spectrum of substantive considerations
by highlighting in particular issues inextricably tied
to socioeconomic development and human rights
and their links to peace and security. It can also help
maintain a time horizon that goes beyond a single
form of engagement and contribute to enhancing
the circle of both internal and external stakeholders
who collaborate in a specific situation. We are fully
committed to enabling the Peacebuilding Commission
and its specific country-configurations the means with
which to provide the Security Council that added value.

Preventing conflicts and building peace and
sustaining that peace long after the fighting has stopped
have been among the biggest challenges facing the
international community and the Security Council to
date. For decades, the United Nations has focused much
of its resources on peacekeeping. While its track record
in that field is mixed, with both successes and failures,
many lessons have already been learned regarding how
to carry out the United Nations firefighting role better.
There is a lot of work to do, however, in the areas
of conflict prevention and post-conflict peacebuilding,
which are key to real and lasting peace. The Philippines
welcomes and supports the ongoing comprehensive
review of the peacebuilding architecture aimed at
strengthening the existing architecture and ensuring
that it reaches its full potential. The current review
should be mindful of the new realities and of the
changing nature of contemporary armed conflicts.
The Philippines supports the recommendations
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture on the primacy of
prevention, mediation and political solutions. We support
proposals towards building coherence in delivering
sustainable peace in the United Nations system through
the roles of the Security Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Secretariat, the Economic and Social
Council, the Human Rights Council and international
financial institutions.
It is deeply regrettable that with armed conflicts
raging over various causes in many parts of the
globe — conflicts at different stages, many of them
recurring — the world still lacks the wherewithal to
prevent and overcome conflicts and sustain the peace.
We still see an urgent need to inform and educate the
world on the vast amount of work to be done once
the guns are silenced and the transition from war to
development has started. There is a need to appreciate
the fact that peacebuilding requires not just the
involvement of a country, a group of international
actors or the United Nations alone, but the commitment
of the whole world to make it work.

16-0478445/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

23/02/2016

We also need to address the misperception that
peacebuilding can begin only when conflict ends. It is
important to stress that the lasting peace is not achieved
in a rigid, linear and sequential manner. The United
Nations peacebuilding architecture should provide an
infrastructure that will support the society until it is
strong enough to stand on its own. Development is the
linchpin of any peacebuilding initiative. Development
is vital in preventing conflict and in sustaining the
peace. The fact that development and peacebuilding are
interconnected cannot be overemphasized.

While we recognize that we, the Filipino people,
are the drivers and the owners of the peace process,
we acknowledge the overwhelming support of the
international community, which is just as crucial
throughout that process. The Bangsamoro Peace
Agreement is also supported by a United Nations joint
programme that aims to reduce barriers to acceptance
of the agreement among key actors in the affected
communities. The Peacebuilding Fund helps in
stimulating discussions and promoting advocacy on the
draft legislation on the Bangsamoro Basic Law.

Following the signing of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front in
March 2014, the Philippine Government has an ongoing
peacebuilding process in Mindanao and is working on
passing legislation that would grant autonomy to several
provinces in Mindanao. The Bangsamoro Basic Law,
once passed by the Philippine Congress, is envisioned
to implement concrete initiatives linking peace and
security, development and human rights.

What we have learned from the southern Philippines’
experience is that peace is a long and arduous process.
It will not come overnight. Pitfalls and challenges will
surface along the way. What is crucial, however, is that
all parties remain resolutely on track.

All stakeholders remain firmly on the peace
track, and no one is backing out of the peace process.
A comprehensive normalization track is being put in
place involving the decommissioning of the Moro
Islamic Liberation Front’s Bangsamoro Islamic Armed
Forces, socioeconomic interventions in communities
affected by the decades-long conflict, interim security
arrangements, the reform and strengthening of the
police force in the Bangsamoro, addressing transitional
justice issues and confidence-building components.
The seeds of development have been planted, and
socioeconomic projects for the transformation of
Moro Islamic Liberation Front camps into productive
communities are continuing.
It is also worth mentioning that the Bangsamoro
Basic Law carries concrete gender-sensitive provisions,
which recognize that women in conflict and postconflict situations are to be protected and empowered
and should play a decisive role in peace and security
mechanisms and processes. The Comprehensive Peace
Agreement with the Bangsamoro is historic, not only
because it signalled the end of a long-standing war in
the southern Philippines, but also because it is the first
peace agreement of its kind in the world to bear the
signature of a woman as chief negotiator — Professor
Miriam Coronel-Ferrer. Following the signing of the
agreement, a woman was tasked to co-chair the Joint
Normalization Committee, and three of four transition
commissions are chaired by women.
46/71

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Donoghue (Ireland): Mr. President, I commend
you for having convened today’s discussion.
Ireland aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union.
I would like to focus on several aspects of this
debate that are of particular interest to my country.
First, with respect to the crucial role of women
in peacebuilding, Ireland concurs with the general
recommendation of all three reviews that women’s
participation in peacebuilding is vital, both in
decision-making related to peace and security, such
as peace negotiations, and in the vital socioeconomic
sphere, encompassing both human rights and
development. The Security Council has acted as a
major linchpin of this debate through its adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) 16 years ago, followed by six
subsequent resolutions. However, more must be done
by us all to ensure that the gains made in the normative
framework on women and peace and security extend
from the Council Chamber to field experience and
practice.
The global study on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), which Ireland helped to support,
is the first major step towards catalysing movement
in that area. Frank discussion is now needed on how
its recommendations, along with the gender-related
aspects of the other reviews, should be implemented.
Ireland advocates the inclusion in the Council resolution
on peacebuilding architecture of a clear deadline to
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

meet the 15 per cent gender marker for financing for
peacebuilding. We also see the participation of women
in mediation processes as fundamental. That stems from
our own experience in brokering and sustaining peace
on the island of Ireland. Furthermore, we see a vital
need for innovative tools and mechanisms with which
to implement resolution 1325 (2000). One example of
such tools is the Global Acceleration Instrument, a
flexible funding mechanism and platform to spur the
resolution’s implementation, which will be launched
tomorrow at an event co-hosted by Ireland.
Secondly, conflict prevention is at the very core of
the mandate of the United Nations. The Organization
was established not merely to end the Second World
War in its entirety, but also to prevent a recurrence.
Calls for a greater focus on conflict prevention
permeate the three reviews. The report (see S/2015/490)
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture recommends that the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) act as a bridge
between those sitting in the Security Council Chamber
and those on the ground who witness the stirrings of
conflict. The report also calls for the PBC to be afforded
more flexibility, stressing the need for it to move away
from the strictures of its formal agenda in order to
respond to emerging crises in any country or region
at any time. Ireland encourages the co-facilitators to
explore with the Security Council the possible role of
the PBC in identifying early warning signs of conflict.
We also ask that the resolution mandate the changes
needed to adapt the working methods of the PBC to the
unpredictability, geographic diversity and challenges
presented by today’s wars and conflict.
Thirdly, with regard to mandate design, Ireland’s
long history of support to United Nations peace
operations has afforded us an opportunity to learn from
both successes and mistakes. We strongly concur with
the general finding of the reviews that mandates and
missions do not lend themselves to a one-size-fits-all
approach. Every conflict has unique characteristics.
Any United Nations mission to support countries
in conflict should reflect that. Ireland supports the
suggestion to establish a role for the PBC to advise the
Security Council on the mandates of peacekeeping and
technical assistance operations. The resolution should
be coherent with the follow-up processes linked to the
other reviews, in particular the peace operations review.
The publication of the reports of those three
reviews represents only one step in what will be a

S/PV.7629

very long process. We look forward to the high-level
thematic debate to be convened by the President of the
General Assembly in May. As the process evolves, we
will need to address some very difficult questions. How
will we go about breaking down the existing silos so as
to ensure a holistic approach to peacebuilding with the
principles of resolution 1325 (2000) at its heart? How
can we implement the Sustainable Development Goals
in a way that addresses the root causes of conflict?
Are we willing to make the tough decisions regarding
predictable financing in order to enhance the innovation
and implementation of peacebuilding mechanisms?
And how can we ensure that every step taken in New
York is one more step towards resolving the challenges
faced on the ground?
I thank you again, Mr. President, for convening
this dialogue. Let us not forget that, in reviewing the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture in all its
dimensions, our fundamental goal is the prevention of
war and conflict and the creation of a safer world for
all.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the Security
Council presidency for organizing this open debate on
a highly pertinent issue. We appreciate the valuable
thoughts shared by the briefers.
Emerging from the ashes of our independence
war in 1971, Bangladesh undertook an arduous yet
sustained process, moving from post-conflict recovery
and reconstruction to nation-building in four decades.
As a nation, we have yet to close certain chapters of that
defining event, as is evident from our ongoing efforts
to break the culture of impunity regarding the crimes
against humanity and the genocide committed during
the war.
The defeated ideologies of the war also tend
to resurface at times to undermine the democratic,
pluralist, non-communal and secular values that we
cherish as a nation. Our journey from a war-ravaged,
aid-dependent economy to one that is now marked by
strong macroeconomic fundamentals, steady economic
growth, inclusive socioeconomic development, a sound
trade and investment regime and a determined effort
to move towards a low-carbon pathway has also been
marked by many trials and successes.

16-0478447/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

That serves to reinforce the point that peacebuilding
per se is not a quick or easy fix that can take place in a
linear, prescriptive fashion. Each conflict setting must
carve out its own course for recovery and reconstruction
leading to durable peace, in which the international
community can play a supportive, catalytic role. Those
insights have motivated Bangladesh to remain engaged
with the work of the Peacebuilding Commission from
the outset, assuming its chairmanship in 2012 and
organizing the Commission’s first high-level meeting
the same year, under the stewardship of our Prime
Minister Sheikh Hasina.
As we see it, there would be a gap in our
understanding of peacebuilding if we were to consider it
only from the context of post-conflict recovery. Without
sustained, long-term efforts to address the underlying
drivers of conflict, sufficient alacrity to read the
early warning signs on the ground and a combination
of will and agility to pre-empt and prevent conflicts,
peacebuilding might risk becoming merely an ad hoc,
piecemeal exercise. That is the overarching message
that we have drawn from the report (see S/2015/490)
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture, which makes a compelling
case for changing the mindset here about the way we
view and engage with peacebuilding in the United
Nations. In that spirit, we wish to flag five issues that
we believe are cardinal to the current initiative of the
review of the peacebuilding architecture.
First, peacebuilding must be owned and appropriated
by the principal organs of the United Nations, in due
recognition of the interaction among peace and security
and development and human rights. As witnessed
during the review exercise, each constituency has
certain values to add to peacebuilding efforts without
compromising their respective mandates.
Secondly, the desired coherence in peacebuilding
will critically hinge on the level of commitment
demonstrated by the Security Council on behalf of
United Nations peacebuilding efforts. The Council’s
focused and meaningful utilization of the existing
resources is expected to enhance the value of the
Peacebuilding Commission’s advisory role and the
Peacebuilding Fund’s needs-driven financing support.
Thirdly,
the
Peacebuilding
Commission’s
convening capacity must be leveraged to further
broaden its orientation and engagements and relieve
it of its rather formulaic, agenda-based approach. The
48/71

23/02/2016

interface between the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Peacebuilding Fund must be visible in terms of their
respective outcomes, again without conceding their
comparative advantages.
Fourthly, the notion of sustaining peace, as
elaborated in the Advisory Group’s report, is such an
all-encompassing construct that it inevitably brings to
the foreground the question of adequate, predictable
and sustained financing for peacebuilding efforts.
In recognition of the useful services rendered by the
Peacebuilding Fund, we see merit in the suggestion to
create an assured financing stream for the Fund based
on assessed contributions. If we are truly committed
to giving peacebuilding a chance under United Nations
auspices, we should work on finding creative ways to
match the predictability of financing with the flexible,
rapid-response capacity of the Fund.
Fifthly, and lastly, the primacy of national ownership
defined by inclusive and accountable processes should
remain at the heart of peacebuilding efforts. As we see
again and again, prescriptions from outside, without
sufficient buy-in among a cross-section of national
actors, including women and youth, have never had a
lasting impact. The potential role of peacebuilding in
contributing to participatory political processes, human
development, social justice and institution-building
should ideally be driven by national consensus in
conflict-affected situations.
To conclude, we urge the Council to ensure that the
ongoing peacebuilding architecture review will turn
out to be a real game-changing exercise in this seminal
year for the United Nations peace and security agenda.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation thanks
you, Sir, for organizing this open debate on the review of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture. We also
thank the briefers, Ambassador Kamau, Ambassador
Skoog and Ambassador Rosenthal, for sharing their
perspectives on this important topic.
Nigeria welcomes the report (see S/2015/490) of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture. We commend the Advisory
Group for the effort put into preparing the report. The
report indicates that, while progress has been made
with regard to the peacebuilding efforts of the United
Nations, considerable challenges still remain. Our
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

statement will focus on the following recommendations
in the report. First, the need for a strong partnership
between the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and
regional and subregional organizations; secondly, the
need for improved leadership and inclusive national
ownership of peacebuilding processes; and, thirdly,
ensuring predictable financing for peacebuilding.
Nigeria supports the recommendation made by the
Advisory Group on the need for a strong partnership
between the PBC and regional and subregional
organizations. Those organizations are usually the
ones closest to the areas of conflict, and are often
the first to respond when conflicts break out. It is for
that reason that we endorse the recommendation that
the PBC should hold consultations with regional and
subregional organizations with a view to promoting
sustainable peace. We believe that peacebuilding efforts
will be more effective when regional and subregional
organizations, as well as countries contiguous to
fragile States, are given the necessary encouragement
to actively participate in peacebuilding processes.
National leadership, ownership and inclusivity
are central to post-conflict peacebuilding. They must
therefore be strengthened through inclusive politics.
Where peacebuilding efforts are rooted in inclusive
consultative processes, trust and legitimacy in the
State and its institutions are likely to be enhanced.
Efforts to sustain peace must start with the crafting
of genuine, open and inclusive peace accords that
reflect the broad aspirations of all stakeholders in
post-conflict societies. On predictable financing for
peacebuilding, we encourage affected States to explore
domestic sources of financing for peacebuilding. In
this connection, we urge Member States to provide
them with technical support aimed at improving State
capacity in the management of natural resources,
public funds, tax collection and curbing illicit financial
flows. We welcome the recommendation that the
Peacebuilding Fund should have predictable financing
through a symbolic 1 per cent of peacekeeping
operations expenditure or $100 million, whichever is
higher, annually, as core funding for the next 15 years.
Nigeria recognizes the difficulty of adopting an
integrated approach to peacebuilding among United
Nations entities empowered by different mandates. We
therefore see merit in having one set of objectives and
a single vision to guide all actors on the ground. This
calls for closer coordination and integration between
the Secretary- General’s Special Representatives,

S/PV.7629

Envoys and Advisers on the one hand and United
Nations country teams on the other. We commend the
Advisory Group of Experts for highlighting this issue
and promoting an enhanced, integrated approach.
Finally, Nigeria reaffirms its support for the 2015
review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
and remains fully committed to the objectives of the
process. We encourage Member States and other
stakeholders to continue to render their support to the
review process as we collectively seek to improve the
peacebuilding architecture of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Finland.
Mr. Sauer (Finland): I align myself with the
statement made earlier by the observer of the European
Union.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the Nordic countries: Denmark, Iceland, Norway,
Sweden and my own country, Finland.
In today’s world, conflicts are not only increasingly
present, but also more complex. The need for rapid,
flexible and preventive peacebuilding work is greater
than ever. We must therefore ensure that the tools at
our disposal are sharp and fit for purpose. We have
a collective responsibility to make the whole United
Nations system deliver better — before, during and
after violent conflicts.
The review of the peacebuilding architecture
provides us with an excellent opportunity to move this
agenda forward. Allow me to highlight five aspects to
which the Nordic countries pay particular attention:
integration, prevention, inclusiveness, gender equality
and institutions.
First, we need a more effective and integrated
United Nations system. This means breaking the silos
and bringing the three pillars of the United Nations
system together. Cooperation must be seamless.
Peacebuilding is inherently about linking security
and development better together. Only through this
comprehensive approach can we truly address the root
causes behind fragility and conflict, while subsequently
also enhancing the effectiveness of our work with
our partner countries. Political analytical capabilities
should be enhanced and our analysis of conflict drivers
improved. There is also a need for a coordinated
planning process of peacekeeping and peacebuilding

16-0478449/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

activities, in order to ensure a smooth transition from
peacekeeping operations to longer-term development.
Secondly, the message from all recent United
Nations reviews and processes is clear. We must once
and for all put prevention of conflict at the centre and
guarantee adequate resources for preventive action;
otherwise, we will continue aiming our resources at
curing symptoms. In the long run, prevention not only
saves money, but, most importantly, it saves human
lives and alleviates suffering.
Peacebuilding not only prevents countries from
relapsing into conflict but also from lapsing into
conflict in the first place. Peacebuilding is an inherently
political process, and, as such, an important answer to
the call for the primacy of politics.
Another common message stemming from the
peace and security reviews is the need for a more
people-centred approach. This leads to my third
point: inclusiveness. Inclusive national ownership
is crucial to a successful peacebuilding process. The
participation of local communities and civil society,
including women and youth organizations, in peace
and reconciliation processes must be given higher
priority. The potential of youth as agents of positive
change must be recognized, and we welcome Security
Council resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace and
security, adopted last December. The responsibility and
accountability to ensure this widest possible inclusion
remains with every individual country.
Fourthly, the genuine participation of women in
all aspects of peacemaking and peacebuilding is an
indispensable foundation for solid peace and sustainable
development. Women’s participation is crucial to the
success of economic recovery, political legitimacy and
social cohesion. Women bring to the table questions and
concerns that are important to the entire population.
Promoting gender equality and women’s empowerment
is an investment in the stability of societies and the
prevention of conflict.
Finally, I would like to highlight the critical
importance of strengthening the rule of law in countries
emerging from conflict in order to help stabilize the
situation, end impunity, tackle the underlying causes
of conflict and build lasting peace. Effective and
impartial institutions and judicial and security sectors
are essential for peacebuilding. We must do more to
create responsive institutions based on the rule of law.
50/71

23/02/2016

To conclude, I want to reiterate the commitment of
the Nordic countries to the review of the peacebuilding
architecture. The Security Council can count on us to
be engaged also in the next phase as we move towards
the actual implementation of the reforms.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic of Korea): The
Republic of Korea appreciates the initiative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to convene today’s
open debate on “Post-conflict peacebuilding: review
of the peacebuilding architecture”. This debate is
particularly timely as it takes place at a time when
both the Security Council and the General Assembly
are preoccupied with the negotiations over the draft
joint resolutions on the review of the peacebuilding
architecture.
Let me also thank the current and former Chairs
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), Ambassador
Kamau of Kenya and Ambassador Skoog of Sweden,
respectively, for their insightful briefings to the
Council, each bringing unique perspectives from
different phases of the review, which is in its final stage.
I also thank Ambassador Rosenthal, who has been
sitting beside me throughout the entirety of today’s
debate, and his team for the tremendous work done in
leading the Advisory Group of Experts, whose findings
have stimulated very useful and vibrant discussions on
the subject of peacebuilding in the first phase of the
review, and the delegations of Angola and Australia,
which are navigating the second phase of the review
as co-facilitators of the intergovernmental negotiations.
The Republic of Korea, as the recently elected
Vice-Chair of the PBC and as a member of its
Organizational Committee since 2015, fully supports
the statement made by the Chair of the PBC in the
earlier part of today’s debate.
In particular, we concur with the view that, as
we work together to operationalize the outcome of
the review, we need to develop the links between our
collective desire to sustain peace and the principles
agreed under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1). In
this regard, let me lay out my delegation’s views on the
issues proposed by the presidency in its concept note
dated February 1 (S/2016/104).
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

First, one of the most salient observations made by
the report of the Advisory Group of Experts (S/2015/490)
is that the current peacebuilding architecture must
overcome the perennial challenges of underpriority,
underfunding and fragmentation. Taken together, these
challenges are a reflection of the fact that a decade after
its establishment, the Peacebuilding Commission has
yet to find its proper place within the United Nations
system, making it difficult to reach its full potential to
prevent the outbreak, resurgence and relapse of armed
conflict.
To address such shortcomings of the past decade of
peacebuilding, the Republic of Korea is of the view that
due institutional arrangements and political attention
by the Organization should be given to peacebuilding
activities, starting with members of the Security
Council. As the primary organ responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council must be a true partner and patron of
sustaining peace. In this regard, the Republic of Korea
applauds the recent trend seen in the Security Council
to include the PBC in its deliberations, including the
series of open debates convened last year during the
Chile and United Kingdom presidencies, in January and
November, respectively (see S/PV.7359 and S/PV.7561),
as well as the Council briefing and informal interactive
dialogue organized under the Malaysian presidency in
June (see S/PV.7472).
Secondly, the Republic of Korea also agrees with the
point articulated in the Venezuelan presidency’s concept
note (S/2016/104, annex) that successful peacebuilding
requires extensive long-term engagement, with the
recognition that it may not progress in a linear manner.
After the decade-long peacebuilding experiment, one
concrete lesson learned from our experience is that
genuine and sustainable peacebuilding efforts cannot
be limited to post-conflict activity, but rather as efforts
to prevent the lapse and relapse into conflict.
Such an aspiration to prioritize the vision of
long-term and sustainable peace is embodied in the
concept of “sustaining peace” introduced in the report
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacekeeping Architecture (see S/2015/490) and
later explained by its authors to the Member States.
It is therefore our intention to highlight the long-term
nature of peacebuilding engagement in our capacity
as the Chair of the PBC’s Working Group on Lessons
Learned.

S/PV.7629

Thirdly, peacebuilding is a cross-cutting activity
that connects the development, peace and security
and human rights pillars of the United Nations. This
interlinkage is of particular importance to the PBC,
which was established as an intergovernmental
advisory body to the Security Council and the General
Assembly with a specific mandate to focus attention
on the reconstruction and institution-building efforts
necessary for recovery from conflict and to support
the development of integrated strategies in order to
lay the foundation for sustainable development. The
Republic of Korea, as a donor to the various United
Nations conflict-prevention activities, including the
Peacebuilding Fund, recognizes the important nexus
between development and peace and security and
intends to increase its contribution in this area in the
years ahead.
Finally, the importance of the role of regional and
subregional organizations across the full spectrum of
United Nations peace operations cannot be emphasized
enough. The need to engage regional and subregional
organizations in the variety of efforts undertaken by
the United Nations in pursuit of peace and security
has been identified in all recent reviews, including
the report of the Advisory Group of Experts and the
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446). The Republic of Korea is
glad to see that the elements related to this particular
aspect of peacebuilding have garnered consensual
support among the wide membership participating in
the intergovernmental negotiations.
In conclusion, the adoption of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development last September (General
Assembly resolution 70/1), in particular Goal 16,
which calls for peaceful societies, access to justice and
inclusive institutions, presents a historic opportunity for
the United Nations peacebuilding discourse to address
a much broader spectrum in future. In this final phase
of the review, the onus is now on the Security Council
and the General Assembly to seize the opportunity and
lay a foundation for the next decade of a lasting and
sustaining peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, we welcome the invitation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, acting in its capacity
as President of the Security Council, to participate in this

16-0478451/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

important open debate on “Post-conflict peacebuilding:
review of the peacebuilding architecture”. We also
welcome the statements made by Mr. Macharia
Kamau, Permanent Representative of Kenya and Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission, Mr. Olof Skoog,
Permanent Representative of Sweden and former Chair
of the Commission, and Mr. Gert Rosenthal, Chair
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture, whose efforts in the
process we value and warmly acknowledge. It is a great
pleasure to see Mr. Rosenthal again.
My country welcomes the report of the Advisory
Group of Experts (see S/2015/490) in that it has
highlighted a number of the outstanding challenges we
see for peacebuilding today, more than a decade after
the establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Ten years after its establishment, we have a unique
opportunity to make a difference. We must not waste it.
In these 10 years we have learned various lessons
and found excessive fragmentation in the actions
of the Organization, dispersion of efforts and some
inconsistency in the strategies. Coordination among the
principal organs of the United Nations that proposed
establishing the Commission is today far from being
effective, which is why we must analyse the deficiencies
of the system and bring about its repair through concrete
measures that bolster integration.
The Commission has the potential to be a bridge
between the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council, as well as
between Headquarters in New York and field activities,
bringing together all other relevant stakeholders in
peacebuilding, including at the national, subregional
and regional levels. Reaching systemic coherence in
peacebuilding strategies should be our main objective.
The review of the peacebuilding architecture
and the parallel reviews of United Nations peace
operations and of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, are focused on prevention.
The preventive approach currently favoured by the
Organization is linked to the concept of “sustaining
peace” understood as an ongoing process that involves
the peacebuilding system not only at the post-conflict
stage but also before and during conflicts. It is based
on a comprehensive approach that takes into account
the need to address the root causes of conflict through,
inter alia, strengthening the rule of law, the promotion
of sustained and sustainable economic growth, poverty
52/71

23/02/2016

eradication, social development, the promotion of
democracy and respect for human rights.
The aforementioned preventive approach includes,
in a necessary and decisive manner, inclusive national
ownership in the peacebuilding process, that is, a
fundamental involvement of Governments and of the
various political and social stakeholders in the Member
States involved in these processes. As the report
notes, such inclusive national ownership should be
encouraged, since the United Nations and international
actors can support and facilitate this process, but not
lead it.
In this context, we understand the need to
systemically address the processes of peacebuilding, as
has been done through the incorporation of a gender
perspective and, perhaps with greater flexibility,
reflecting on how it could work beyond the format of
country configurations. Peacebuilding activities are
carried out in the field, not at agency headquarters,
given that domestic realities must take precedence. For
this, it is necessary to have flexible approaches, since
there is no single approach that will work in every case.
(spoke in English)
There is no “one size fits all” in peacebuilding.
(spoke in Spanish)
The lack of attention devoted to peacebuilding is
reflected mainly in the meagre allocation of resources
to the development of related activities. In that regard,
we stress the need for predictable and sustainable
funding for peacebuilding activities. And in that vein,
we agree with the recommendation by the Advisory
Group to allocate $100 million to the Peacebuilding
Fund annually or, if the figure were greater, an amount
equivalent to 1 per cent of the total budget of the United
Nations for peacekeeping operations and special
political missions, in the framework of contributions
established for the budget of the Organization.
Another important point raised both in the report
of the Advisory Group and in your concept note
(S/2016/104, annex), Mr. President, is the need to
review the time frames on which the processes and
programmes towards the achievement of sustainable
peace are structured. They must necessarily be longer
as they refer to stages of development. The 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly
resolution 70/1), which we approved in September 2015,
proposes the promotion of fair, peaceful and inclusive
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

societies, thereby linking the sustainment of peace and
development. Peacebuilding architecture that aspires
to sustain a stable international order cannot neglect
these three interrelated dimensions: development
challenges, financing and time frames consistent with
the objectives to be achieved.
Lastly, I would like to emphasize that regional
and subregional organizations are also essential to
partnerships that are conducive to peacebuilding
processes. In that regard, in the Americas, consideration
should be given to the role that could be played by the
Organization of American States or other subregional
organizations such as the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States, the Union of South
American Nations and the South American Common
Market.
Argentina welcomes the fact that the issue of
peacebuilding has been brought to the attention
of Member States and trusts that the review of
its architecture, which began with the report of
the Advisory Group, will help to strengthen the
Organization, giving it more effective tools to foster
peace and the development of peoples.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Komada (Slovakia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this debate on
post-conflict peacebuilding and the review of the
peacebuilding architecture. I should also like to thank
the briefers — the Permanent Representatives of Sweden
and Kenya to the United Nations, and Ambassador Gert
Rosenthal — for their comprehensive presentations.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European Union.
I will limit myself to a few remarks.
Advancing peace and security, and helping to build
peaceful and just societies around the world lie at the
heart of the work of the United Nations. Sustaining
peace requires continued engagement by and greater
coherence and coordination among the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council, consistent with their mandates as set
out in the Charter of the United Nations.
Currently, we are in a critical period for global
peacebuilding, as demonstrated by our ongoing efforts
to reinforce the relevance and impact of United Nations
peacebuilding on a successful war-to-peace transition.

S/PV.7629

We hope that the current stocktaking and analytical
review of the peacebuilding architecture will result in
the strengthening of its added value to overall United
Nations peace efforts.
The peacebuilding architecture was established
10 years ago to prevent countries from relapsing into
violence, to mobilize resources and political will, and
to build national capacity for long-lasting peace and
development. It was established as an integrated field
that brings together different elements of conflict
resolution, with particular emphasis on holistic
United Nations action and the eschewal of fragmented
approaches.
Today peacebuilding activities have become
increasingly
complex,
multidisciplinary
and
multifaceted. Post-conflict development programmes
are implemented in countries where the root
causes of conflict — underdevelopment, rising
inequality, denial of human rights and weak State
institutions — are intricately linked. More should
be done to better harmonize and adjust the mostly
standard development strategies and activities of
international organizations and bilateral donors to
the complex political, security and social realities in
conflict-affected countries. I would also underline the
need for gender mainstreaming in all United Nations
peacemaking and peacekeeping work. It is vitally
important to better understand and explore ways to
make peace more durable, and to deal with the root
causes and issues that drive conflict.
More than a decade after the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission, we still face the challenges
of how to more effectively measure, monitor and
evaluate progress in the context of peacebuilding.
Chronic wars and protracted conflicts prevented
the full achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals in many countries around the world. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) — the next generation of
development goals — acknowledges the role of violence
and fragility in cycles of poverty and the important
link between peace and development. The inclusion of
Goal 16 and its 12 related targets in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development reflects the growing
recognition of the importance of peace, safety and good
governance to the traditional development paradigm.
When countries transition out of conflict, Goal 16
should provide a platform for continuity of support to

16-0478453/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

reforms in all rule-of-law areas, which are critical to
sustaining peace.
Effective peacebuilding requires a thorough
reform of the security sector in societies emerging
from conflict, as the provision of security and the
rule of law are assumed to be core preconditions for
the achievement of sustainable peace. In unanimously
adopting resolution 2151 (2014), the Security Council
reaffirmed that reforming the security sector in postconflict environments is critical to consolidating peace
and stability, promoting poverty reduction, the rule of
law and good governance, extending legitimate State
authority and preventing countries from relapsing into
conflict.
The Security Council also recognized the
important role of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Peacebuilding Fund in supporting security-sector
reform. Security-sector reform must remain a key
element in the political processes of States recovering
from conflict. Governments, regional organizations
and the United Nations must continue their assistance
in support of national efforts to develop security
institutions that are accountable, accessible and
responsive to the needs of their population.
In conclusion, I would like to underline that the
relevance of civil-society engagement, including
women’s civil-society organizations, in peace and
security matters is emphasized in both the 2015
report of the High-Level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446) and the 2015 review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture.

23/02/2016

considering the necessity for peace operations. In that
respect, United Nations cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations is integral to sustaining
international peace and security.
The report of the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture
(see S/2015/490) also acknowledges that the task of
sustaining peace globally goes beyond the capacity
of what the United Nations can deliver on its own.
Partnerships with local communities, regional and
subregional actors, donors and civil society are essential
to make peace sustainable.
South Africa is encouraged by this aspect of the
report and the progress made by the United Nations
in strengthening its partnerships with regional
organizations, particularly the efforts to institutionalize
its relationship with the African Union. Cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations is critical,
as the need for sustainable development in post-conflict
scenarios is contingent on the regional environment
in which these countries exist. In that regard, my
delegation calls for greater synergy between the
efforts of the Peacebuilding Commission and those of
regional and subregional organizations, in particular
the African Union and its post-conflict reconstruction
and development policies and organs.

Mr. Mminele (South Africa): Please allow me
to join other delegations in congratulating you,
Mr. President, for having convened this timely and
informative debate. Let me also congratulate the
co-facilitators of the intergovernmental peacebuilding
architecture review, the Permanent Representatives
of Angola and Australia, on the excellent manner in
which they are moving the process forward. I assure
them of South Africa’s support. I also wish to thank
Ambassadors Kamau, Skoog and Rosenthal for their
briefings.

Some of the key conclusions and recommendations
emanating from the report of the Advisory Group
of Experts on the 2015 review of the peacebuilding
architecture also remind us that the United Nations has
the core mandate of sustaining peace. As a result, that
thread must flow throughout all of the Organization’s
engagements, from preventative action to peacemaking,
peace enforcement, peacekeeping and post-conflict
recovery and reconstruction engagement. That mandate
must inform and be incorporated across all the sectors
and phases of action. It is for those reasons that South
Africa supports the recommendation that the challenge
of sustaining peace should be assumed by the entire
United Nations system, including the three relevant
intergovernmental organs. South Africa believes that
such efforts should include other role-players, such
as the international financial institutions, the private
sector, local communities, regional and subregional
organizations and donors.

My delegation recognizes that the core message
of the reviews of the peace operations is that conflict
prevention must be a central component when

My delegation is supportive of having the Security
Council exercise some flexibility in its working methods
in order to allow the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.

54/71

16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

to effectively play its role in advising the Council on
institution-building in post-conflict situations. We
encourage the Security Council, working in consultation
with the PBC, to make sure that peacebuilding tasks
related to institution-building are working in an
appropriate synergy with all peacekeeping mandates.
The report of the Advisory Group of Experts also
calls for a people-centred and inclusive approach at
the national level that will provide a common vision to
all domestic stakeholders. South Africa fully supports
that approach and believes that national ownership of
peacebuilding efforts is at the core of creating sustainable
institutions in the immediate aftermath of conflict. The
international community has the obligation to build
on national efforts and advise countries, based on the
priorities that they have identified for themselves. The
United Nations and the international community in
general should support and complement national efforts
towards the development of institutions immediately
after the signing of a peace agreement and the end
of open conflict, in order to support the newly found
peace. Where peacekeeping operations exist, capacityand institution-building should be simultaneously
pursued if conditions so permit.
We support the need for the Peacebuilding Fund to
leverage funding so as to catalyse additional voluntary
contributions, and for the Fund to consider developing
a new funding area around efforts to strengthen the
capacity of regional organizations.
Finally, my delegation maintains the view that
institution- and capacity-building in post-conflict
countries requires a substantial injection of resources
and more predictable funding. Consideration should
be given to having the United Nations finance the
Peacebuilding Fund from its assessed contributions,
as recommended by the Advisory Group of Experts, in
order for the United Nations to achieve its objective of
sustaining peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela for organizing this debate at a time when
the international community is striving to review the
peacebuilding architecture. We also congratulate you,
Mr. President, for the quality and clarity of the concept
note (S/2016/104, annex) that you have shared with
Member States.

S/PV.7629

The review of the peacebuilding architecture is
entering its final phase, with the intergovernmental
negotiations on the identical draft resolutions to be
adopted by the Security Council and the General
Assembly. I would also like to also thank Ambassador
Skoog for his briefing, which was edifying, and pay a
heartfelt tribute to the work carried out by Ambassador
Rosenthal and the members of the Advisory Group of
Experts. My delegation also welcomes the briefing by
the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
Ambassador Kamau, and reiterates its full support to
him.
Since the establishment of the PBC, 10 years
ago, significant progress has been achieved, first, in
understanding the specific challenges that emerge
from conflict and, secondly, in better coordinating
international efforts, including among United Nations
entities. However, further progress can still be made
through our collective efforts, in particular in improving
our ability to mobilize resources over the long term and
in coordinating the actions of various donors in order
to support the strategies that have been worked out with
the Governments concerned.
The Kingdom of Morocco is engaged in
peacebuilding activities, both at the bilateral level
and at the level of the United Nations as a member of
the Peacebuilding Commission for third time since
its establishment and in its capacity as Chair of the
PBC’s Central African Republic country-specific
configuration since January 2014. In that context,
the Kingdom of Morocco supports the review of the
peacebuilding architecture, and its interlinkage with the
strategic review of peace operations and the review on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is crucial.
Those reviews will, we hope, allow us to harmonize all
the intervention modalities within the United Nations in
countries in conflict or emerging from conflict — from
prevention to post-conflict stabilization, peacekeeping
and the management of the transitional period. In that
regard, we welcome the initiative taken by the President
of the General Assembly to hold a high-level debate on
peace and security in May.
I would now like to highlight some particular points
that seem to us to be of central importance.
The review invites us to change our understanding
of peacebuilding and to view it through a broader
prism. The complexity of the new conflicts facing the
international community transcends the traditional

16-0478455/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

view of conflict resolution followed so far, as was noted
by the Advisory Group of Experts. Any peacebuilding
process should be part of a holistic approach that
combines all actions — from prevention to restoring
peace, peacekeeping and post-conflict State-building.
The interaction among the various United Nations
actors and external actors in peacebuilding should be
reviewed so as to ensure better synergy in the efforts
carried out both at the strategic decision-making level
and in the field. Peacebuilding must also be carried out
from a multidimensional perspective that takes into
account the economic, political and social aspects of
the conflict.
Secondly, we must ensure that all components of a
post-conflict society, all movements and all political and
ethnic allegiances are included. That is a prerequisite for
the success of peacebuilding efforts. Looking for peace
should not be a goal in and of itself. Rather, peace must
be constantly maintained and should be considered as
a way to bring about security, prosperity and the wellbeing of affected populations. In order to be definitive
and lasting, peace must emerge from within the society
in conflict and not be imposed from outside. A peace
that does not bring together all the vital forces of the
country cannot last.
Peace should not be viewed in a standardized and
uniform way or applied in a one-size-fits-all manner.
A simplistic vision of peace that does not take into
consideration the particularities of every situation, the
priorities and sensibilities of each population will be
doomed to failure.
The involvement of women in the early stages of
the peace process is essential, given their proven role
in easing tensions, promoting economic recovery
and strengthening political legitimacy and social
cohesion. Civil-society actors and non-governmental
organizations must also be involved to a greater extent
in the work of the PBC. Their presence on the ground
and their knowledge of the situation in the country, as
well as their analytical capabilities, allow them to make
relevant proposals on the long-term strategies that need
to be adopted.
The transition process at the end of the mandate
of a United Nations mission must be carefully planned
and based on an objective and careful analysis of the
situation under review and must not be the result of
purely budgetary or logistical considerations.
56/71

23/02/2016

The transfer of responsibilities between a mission
and the country office continues to be problematic,
given the differences in human and financial resources
between those two entities. It is for that reason that
the capacities of country offices should be further
strengthened.
Thirdly, it is time that the PBC’s role and position in
the peacebuilding architecture be given the recognition
and interest they deserve. Having an advisory role,
the PBC is called on to support the work of the main
organs of the United Nations and to coordinate their
peacebuilding efforts within the framework of an
integrated and global approach. The Council has to
increase its interaction with the PBC and its countryspecific configurations beyond simply looking at
annual reports of the Commission and the periodic
reports on the six countries on its ageanda. Called on
to fulfil the three main functions under the mandate,
namely, political support, the mobilization of resources
and ensuring coherence among various actors in
peacebuilding, the PBC and its country configurations
have become a major player in maintaining peace and
promoting development in post-conflict situations. The
Commission and the country configurations must be
systematically invited to take part in the deliberations
of the Council, which should take fully into account
their contributions and proposals.
Fourthly, mobilizing appropriate financial support
in a structured, predictable and lasting way is the key
to the success of peacebuilding actions. Without the
appropriate financial resources to provide financial
support, the initiatives aimed at bringing together all
parties to a conflict to disarm former combatants,
integrate them into society, restore State authority,
reform the security and justice sectors and provide
economic recovery are at risk of not being achieved.
The stakeholders, be they of the United Nations, local
stakeholders, Goverments, the private sector, regional
organizations or international financial institutions,
must cooperate in order to define as closely as possible
the funding needs for peacebuilding activities in postconflict countries.
The Peacebuilding Fund is one of the components
of the peacebuilding architecture that has had an
extremely positive impact since its creation. Success
means that it is now a recognized and viable actor
when it comes to financing in post-conflict situations.
Nonetheless, although its track record is largely positive,
the Peacebuilding Fund cannot simply content itself
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

with voluntary contributions coming from members.
More interactions, and not only with donors, will
enable it to inform all Member States on the numerous
projects financed by the Fund. Those steps, which are
being put in place, would enable it to broader the donor
base and encourage even those countries that already
contributing to the Fund to increase their contributions.
The work carried out by the PBC on generating
domestic resources and local tax collection, the fight
against illegal flows and support for the proper use of
natural resources must be strengthened, together with
international financial institutions, in order to allow
countries emerging from conflicts to particpate equally
in the economic recovery of their economies.
Fifthly, peacebuilding efforts can be successful only
if they are part of a global and integrated development
strategy that fights the deep underlying causes of
conflicts and meets the hopes and socioeconomic
aspirations of countries emerging from conflicts. Peace
and development are independent and indivisible. To
be efficient and have lasting effect, peacebuilding
must take into account and attempt to resolve the
underlying causes of conflict. Rebuilding a viable
economy after a long period of conflict remains one of
the more difficult challenges within the peacebuilding
process. A country emerging from conflict has to be
able to ensure macroeconomic stability, create jobs
and generate economic growth. Convinced that SouthSouth cooperation has become essential because of the
urgency and scope of challenges facing developing and
fragile States, Morocco works bilaterally and trilaterally
to put together specific and diversified partnership
projects in productive sectors, stimulating growth and
creating jobs that help with human development and
directly affect the lives of citizens.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the initiative of holding this open debate, which
gives us an opportunity to consider the current United
Nations architecture review process for peacebuilding
in post-conflict situations. We are particularly grateful
to Ambassador Rosenthal, who is here today, for the
valuable report (see s/2015/490) he presented, as well
as to the briefers for their presentations made this
morning.
Since the foundation of the Organization, the
international community has understood that peace

S/PV.7629

is not merely the absence of conflict. That is why
the Charter of the United Nations sets out three
fundamental and interdependent pillars that are
mutually reinforcing: ensuring international peace and
security, achieving development and promoting and
protecting human rights. In the same vein, last year we
adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1), which indicates that
sustainable development cannot be achieved without
peace and security and that these are at risk without
sustainable development. In that context, we believe it
is important to mention the direct relationship between
sustainable development Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda
with peacebuilding, given that building of stable,
fair and peaceful societies in which human rights are
respected and promoted, thus enabling participation in
the political, social and cultural life of a country, would
be the best guarantee for lasting peace.
With that interdependence in mind, over 10 years
ago we decided to build a peacebuilding architecture for
the United Nations with a view to permanently breaking
the cycle of conflict by attacking its root cuases.
Unfortunately, in this review process we have noted the
limited impact of the structure when developing its work
of supporting States that have suffered the consequences
of conflict during the process of peacebuilding. We
agree with the report of the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture on the
need to adopt a series of measures to improve actions
in the field and give direction to peacebuilding, leaving
behind the problem of fragmented responsibilities
across the agencies of the United Nations system. My
delegation believes that the Peacebuilding Commission
must play a role of coordination, promoting synergies
and connections between the main bodies of the
Organization and agencies of the system responsible for
supporting States that have suffered from the results of
conflict. That should be complemented with its main
function of supporting States in post-conflict situations
by applying policies drawn up by national Governments
in accordance with their priorities, bearing in mind
the interdependence among security, development and
human rights.
Peru has always expressed its strict adherence to
the principle of national ownership of the execution
of national development plans in the process of
peacebuilding in post-conflict situations. For we
believe that peacebuilding is inherently an internal
political process, where the Government of a country

16-0478457/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

that has suffered from a conflict must work with the
political forces, former combatants and civil society
organizations in order to achieve national reconciliation
and set national priorities for development. The work of
the United Nations should be to facilitate that process
by providing assistance, political support and the
necessary financing to establish the basis for lasting
peace.
Peru believes that the scope of the challenge
of maintaing lasting peace requires that the United
Nations establish broader strategic and operational
links with regional and subregional organizations, as
well as with international financial institutions. The
latter is fundamental to ensuring appropriate financing
for the work of peacebuilding on the ground. Peru also
believes that the General Assembly should review
the appropriateness of providing greater resources
to develop peacebuilding activities, as well as to
strengthen the Peacebuilding Support Office.
In conclusion, I believe that that the United Nations
should adopt a holistic focus that includes preventive
diplomacy actions in support of the processes of
peaceful conflict resolution, preventing the relapse of
conflict and making peacebuilding possible. In that
regard, early warning systems should be adopted to
prevent conflicts in strategies and the actions of all
United Nations agencies, particularly those directly
involved in development work. The adoption of such
a holistic focus will make it possible for us to resolve
the fragmentation of the system when it comes to
peacebuilding processes and include the objective of
attaining lasting peace as the realization of the mission
of the Organization to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I would like to thank the
Venezuelan presidency for organizing today’s timely
debate on the review of the peacebuilding architecture.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union and would like
to make the following remarks in its national capacity.
The international community still witnesses
too many countries relapsing into conflict within
short periods of time. While there have been notable
successes in peacebuilding, it is important to note
that, 10 years from the inception of the peacebuilding
58/71

23/02/2016

architecture and five years from the previous review,
we are yet to realize its full potential. That serves to
underline the importance of focusing on concrete
steps on how to make the peacebuilding review lead
to concrete results. Estonia would like to highlight the
following aspects that are crucial for bringing the full
potential of peacebuilding to the fore.
We must put the prevention of conflict at the centre
if we are serious about sustaining peace. That was one
core message that came out from last year’s reviews — the
United Nations system needs to strengthen its ability
to prevent conflicts from reoccurring. Peacebuilding
is primarily a political process that requires long-term
engagement. It should address the structural causes of
conflicts as well as contemporary risks of recurrence.
One of the most effective ways to sustain peace and
prevent conflict is by building national capacity,
strengthening domestic institutions and supporting
good governance. In that context, I would also like to
highlight that sustainable development is crucial for
sustainable peace.
Peacebuilding should no longer be viewed as merely
a post-conflict activity, but rather the challenge to meet
in order to sustain peace throughout the complete cycle
of our engagement. In that regard, Estonia would like to
underscore the importance of linking the peacebuilding
review to the Secretary-General’s review of peace
operations, the review of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, and
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1). This
holistic approach of addressing the interdependence
between peace, security and development should
include the protection of human rights, including
attention to women’s rights, whose meaningful
participation in peace consolidation can significantly
improve the results.
Better coordination is needed if we are to
strengthen peacebuilding. Effective national, regional
and international partnerships enable more relevant
approaches to targeting specific peacebuilding
needs to be jointly developed. The United Nations
system — both at country level and at Headquarters
level — needs to work in a more coordinated fashion. To
that end, Estonia, in its capacity as the Vice-President
of the Economic and Social Council, has participated
in discussions with the Peacebuilding Commission on
finding ways to strengthen cooperation between the
two bodies.
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Lastly, more predictable and sustained funding is
required to achieve the full potential of the peacebuilding
architecture. Estonia has supported the Peacebuilding
Fund (PBF) since 2013, as we believe that the PBF is
an effective peacebuilding instrument for providing
catalytic, fast and flexible assistance. However, since
the PBF remains a relatively small-scale strategic fund,
it has to be complemented by longer-term commitments
from other financing sources, such as multilateral and
regional development banks.
The increasing number of violent conflicts across
the globe serves as a strong reminder of why we need
to attach greater importance to peacebuilding, as it is
an important avenue for conflict prevention. Estonia
believes that we need to use the opportunity that the
peacebuilding review offers to produce bold, concrete
and significant outcomes for reinvigorating the
peacebuilding architecture.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Medan (Croatia): We thank the Venezuelan
presidency for holding today’s timely debate on the
review of the peacebuilding architecture.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union. I would
like to make some additional remarks in my national
capacity.
Croatia welcomes the report (see S/2015/490) of
the Advisory Group of Experts and fully supports its
conclusions that the United Nations must see sustaining
peace as the core task set by the Charter of the United
Nations. Peacebuilding should not be regarded as a
peripheral activity within the United Nations but as a
high priority.
The concept of peacebuilding has evolved since the
inception of the peacebuilding architecture, reflecting
the changing nature of international threats in an everchanging world. Originally conceived in the context of
post-conflict recovery efforts to promote reconciliation
and reconstruction, the term peacebuilding has more
recently taken on a much broader meaning. There is
recognition that the peacebuilding should not be limited
only to post-conflict engagement.
Many agree that the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) should adapt to a rapidly changing environment.
In that context, we share the view that we have to use
the review of the peacebuilding architecture in order to

S/PV.7629

make the Peacebuilding Commission more relevant and
efficient.
We welcome the considerable accomplishments
achieved by the PBC since its establishment, in 2005,
but we also recognize that it is facing with many
challenges. There is an impression that the expected
impact of the PBC is far from being fully achieved. In
that context, we believe that additional improvements
of the Commission’s working methods, as well as their
rationalization, would be welcome. There is also a
need for improving and strengthening the relationship
between the PBC and the three principal United Nations
organs — namely, the General Assembly, Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council — as
well as other relevant actors.
Croatia advocates for a holistic, people-centred,
country-tailored approach to peacebuilding that
recognizes national specificities, respects regional
expertise and empowers local actors. At the same
time, international efforts should be more effectively
integrated into locally and regionally owned efforts
towards building peace. Croatia also advocates for the
need to facilitate and build broadly inclusive national
ownership. We believe that women’s empowerment
greatly contributes to enhancing inclusivity and
cohesion, and therefore welcome the fact that the PBC
continues to attach importance to the role of women
in peacebuilding and their contribution to building
and sustaining peace. We also stress the importance
of the inclusion and empowerment of youth in national
peacebuilding priorities and actions. We welcome the
fact that the PBC recognizes the indispensable role
played by young people in any effort to sustain peace.
For peacebuilding efforts to be successful, long-term
political and financial support is needed, as well as
partnerships among local communities, Governments,
the private sector and regional and international
organizations, including international financial
institutions.
Peacebuilding requires the sustained and
coordinated commitment of national, regional and
international actors. Sustaining peace requires coherent
and coordinated action among the principal organs
of the United Nations, between Headquarters and the
field, and among different peacebuilding actors. There
is also the need for a parallel focus on political, security
and development issues. We therefore believe that the
review process of peacebuilding architecture should
be linked to other review processes — namely, the

16-0478459/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

review of peacekeeping operations and the review of
the progress in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) — as well as to a new sustainable development
agenda. All those processes should establish strong
linkages among peace, security, development and
human rights. True, comprehensive development cannot
be achieved and sustained without peace. Likewise,
peace cannot be achieved or sustained without justice,
and peace, development and justice are not possible
without respect for human rights.
The peacebuilding architecture review process gives
us a chance to improve our prospects for advancing the
course of peacebuilding, and that opportunity should
not be missed. Finally, let me reiterate Croatia’s strong
support to such efforts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Mendoza-García (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): We congratulate you, Sir, and the Venezuelan
Mission for the work it is doing this month during
its presidency of the Security Council and for
having convened today’s open debate on a subject of
vital importance for my delegation. We thank the
Ambassadors of Kenya and Sweden and Mr. Rosenthal
for their briefings earlier today.
As a peace-loving nation that voluntarily disarmed
67 years ago, Costa Rica is a firm believer in the peaceful
settlement of conflicts between peoples and between
States within a framework of international law and
multilateral diplomacy. That decision was made based
on our conviction of the importance of contributing to
international peace and security, principles that govern
our foreign policy. It is vital that we exchange the logic
of confrontation, blame and war for one of good faith,
goodwill and peace.
As is stipulated in its Charter, the main objective
of the United Nations must remain the maintenance of
peace, which requires that we act preventively and in
a timely fashion and that we be capable of preventing
conflicts and of maintaining a presence during and
after them. The post-conflict period is a critical stage,
and under no circumstances should be pushed into the
background. Since its creation, the United Nations
approach to the maintenance of international peace
and security has evolved significantly. The global
dynamic has changed, with the emergence of new types
of conflicts and movements. The situation is more
complex and the clashes last longer, and therefore the
60/71

23/02/2016

international Organization has to be more adaptive.
Modern conflicts have tended to transcend borders,
entering a new, transnational dimension. While that
makes the role of the United Nations a fundamental
one, it does the same for the regional and subregional
organizations that take on a more specific responsibility
for conflict areas. In that regard, creating alliances is
crucial.
Since the maintenance of peace is the principal
objective of the United Nations, it is essential that we
have shared responsibility and that all its Members
focus seriously on prevention, reconstruction and postconflict recovery, not just on the imposition of peace.
The fragmentation and lack of cohesion in the United
Nations are major problems that pose significant
obstacles to peacebuilding, and we have to address and
solve them and thus provide a speedy response to them.
We should place great emphasis on preventing
conflicts, both operationally and structurally. The
big challenges to peace require, among other things,
establishing greater economic equity, building
sustainable development, human security and effective
democratic participation, and replacing a culture of
violence with a culture of peace. Violent conflicts
are often a symptom of the existence of profound
inequalities, social exclusion, violations of human
rights and a lack of good governance and the rule of
law, to name only a few. Our challenge is arriving at
transitions to lasting peace that can enable democratic
participation in decision-making and the full
implementation of the Goals, targets and indicators of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1). Achieving sustainable
development is a prerequisite for preventing relapses
into conflict.
Peacebuilding definitely requires more time than
we currently allow it. We must work on post-conflict
reconstruction by rebuilding legitimate institutions
and restoring the people’s trust. That requires adequate
transition time and careful attention to human rights,
security and sustainable development. That is how to
build inclusive, sustainable peace that is not imposed
and runs no risk of relapsing into conflict.
Women’s participation is and will remain essential
to maintaining peace. As stated in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2010/466) on women’s participation
in peacebuilding and the report (see S/2015/490) of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Peacebuilding Architecture, women are crucial partners
in the transition from war to peace. They are key agents
in promoting social cohesion, political legitimacy and
economic recovery. We must also continue to demand
respect for the policy of zero tolerance for sexual abuse.
In regions as diverse as Central Asia, Africa and the
Middle East, many countries are struggling to address
the root causes of conflict, while in January 2014 the
Presidents and Heads of State of Latin America and the
Caribbean proclaimed the region a zone of peace and
reiterated their continued commitment to the peaceful
settlement of disputes, with the goal of banishing
forever the use or threat of use of force in our region.
Our Heads of State also stressed the commitment of
the States of the region to complying strictly with their
obligation not to intervene, directly or indirectly, in the
internal affairs of any other State and to observing the
principles of national sovereignty, equal rights and the
people’s right to self-determination.
We are very happy with the joint statement of
19 January issued by the Government of Colombia and
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
committing to their final peace accords. That goal
became even closer with the Security Council’s
unanimous adoption, on 25 January, of resolution
2261 (2016), which creates a political monitoring and
verification mission that will have the support of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States.
On top of that came the announcement, on 16 February,
of the creation of a post-conflict stabilization and
peacebuilding fund. There can be no question that
the support we provide to that peace process will be
of benefit to the whole world. Costa Rica hopes that
Colombia will achieve its longed-desired irreversible
transition from war to sustainable peace with the
support of the international community.
My delegation believes that peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are necessarily achieved through the
promotion of a culture of peace. We are talking about
an educational task based on studying and preventing
conflict, eliminating cultural violence, and promoting
disarmament, as well as educating people so that
dissent and non-conformism do not become triggers
of violence. Peace will continue to be a constant
challenge demanding means, resources, personnel and
thoughtfulness.
The existence of the University for Peace sends
a message that tells the entire world that peace is

S/PV.7629

not born out of nothing but is rather the result of a
constant building process, a question of responsibility
to humankind and one that must be worked on if it is
to be achieved. In that regard, we are very honoured
that Costa Rica hosts that academic institution, in
recognition of our pacifist, democratic, unarmed civic
tradition and on our trust in the multilateral system and
international law as our only instruments of defence.
At this seventieth anniversary of the United Nations,
the three review processes connected to peace — of
peace operations, the peacebuilding architecture and
women and peace and security — have taken on great
importance. What is crucial now is to be able to integrate
them and, above all, to truly understand and apply the
experts’ recommendations. It is vital that we meet Goal
16 of the 2030 Agenda, which we must all support in
order to promote and strengthen security at both the
national and international levels by strengthening
democracy and human rights and promoting respect
for the rule of law. The world we bequeath to future
generations demands an enduring and collective effort
if we are to build a lasting and sustainable peace for all.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Paraguay.
Mr. González Franco (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of the Government of Paraguay, I
would like to congratulate your country, Mr. President,
on the way it has led the Security Council this month,
enabling us to hold important debates on issues that
demand urgent and thorough attention on the part
of the membership of the United Nations. Today we
meet to discuss its new peacebuilding architecture, an
issue that is particularly important considering what a
challenge it is to try to achieve settlements, peace and
reconciliation for post-conflict societies.
One might think that the importance of
peacebuilding and its architecture is merely relative,
vital only to those countries that endure the tragic
experience of conflict. But the level of attendance and
interest in this debate underscores the commitment that
every State made to the task of adapting its structure,
procedures and multilateral approach to today’s new
requirements in order to make them clearly more
effective.
While the current peacebuilding architecture is
barely 10 years old, the pace of events and the results
we have achieved have brought us to the realization that
where we are now is at the end of a phase. As a nation

16-0478461/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

that promotes peace, we contend that complying with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations demands that we come up with new methods of
work that include early warning systems and effective
monitoring mechanisms. That can be achieved through
budgets that are more needs-based, the more efficient
management of available financial resources and bettertrained human resources, all of this within a modern
institutional framework that will enable us to sustain
peacekeeping results. But above all, it will enable us to
prevent a relapse into conflict.
I need not remind the Council that billions of
dollars have been allocated for quite some time now
by the international community to programmes aimed
at stabilizing post-conflict situations, without the
necessary conditions for sustainability required to
ensure that their effects are perceptible in the medium
and long terms. In such cases, we could affirm that,
given the absence of such a structure and objectives,
the resources of States have not been efficiently used in
the context of the weakening and exhaustion of funding
sources.
We therefore highlight the crucial importance
of coordinating efforts to ensure that the effects and
benefits of development are linked with those resulting
from similar endeavours undertaken on the basis of
the guiding principles of peacebuilding, as there is no
doubt that the progress made in terms of development
will inevitably have the effect of consolidating the
prevailing elements that strengthen peacebuilding and
improve post-conflict conditions.
Finally, and without suggesting this is less
important, we want to stress the necessary and urgent
optimization of resources that should accompany
any reformulation of the peacebuilding architecture.
We believe that regardless of the modalities for
reformulation, it would be unacceptable to think of yet
another drain on financial resources without clearly
defined objectives and results, as has happened in
the past. The international community is already
engaged in too many joint efforts, such as achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals and a new climate
change agenda, to stress only the most important,
which require ongoing and increasing efforts in all
areas and the maximal optimization of existing and
future resources.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sierra Leone.
62/71

23/02/2016

Mr. Minah (Sierra Leone): I wish to commend the
Venezuelan presidency of the Council for convening
this important debate. It is indeed timely that we are
here today while elsewhere deliberations continue on
the twin draft resolutions concerning the Advisory
Group of Experts report (see S/2015/490). I would like
to commend the work of the Swedish chairmanship of
the Peacebuilding Commission and wish Ambassador
Kamau the very best as he assumes the post of Chair.
I would also like to acknowledge the work of the
co-facilitators of the intergovernmental process and
commend them for the way in which they are guiding
our work.
With your indulgence, Mr. President, I will submit
my written comments as part of the record, but I will
now address certain salient points which I believe have
arisen during the course of our debate.
The issue of sustaining peace is the central focus
of the Advisory Group of Experts report. For that we
commend Ambassador Rosenthal and his team for
focusing our attention on the urgency of the matter. As
far as Africa is concerned, it has been a key beneficiary
of the peacebuilding efforts of the Organization and
of key partners. We realize, however, that we need to
do more. We fully expect and hope that the guns of
conflict will grow silent by 2020, and that is reflected
in our “Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want”. Africa
welcomes the key recommendations of the Advisory
Group of Experts report, and we believe that it provides
us a way forward.
On the issue of the definition of sustaining peace,
or peace sustainability, we believe that on this issue a
compelling case has been put forward by Ambassador
Rosenthal and his team. It is now a question of the
evolution not only of our thinking but also of practical,
political and diplomatic responses to the report. The old
thinking of peacebuilding as post-conflict, or thinking
of peacebuilding as something that happens when
considering a relapse into conflict, is now outdated. We
fully concur with that position.
Peacebuilding encompasses a whole range of
activities on conflict prevention. It starts before a conflict
is fully realized, when we see the causes of conflict
gathering. In the deliberations we have had today, the
issues have focused on financing and the viability of
the report. I do believe that the consensus is that the
report is well received and its core recommendations
are worthy of our strong consideration. But beyond
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

accepting the report and beyond praising the report, it
calls for compelling action. Time is of the essence. The
Organization, both within its core institutions, agencies
and committees in-house and those in the field, needs
to evolve and adapt to the new realities. Africa, as one
of the primary beneficiaries of peacebuilding efforts,
welcomes a greater, innovative partnership with the
United Nations. We believe that the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the Security Council
together can deepen their relationship for the benefit
of all.
With the reports that were recently delivered to
us–the Advisory Group of Experts report and the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/716) on women and
peace and security and the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000)- and with all the elements that we have
to consider, it is important that we do not waste time.
We welcome the deliberations on the draft resolutions,
but we are concerned that the question of financing
seems to be a sticking point. It is quite clear that for
peacebuilding, or rather sustainable peace, to take hold,
there has to be clear, predictable financing.
We take on board the concerns of those States
and those delegations that are concerned that assessed
contributions may not be the way to go. However, we
believe that multi-year voluntary contributions must
be the minimum standard. It is for those delegations
that consider that the assessed contributions route
might be problematic, given the United Nations
financial system, namely, the Fifth Committee and the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, to make the case that there is another option
that is equally satisfactory. The need for funding is
critical to all that we hope the Peacebuilding Fund, the
Peacebuilding Support Office and the Peacebuilding
Commission will evolve and become. Without it, they
will not fulfil our best hopes.
The issue of financing is one that I believe we can
resolve. It is possible to create a mechanism of oversight
that can look at both a twin track of assessed and
voluntary contributions and report to the Council and
to the Commission on its success during a pilot phase.
I do not believe that we have to choose one or the other.
The course of the deliberations during the discussions
on the draft resolutions appears to have moved away
from the symbolic 1 per cent, the $100 million mark.
However, as has been reported and noted here in the
Council, the figure, the symbolic 1 per cent is a mere
drop in the ocean of the billions in funds that are devoted

S/PV.7629

to peacebuilding and humanitarian programmes. It is
not, therefore, wildly ambitious; we believe that it is, in
fact, quite modest.
We believe that the Secretary-General’s marker
of 15 per cent for gender mainstreaming in all
peacebuilding programmes is similarly modest and
something that we should heartily embrace. Research
shows that, in any peacebuilding process, the effect of
having women fully involved increases the chances of
success. Sierra Leone has been cited as an example of
a relative success in terms of peacebuilding, and for
that we are grateful for the work of the Council and
all those who supported us on our journey. From our
darkest hours, days and months, we have evolved into
a fully functioning State, with institutions that are
growing stronger every day. As everyone is aware, the
advent of Ebola knocked back some of the gains made
in peacebuilding and threatened others. However, with
the support of the Organization, we believe that we are
on our way to economic recovery.
It is quite true that peacebuilding can only be an
adjunct to the efforts of the national Government. All
national Governments have the authority to take care
of their citizens in terms of stability and economic
security. However, when one has a situation in which
the national Government has perhaps collapsed,
asymmetric warfare has taken hold and rebel groups
roam the territory of a particular nation, it is time for
the United Nations to step in. But as the report clearly
indicates, there are markers before one gets to the
full-blown conflict, that is, indicators that the peace,
stability or security of the State are jeopardized. The
report quite properly calls for our attention and focus
at that time, prior to conflict, the outbreak of hostilities
and the breakdown of society, and we welcome that
focus.
I do not believe that we need to have an in-depth
debate about what the report posits as peace
sustainability or sustaining peace. I do believe that we
should concentrate our attention on the challenges of
peace sustainability. That requires in-house reform, the
evolution of the institutions within the house and efforts
on the ground. Sierra Leone has also been posited as an
example of a situation where the mission evolved from
a classic peace operation into an integrated mission.
That integrated mission was not integrated simply as
a matter of theory, but actually as a matter of fact.
The concept of the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, combining the roles of the Resident

16-0478463/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Representative and of the Resident Coordinator of
the United Nations Development Programme arm,
was novel and worked successfully. In effect, the
mission — the integrated office — was domesticated
within the national institutions of Sierra Leone. By
that I mean that the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General had full access to all the organs of
the Government, including the presidency.
While we look to the past for examples, we must
look to the future and commend the work that the
Peacebuilding Fund, the Peacebuilding Support Office
and the Peacebuilding Commission have undertaken to
date. In order for them to do more, it is important that
we answer the question of financial sustainability and
that we also ensure that they have the political impetus
and direction to evolve as they should.
We welcome the deliberations and efforts on the part
of all organizations, including civil society and other
multilateral and financial entities, which are focused
on the issue of peacebuilding and the future of peace
sustainability. It is perhaps fitting that the Council,
which gave birth to the peacebuilding architecture,
remains engaged today on the issue.
The test of our efforts and the test of any success
that we can claim will be borne out when the least
advantaged of populations in conflict societies can
see a measure of hope and a future where the conflicts
that have inflamed them will end. Beyond ending the
conflict, it is important that the economic drivers of
peace be fully embedded. That requires the work of the
development financial institutions and international
financial institutions and bold, creative and innovative
thinking on the part of the World Bank and other premier
financial institutions. The link between the Council,
the Organization and those other financial institutions
must be strengthened and deepened. We are all called
on not only to be the makers and enforcers of peace, but
also the sustainers of peace. Collectively, our actions
as diplomats, politicians, ministers, representatives of
civil society and citizens must make a difference.
I hope that the deliberations on the draft resolution
will produce a resolution worthy of its name and worthy
of the efforts of the members of the Advisory Group
of Experts. We owe succeeding generations no less.
The core objective of the Council’s responsibility is
the search for peace, and as members of the General
Assembly, the principle organs and intergovernmental
entities, we all must collectively assist the Council in
64/71

23/02/2016

the search for peace. We welcome once again the efforts
of the Experts, but now it is the turn of the diplomats
to match their work and also ensure that the search for
peace is fully realized.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I align myself
with the statement made on behalf of the European
Union earlier today.
I will read out a shortened version of my statement
in view of time constraints. The full version will be
made available on my Twitter account.
Let me also thank the Government of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela for organizing this timely debate.
It is fitting that a neighbour of Colombia has
invited Member States to reflect on the importance
of peacebuilding. The recent history of that country
shows that it takes political courage and perseverance
to overcome obstacles to sustain sustainable peace in
a country. The comments just made by our colleague
from Sierra Leone are another positive example in that
context.
Let me also thank Ambassador Macharia Kamau and
Mr. Skoog for their briefings this morning. Furthermore,
the King of the Netherlands welcomes the report (see
S/2015/490) of the Advisory Group of Experts, which
provides clear recommendations for improvement and
reform in the practices of peacebuilding, and we pay
tribute to the work, words and wisdom of Ambassador
Gert Rosenthal and thank him very much. I will focus
on three points: partnerships, coherence and peace
operations.
When it comes to partnerships, peacebuilding
can only be durable and inclusive if we view it as a
partnership that involves all of those who have a
stake in peace. We need not only the participation
of the belligerent parties, but also that of local
communities, local Governments, women, youth,
business communities, regional organizations and
non-governmental organizations. In our view, women’s
participation, as it has already been said today, is
a condition for peace. We need to invite women to
participate on panels and at negotiating tables, and we
support the initiative of Mr. De Mistura to establish
an independent women’s advisory board in his Office.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands strives to support
partnerships for peacebuilding in practice. Since 2012,
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

UNICEF has implemented an innovative programme
known as the Peacebuilding, Education and Advocacy
Programme, with the help of the Peacebuilding
Support Office, and the Netherlands helped to make
that programme possible. That partnership combined
educational activities with academic development
with a view towards peacebuilding and advocacy
under national ownership, in conjunction with political
efforts. It was implemented in 14 countries, including
Pakistan, Uganda, Somalia and Liberia. It is an example
of a coalition of stakeholders working towards the same
goal: to give children and youth the tools to support
peace in their country.
With regard to coherence, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands considers it of the utmost importance that
the peacebuilding review be linked to the SecretaryGeneral’s review of peace operations, the review
of resolution 1325 (2000) and the 2030 Agenda
on Sustainable Development (General Assembly
resolution 70/1). Linking the recommendations of those
crucial reviews and processes should ensure maximum
coherence of United Nations actions. The high-level
thematic debate in the General Assembly in May
provides us with an opportunity to reflect on concrete
ways of enhancing coherence within the United
Nations system on the issues of peace and security.
In addition, to prevent and effectively end conflicts
the Security Council has a range of possibilities at
its disposal. We welcome a more effective use of
existing mechanisms, such as horizon scannings and
briefings by Special Advisers and other bodies such
as the Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding
Support Office and the Department of Political Affairs.
Furthermore, we believe that Resident Coordinators
and Special Representatives should be accountable for
the efforts of the United Nations during the entire cycle
of conflict. Only this morning we hosted a meeting
between the United Nations Development Programme
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to
enhance their cooperation on the ground on rule- of
law implementation in post-conflict situations. We
must build bridges between the silos within the United
Nations.
The third point on peace operations — during or
after a conflict, a coherent United Nations strategy
should focus on joint goals and deliverables, on the basis
of a shared conflict analysis and with complementary
roles for political, military, police and development

S/PV.7629

instruments. In that context, we also see a close link
between peace, justice and development.
In addition to supporting physical safety and
political dialogue in conflict-affected States, the
restoration of trust in the maintenance of law and
order is of equal importance. Security sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
are the main components of building peace. The police
component in missions should be further developed.
Resolution 2185 (2014), on the role of police in peace
operations, underlines the fact that police organizations
are the primary link between the Government and the
community in the field of security. They also provide
an essential element of the transition to stabilization.
In conclusion, I would like to refer to the draft
resolution on the peacebuilding architecture now being
negotiated in the General Assembly. In our view, the
draft resolution should give a clear and actionable
mandate to the Secretary-General aimed at overcoming
silos and addressing the fragmentation within the
United Nations system. We support the Ambassadors
of Angola and Australia in their efforts made on behalf
of that draft resolution.
The next points I am going to make were also just
made by our colleague from Sierra Leone, namely, that
peacebuilding activities are currently hampered by a
lack of funding. In order for the Peacebuilding Fund
to contribute substantively to peacebuilding efforts, it
must be able to rely on more donors than the ones that
are bearing the burden now. Aside from the Netherlands
being a large donor, we advocate for more and more
reliable funding and backstopping of special political
missions, peacebuilding, conflict prevention and
mediation, in the Fifth Committee and other forums.
Let me conclude by reiterating our strong support,
as a partner of the United Nations for peace, justice
and development, for the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.
Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): Botswana congratulates
your country Sir — Venezuela — on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of February. We assure you of our support as you
discharge your mandate.
We commend the Security Council for continuing
to engage us in debates like this one, as they provide

16-0478465/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Member States an opportunity to share views on various
themes — for example, like today on the review of the
peacebuilding architecture. We also thank the briefers
for providing us with vital information this morning.
Pursuant to the relevant General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions that called for a
comprehensive review of the peacebuilding architecture,
the need to continuously re-examine and strengthen
peacebuilding frameworks at national and international
levels has become even more apparent. We applaud
the efforts by the Secretary-General to institute such a
review by appointing an Advisory Group of Experts on
the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture, whose
report (see S/2015/490) is the basis of our discussion
here today.
It is the considered opinion of my delegation that
the Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding
Fund and the Peacebuilding Support Office collectively
play an important role in building and sustaining peace
and international security. As we examine history,
we acknowledge the fact that our continent, Africa,
which has had its fair share of internal conflicts
and strife, remains an integral part of the peace and
security architecture. However, we believe that the
fact that the majority of our post-conflict countries
still remain fragile and increasingly vulnerable to be
of significance. They very often have weak, or no,
institutions of governance, the rule of law has broken
down, any socioeconomic development capacity is
absent and they need to be supported over long periods.
As history has shown, peacebuilding processes
are themselves very complicated and need time to be
consolidated. They need extensive and comprehensive
patience to avoid the resurgence of violence and the
reopening of healed wounds.We therefore regret that,
even up to now, no proper or predictable funding
mechanisms are established at regional and international
levels to ensure that the seeds of sustained economic
growth are safeguarded through reconstruction
and a recovery period. We call on the international
community, especially the United Nations system, to
ensure proper coherence and coordination in promoting
an efficient peace and security funding framework.
We note that the report of the Advisory Group
of Experts has identified many shortcomings in the
work of the peace and security architecture, not only
at international and national levels but also within
the United Nations system. My delegation therefore
66/71

23/02/2016

appreciates the contents of the report and believes that
its recommendations deserve due consideration.
My delegation believes that, in order to promote
growth and development, countries that are emerging
from years of sustained conflict must as a matter of
fact invest in instruments of peace, capacity-building,
inclusive governance and very strong institutions.
Therefore, we believe that the international community
can share experiences and lessons with post-conflict
countries in order to cultivate a culture of post-conflict
reconstruction, maintaining peace, reconciliation and
institution-building. In that regard, Botswana remains
ready and willing to contribute in its own small way
towards the strengthening of institutions of governance,
particularly within the African continent.
We also note that the United Nations system is
increasingly experiencing dwindling resources as it
grapples with the rising tides of conflict across the
globe. We therefore need to find creative ways of
introducing predictable funding methodologies for
peacebuilding initiatives to support the Peacebuilding
Fund.
In conclusion, we commend all the work that has
been achieved thus far with respect to the review of
the peacebuilding architecture. While the achievement
of international peace and security has at times proved
elusive, Botswana remains firmly convinced that that
can be achieved with concerted effort at the international
level. In that respect, we reaffirm our abiding faith in
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, including to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Morejón Pazmiño (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this important debate. I very much appreciate what was
said by Ambassador Kamau, Ambassador Skoog and
Ambassador Rosenthal this morning, for it touched on
the very essence of what we want to talk about today.
I also want to stress the fact that Mr. Rosenthal has
been present here right from the start of this morning’s
debate, a courtesy that I greatly appreciate. The United
Nations was born on 24 October 1945 from the ashes of
the Second World War to maintain international peace
and security, one of its founding principles. Following
the Holocaust, we regarded peace only as the absence of
war. Nevertheless, in the twenty-first century, 70 years
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

later, peace continues to be absent, since were it present
then justice, dignity, development and the elements of
the visionary Sustainable Development Goal 16 would
all be present too. On the contrary, poverty, human
rights violations and conflicts continue to affect ever
greater populations. What is most serious is that those
conflicts have become increasingly complex, ever more
fragmented, more difficult and risk laden.
Such developments over time and the evolution of
the contexts in which conflicts arise underscore the
need for a change in the way peacebuilding is viewed.
The Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture noted in its report (see
S/2015/490) that the fundamental task of the United
Nations — the maintenance of peace — does not receive
due priority or adequate resources at the global level or
within the United Nations system.
That statement compels my delegation to address
the root causes of the Organization’s inability to prevent
the resurgence of the conflicts that have once again
engulfed brotherly countries, posing major threats
to, and resulting in serious consequences for, the
peacebuilding efforts of the United Nations and other
international and regional actors, and in weaknesses
and divisions not only within their own organizational
structure but throughout the entire United Nations
system. However, my delegation also recognizes the
Organization’s underlying concern about this important
issue.
Twenty-four years ago, the then SecretaryGeneral Boutros Boutros-Ghali, in “An Agenda for
Peace” (S/24111), defined and analysed post-conflict
peacebuilding. To that end, several new initiatives have
been taken, including the creation of the peacebuilding
architecture. Recently we have seen the report of the
Secretary-General entitled “The future of United
Nations peace operations: implementation of the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations” (S/2015/682) and the report of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture (see S/2015/490). The
latter contains substantive and analytical content on its
findings and recommendations.
Let me briefly touch on just a few points. First,
peace must be the common denominator of all of the
Organization’s activities. Second, we must shift the
Organization’s focus from response to prevention.
Third, the task of maintaining peace means that the

S/PV.7629

entire United Nations system, in particular its three
main intergovernmental organs, must make the effort
to accord it due priority and attention. Fourth, we must
ensure more predictable funding for peacebuilding.
The goal of $100 million is a disproportionate sum
compared to the tremendous amount spent on the
peacekeeping operations. My delegation believes that
contributions to the fund could be both voluntary and
quota-based. Fifth, there is a need to achieve broad
and inclusive participation by the societies with which
they work in the field. Sixth, we must ensure women’s
full participation in the entire peacebuilding process,
from beginning to end. And seventh, the triangular
relationship among peace, development and human
rights means that all three of the Organization’s
components must work in close collaboration.
I conclude with a moral reflection by His Holiness
John Paul II in his encyclical on peace: that we are dutybound to build a peace that is sustainable over time and
that requires us to be responsible in helping to build a
decent society for humankind.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): The
2015 review of the peacebuilding architecture, along
with the concurrent reviews of peace operations and
of resolution 1325 (2000), have enabled us to draw
important and complementary conclusions. Preventing
violent conflict and the achievement of sustainable
peace must remain at the forefront of our efforts in
the area of international peace and security. All three
reviews provide us with an important opportunity
to learn from years of experience and to reflect the
growing global consensus that peace, stability and
development are inextricably linked.
Canada believes that peacebuilding efforts must be
in line with and in support of that concept in order to
allow for better functioning at all stages of the conflict
cycle. Indeed, we see peacebuilding as encompassing
actions before, during and after conflict in order to
maintain peace. That means that conflict prevention,
including the prevention of the resurgence of a conflict,
must be at the core of our peacebuilding efforts. To that
end, it should be acknowledged that the root causes of
and solutions to conflicts are political in nature.
We commend the Advisory Group of Experts for
having clearly articulated that point and for making
constructive recommendations in that regard in its report

16-0478467/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

on the 2015 review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture (see S/2015/490). It is now incumbent upon
Member States and organs of the United Nations to
adopt and implement reforms that will revitalize the
international community’s ability to effectively prevent
and respond to instability and conflict.
(spoke in English)
Canada deeply appreciates and supports the
key elements of the draft resolution prepared by
co-facilitators Angola and Australia on the 2015
review of the peacebuilding architecture. The draft
is substantive and ambitious, but realistic. We are
encouraged by the wide-ranging level of engagement
in this process to date and will continue to support the
co-facilitators’ efforts and to engage constructively
with all Members. In particular, we wish to see
reforms that will improve United Nations operational
coherence, both in New York and in the field, enhance
the role of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in
conflict prevention and strengthen its efforts to advise
the Security Council.
On this last point, Canada’s experience as Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission’s country-specific
configuration on Sierra Leone has reinforced for us
that the PBC has a particular role and added value in
the design of mission mandates to ensure support for
longer-term peacebuilding objectives. In this instance,
the United Nations presence entailed a gradual
drawdown from an integrated peacekeeping mission
through different iterations of special political missions,
to graduation from the Security Council’s agenda. At
the present time, the United Nations country team on
the ground is working in close collaboration with and
in support of the priorities of the Government of Sierra
Leone.
Canada urges the Council to remain engaged in
the ongoing peacebuilding review. Through close
cooperation between the Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, we remain confident that we can
operationalize concrete measures to enhance United
Nations and international responses to the threat of
violent conflict. Canada looks forward to continuing
such discussions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. Koncke.
Mr. Koncke (spoke in Spanish): I would like
to begin by thanking the presidency of the Security
68/71

23/02/2016

Council for having convened today’s open debate
on the review of the peacebuilding architecture. We
also welcome the briefings made earlier today by the
Permanent Representatives of Kenya and Sweden and
Ambassador Rosenthal on the subject under discussion.
Similarly, my delegation thanks and acknowledges
the presidency for having directly inscribed the
Organization of American States (OAS) on the list of
speakers for today’s open debate, without having each
of its member States speaking on its own behalf.
The General Secretariat of the OAS shares the view
that peacebuilding must be viewed as broadly and as
comprehensively as possible. Peacebuilding cannot
be regarded as a mere step in the post-conflict stage,
as that would remove from the concept elements that
must inevitably be taken into account in addressing
the underlying causes of conflict. The mandate of
the Charter of the United Nations to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war can be achieved
only through an integrated approach that allows for
a thorough analysis and concrete action to prevent
conflict. Although emergency actions taken to end
crises and start immediate reconstruction efforts are
absolutely necessary, it is in the stages prior to that
outcome on which the international community should
focus, by investing the political diplomatic capital and
development efforts required.
The nexus between development and peacebuilding
appears to be a pattern that should be highlighted
and analysed. Without harmonious development that
is sustainable and inclusive, achieving a society in
which peacebilding can reach the necessary standards
and levels of stability is unthinkable. The General
Secretariat of the OAS is of the view that there can be no
peacebuilding without the promotion and the protection
of human rights. Any peacebuilding process will be
inconclusive and lacking in foundation wherever the
human rights of the population are not considered the
main reason for action. Similarly, the role of women
must be given special consideration in peacebuilding
efforts.
With regard to the regional perspective, and in the
context of the provisions of Article 52 of the Charter
of the United Nations, the Organization of American
States works with a vision to prevent, promote and
protect rights, based on the premise of more rights for
more people. One of the conclusions that we take away
from the report (see S/2015/490) of the Advisory Group
of Experts, as well as the tasks of the Peacebuilding
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Commission, is the relevance of regional and
subregional organizations in preventing and resolving
conflicts, as well as in taking action in all pertinent
phases. In that context, the Organization of American
States relies on the legal tool under Article 52 of the
Charter, the Charter of the Organization of American
States and the Interamerican Democratic Charter,
among other instruments.
Early detection of indicators of crises based
on geographical and cultural proximity affords
regional and subregional organizations the necessary
perspective for playing a key role in this area. In that
connection, in its role of regional organization, my
delegation reiterates the statement made by SecretaryGeneral Luis Almagro when he said that the OAS is
fully committed to the peace process in Colombia, the
last armed conflict in the region, with a view to a stable
and lasting peace. By the same token, the General
Secretariat of the OAS wishes to convey appreciation
to the countries of the region, particularly Cuba and
Venezuela, for their contributions to the peace process.
In the context of the confluence afforded by the
review of the peacebuilding architecture, peacekeeping
operations and resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, my delegation considers that
the common denominator of all these, beyond the
specificities of each case, must be the priority of human
rights. With that in mind, the General Secretariat of
the OAS reiterates its enthusiasm to continue working
jointly with the States parties of the Organization of
American States and with the United Nations in hopes
of achieving the set goals.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Nibishaka (Rwanda): Let me join others
in thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing
this important open debate. I also thank all the
briefers for their comprehensive presentations this
morning. I am convinced that recommendations from
discussions of this nature can significantly contribute
to the improvement and streamlining of practices in
peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction.
As all members know, my country went through
a difficult process over the past 20 years from a
post-conflict situation to become one of the main
contributors to United Nations peace operations. Our
experience alone is an indication that indeed postconflict peacebuilding is an important process dealing

S/PV.7629

with the aftermath of conflicts and conflict prevention,
not to mention upholding the responsibility to protect.
More often, however — peacebuilding, being both a
political and a technical process — the United Nations
has continued to struggle in matching the critical gap
between applying existing top-down technical strategies
and the political realities on the ground. In many cases
post-conflict peacebuilding has been carried out as
a purely operational process, using blueprints that
stipulate what decisions must be established and what
systems must be introduced, with technical aspects
tending to take priority. The deteriorating situation
in some countries on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) leads to questions as to whether
local political mechanisms, capacities and country
dynamics have been taken into account, and whether
mechanisms have been put in place to safeguard their
continued existence and avoid a relapse into conflict.
The situation in Burundi speaks for itself. Despite
being on the PBC agenda for nearly 10 years, political
and administrative weaknesses persisted and in 2015
the situation worsened and the country descended
into political turmoil. While we embraced the concept
of the responsibility to protect 10 years ago, in our
understanding of State responsibility and the role of the
international community in helping States to fulfil it,
the fact that Burundi has now descended into an evergreater spiral of violence has not helped make the case.
With similar cases in the Central African Republic in
2015 and 2014, and the 12 April 2012 coup d’état in
Guinea-Bissau, it appears that the PBC has not lived
up to its projected role and it is far from reaching its
full potential. Those cases also demonstrated that the
international community in general, and the United
Nations in particular, needed to adopt targeted postconflict measures that address the root causes of
political conflict while at the same time respecting the
specificity of each situation, including the local political
dynamics, cultural, religious and ethnic configurations
and other elements that might play a critical role in
post-conflict settings.
It has been consistently stressed by my delegation
here, and in line with the report (see S/2015/490)
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
Peacebuilding Architecture, the work of the PBC
should focus on the means and the potential available
to the international community to support the locally
driven and locally defined priorities, with a clear
implementation plan and benchmarks to build inclusive

16-0478469/71

S/PV.7629

Post-conflict peacebuilding

local capacities. Inclusive national ownership and
leadership are crucial prerequisites for sustainable postconflict peacebuilding, as is highlighted in the report of
the Advisory Group of Experts. Any peace process not
endorsed by those who have to live with it is likely to fail.
In that regard, we concur with the recommendations of
the three reviews to directly involve women in setting
peacebuilding priorities, identifying beneficiaries and
monitoring implementation. In addition to the potential
for women to contribute to successful peacebuilding,
their participation should also be encouraged on the
basis of fairness and justice.
We call for continued advocacy on behalf of the
countries on the agenda and help underscore political
and social economic progress to attract assistance and/
or investment and to national priorities. Despite these
challenges, in the country-specific configurations we
are encouraged by efforts deployed by configuration
Chairs, particularly increasing the visits to Burundi and
the region to interact with various stakeholders, as well
as the briefings to the Council and the configuration.
We believe that the PBC, in supporting countries
on its agenda, has a critical role to play in fostering
regional engagement and commitment. In that respect,
the PBC advisory function should also aim at forging
interregional coherence through links with countries of
the region and regional economic communities, as well
as the African Union Peace and Security Council. I
particularly thank those Chairs of the country-specific
configurations who have integrated the regional
dimension into their approach. These practices could
provide an opportunity to increase awareness of the
situation at hand and, where necessary, contribute to
the accuracy of the information at the disposal of the
United Nations that can allow appropriate action to be
taken.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): Turkey aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union. I should, however, like to make some additional
comments in my national capacity.
We join others in appreciating the convening of
today’s debate and thank the briefers for their insightful
remarks. We also thank the co-facilitators of the
draft resolution — the representatives of Angola and
Australia — for their transparent and inclusive work.
70/71

23/02/2016

The United Nations has undertaken several review
processes on how to better address the challenges to
international peace and security. Turkey welcomes those
processes and supports their key recommendations.
However, it is also important that synergy and coherence
be derived from them in order to give rise to crosscutting and multidimensional solutions; otherwise we
run the risk of fragmentation.
The report (S/2015/682) of the SecretaryGeneral entitled “The future of United Nations peace
operations: implementation of the recommendations of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations”
and the report (S/2015/716) on the global study on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) have already
contributed to the ongoing debates. Moreover, the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1), in particular Sustainable
Development Goal 16, has underscored the link between
peace and development with an emphasis on conflict
prevention, good governance and the rule of law.
Turkey has long advocated in favour of a
stronger interrelationship between humanitarian
and development perspectives. In our experience,
humanitarian assistance delivered through development
tools enhances recipients’ resilience in facing recurrent
crises. The World Humanitarian Summit to be held in
Istanbul will enable all stakeholders to further assess
this interrelationship.
The Organization devotes most of its energy
and resources to crisis management. However,
conflict prevention can be more efficient and costeffective. As an important tool in recovery efforts,
peacebuilding may well play a preventive role. In
fact, peacebuilding — which is at the nexus of the
three pillars of the United Nations — is applicable
throughout the conflict cycle. Turkey supports United
Nations efforts in using effective mediation tools for
the purpose of conflict prevention, and regards United
Nations peacebuilding capacity as a contribution to
sustainable peace.
The Peacebuilding Commission plays an
important role as a bridge between the principal
United Nations organs — the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. Turkey participates in five out of six countryspecific configurations within the Commission. We
therefore believe that, if given strategic guidance, the
Commission can fulfil its mandate more effectively.
16-04784

23/02/2016

Post-conflict peacebuilding

We should also find a way for allocating adequate
resources to the Peacebuilding Fund. Peacebuilding is
a political engagement with a broad scope of activities,
including institution-building, which requires financial
and human resources. With this understanding, Turkey
supports the Fund with voluntary contributions.
Likewise,
activities
such
as
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, security sector reform
and the promotion of human rights and the rule of law
are heavily dependent upon United Nations support,
and therefore require further resourcing.
The report (see S/2015/490) of the Advisory Group
of Experts emphasizes the need for deeper cooperation
between the United Nations and the international
financial institutions. In that regard, cooperation with

S/PV.7629

regional development banks could play a positive role
in sustaining peacebuilding activities with a higher
degree of ownership at the regional, national and local
levels.
It is key to success in our peacebuilding and
development endeavours to encourage the increased
participation, inclusiveness and empowerment of all
segments of society, notably women and youth, because
social division and injustice will only harm the prospect
for a culture of peace to flourish.
Last but not the least, the work of the Peacebuilding
Support Office deserves more support and
encouragement than it receives at present.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

16-0478471/71
