United Nations

A/RES/57/251

General Assembly

Distr.: General
21 February 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 87

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/57/532/Add.7)]

57/251. Report of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme on its seventh special session
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2997 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, by which it
established the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme,
Recalling also its resolutions 53/242 of 28 July 1999 and 56/193 of
21 December 2001 on the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme on its twenty-first session,
Having considered the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme on its seventh special session,1
Taking into account the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”),2
Recalling that in the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation the General
Assembly was invited to consider, at its fifty-seventh session, the important but
complex issue of establishing universal membership for the Governing
Council/Global Ministerial Environment Forum of the United Nations Environment
Programme,
Underlining the unique role of the General Assembly, as the highest
intergovernmental decision-making body of the United Nations, in giving
consideration to the issue of establishing universal membership for the Governing
Council/Global Ministerial Environment Forum of the United Nations Environment
Programme and, therefore, the need for a thorough analysis by Member States and
the relevant bodies of the United Nations system to enable the General Assembly to
fully consider all its implications, including legal, political, institutional, financial
and system-wide implications, before making a decision,
Reaffirming the role of the United Nations Environment Programme as the
principal body within the United Nations system in the field of environment, which
_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/57/25).
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–
4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution
2, annex.

2

02 55594

A/RES/57/251

should take into account, within its mandate, the sustainable development needs of
developing countries as well as countries with economies in transition,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme on its seventh special session,1 and the decisions contained
therein;
2.
Expresses its appreciation to the Open-ended Intergovernmental Group
of Ministers or Their Representatives on International Environmental Governance
for its report as adopted by the Governing Council at its seventh special session;3
3.
Recalls the decision made at the World Summit on Sustainable
Development4 to fully implement the outcomes of decision SS.VII/1 on international
environmental governance adopted by the Governing Council at its seventh special
session;1
4.
Invites Member States, the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme, and the relevant bodies of the United Nations system to
submit to the Secretariat their comments on the important but complex issue of
establishing universal membership for the Governing Council/Global Ministerial
Environment Forum, including its legal, political, institutional, financial and
system-wide implications, and requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
incorporating those views to the General Assembly for its consideration before its
sixtieth session;
5.
Reiterates its desire to be informed on the work of the Environmental
Management Group;
6.
Requests the United Nations Environment Programme, within its
mandate, to continue to contribute to sustainable development programmes and the
implementation of Agenda 215 at all levels, bearing in mind the mandate of the
Commission on Sustainable Development;
7.
Reiterates the need for stable, adequate and predictable financial
resources for the United Nations Environment Programme, and in this regard and in
accordance with resolution 2997 (XXVII) underlines the need to consider adequate
reflection of all administrative and management costs of the Programme in the
context of the United Nations regular budget;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to keep the resource needs of the United
Nations Environment Programme and the United Nations Office at Nairobi under
review so as to permit the delivery, in an effective manner, of necessary services to
the Programme and to other United Nations organs and organizations in Nairobi.
78th plenary meeting
20 December 2002

_______________
3
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/57/25), annex I,
decision SS.VII/1, appendix.
4
See Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum),
chap. I, resolution 2, annex, para. 140 (d).
5
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted by the
Conference, resolution 1, annex II.

2
