S/2021/167

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 February 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 22 February 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen; Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; and Ambassador Inga Rhonda King, Permanent Representative of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, in her capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014); as well as the statements
delivered by the representatives of China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland, Kenya,
Mexico, Norway, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America and Viet Nam, in connection with the video-teleconference on “The
situation in the Middle East (Yemen)” convened on Thursday, 18 February 2021. A
statement was also delivered by the representative of Yemen.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the
Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefings and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Barbara Woodward
President of the Security Council

21-02736 (E) 010321 240321

*2102736*

S/2021/167

Annex I
Briefing by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Martin Griffiths
I am saddened to report that over the past month, with Ansar Allah’s most
recent offensive on Ma’rib governorate, the conflict in Yemen has taken a sharp
escalatory turn. I have denounced this offensive operation many times since early
last year when the operation started, and I will repeat my call now: the attack on
Ma’rib must stop. It puts millions of civilians at risk, especially with the fighting
reaching camps for internally displaced persons. The quest for territorial gain by
force threatens the prospects of the peace process.
The humanitarian situation is also worsening, as Mr. Lowcock will explain
to us in more detail. The threat of famine is still looming. Large numbers of civil
servants are not being paid their salaries. Insufficient fuel ships entering AlHudaydah port, coupled with obstacles to domestic distribution, have resulted in
serious fuel shortages in Ansar Allah-controlled parts of the north. We hear reports
that hospitals and food factories are running out of fuel. I hope that the Government
of Yemen will quickly permit the entry of fuel ships to alleviate this situation.
Although the situation on the ground is deteriorating, I am encouraged to
report that there is renewed international momentum behind finding a peaceful
resolution to the conflict. I particularly welcome the renewed focus the United
States is placing on this conflict. International support for ending the conflict is
indispensable and offers a new opportunity to reopen space for a negotiated solution.
There is a negotiated way out of this conflict. But in any negotiation, the
parties need to know where they are going. They need to clearly see the end-state. I
think it is therefore important that I reiterate what could constitute the basic elements
of a mutually acceptable end to the war and a path towards peace.
Those elements should be guided by the aspirations Yemenis have long
expressed — for a future marked by peaceful political participation, accountable
governance, equal citizenship and economic justice. This is what I have heard time
and again from Yemeni women, youth, civil society, political parties and community
leaders. Yemenis own the vision of the future that drives our work.
The only way to realize these aspirations is through a genuinely inclusive,
Yemeni-led political process under United Nations auspices and supported by the
international community. Through this political process, Yemenis could negotiate an
agreement to end the conflict and bring about sustainable peace.
Such an agreement should ensure a complete end to the use of violence for
political gain. The agreement would be time-bound and would end with national
elections. During the period of transition, Yemen’s unity, sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity must be respected. Political arrangements should be based
on the principles of inclusive partnership and continued dialogue among Yemen’s
political and social components, including women and civil society. The political
partnership would have to be strong, and Yemenis would need to address critical
political questions that will persist nationally and in many areas of the country, not
least in the south.
Security arrangements should provide for the Yemeni people’s safety and lead
towards responsive security institutions that uphold the rule of law. The Yemeni
people will need guarantees for equal citizenship under the law, including for Yemeni
women and girls, as well as guarantees of humanitarian relief, reconstruction,
transitional justice and economic recovery.
2/33

21-02736

S/2021/167

None of these elements of an agreement are new. They are based on broad
consultations with Yemenis and prior rounds of peace negotiations. The main
outstanding question is how to get there.
To seize this chance to revitalize the political process, the parties should
immediately agree to a nationwide ceasefire that halts all forms of fighting. They
should also agree to economic and humanitarian measures, at a minimum to include
ensuring the unhindered flow of fuel and other commodities into Yemen through the
Al-Hudaydah ports, with port revenues going towards civil-servant salaries based on
the 2014 payroll database, and opening Sana’a airport to commercial traffic.
These measures should maximize humanitarian objectives, while providing
appropriate security guarantees in line with Security Council resolutions. They
should not be exploited for political or military gain. It is the Yemeni people who
suffer from the weaponization of the economy.
These issues — the ceasefire, Al-Hudaydah ports and Sana’a airport —
have long been under negotiation. They are well known to all parties. Mechanisms
can be agreed upon. What is needed is political will to end the conf lict. Now is
decision time.
An agreement on these issues would offer Yemenis a break from relentless
cycles of violence. It would facilitate the movement of people and goods. And it
could create an environment conducive to the parties moving to address the real
issue at hand: inclusive talks to end the war. The political process would need to
resume promptly; a nationwide ceasefire will not be sustainable if it is not tied to
progress on the political track. I will continue engaging the parties on this path
forward, and I hope they will demonstrate the will to make progress.
I want to emphasize what is at stake. The military situation in the country
is extremely tense, and civilians bear the brunt of the hostilities, with shocking
violations of international humanitarian law taking place. In the Al-Hudaydah
and Ta’iz governorates, worrisome spikes of violence and hostilities continue,
causing civilian deaths and injuries and damage to homes. Even more alarming
are the continued cross-border attacks, which damage prospects for peace and
regional stability.
We know that the negotiating table can produce win-win results. The parties
demonstrated that last year when they successfully negotiated a large-scale release
of prisoners and detainees. For the past three weeks, the parties have been meeting
again in Amman in an effort to agree on more individuals to release. I urge them
to continue their discussions in good faith and to bring this round to a successful
conclusion. I also call for the immediate and unconditional release of all sick,
wounded, elderly and child detainees as well as all arbitrarily detained civilians,
including women and journalists.
As a mediator, I seek common grounds for agreements. With the support of the
international community, I persuade, facilitate and encourage dialogue. But there is
nothing anybody can do to force the warring parties into peace unless they choose to
put down the guns and talk to each other. The responsibility to end the war, first and
foremost, lies with the parties to the conflict. I hope they will not miss this chance.

21-027363/33

S/2021/167

Annex II
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mark Lowcock
Yemen is speeding towards the worst famine the world has seen in decades.
Data released last week confirm, yet again, that we are running out of time.
Malnutrition rates are at record highs. About 400,000 children aged under five are
severely malnourished across the country. These are the children with distended
bellies, emaciated limbs and blank stares — starving to death.
Across Yemen, more than 16 million people are going hungry, including 5
million who are just one step away from famine. That is why, last month, I said every
decision the world makes right now must address the risk of famine.
Last week, the United States reversed its designation of Ansar Allah as a foreign
terrorist organization and specially designated global terrorist entity under United
States domestic law. The United States was concerned about the devastating impact
the designation could have on Yemen’s food supply at an exceptionally dangerous
time. We have, as you know, welcomed the United States’ decision. Officials of the
United States have made clear, and we agree, that the concerns around this issue are
strictly humanitarian.
The United States has reaffirmed it intends to prioritize diplomacy to end
the war in Yemen as well as dealing with the humanitarian crisis. Many other
countries, including countries of the Coalition to Support Legitimacy in Yemen,
have welcomed this.
So there is an important opportunity right now to help Yemen move towards
lasting peace. That opportunity will be wasted if Yemen tips into a massive famine.
To stop famine, we urgently need action on five points: first, protection of civilians;
secondly, humanitarian access; thirdly, funding for the aid operation; fourthly,
support for the economy; and, fifthly, progress towards peace.
First, with regard to the protection of civilians, ten days ago, Ansar Allah
forces launched a major offensive in Ma’rib. Fighting, shelling and air strikes have
been some of the heaviest of the war.
The front lines are reportedly moving closer to civilian areas. At least four
missiles landed in Ma’rib city in the last ten days — seemingly fired indiscriminately.
Those attacks killed at least three civilians. Missiles have also landed around camps
for displaced people. Thousands are al-ready fleeing.
Until recently, Ma’rib had been relatively safe. Since 2015, about 1 million
people have fled there to get away from the war in other areas. Many have fled
multiple times. This escalation is extremely dangerous. It threatens to send hundreds
of thousands of people again running for their lives at a time when everyone should
be doing everything possible to stop famine.
International humanitarian law requires all parties to take constant care to
spare civilians and civilian objects throughout military operations. International
humanitarian law also requires the par-ties to facilitate rapid, unimpeded
humanitarian access, which is my second point: delivering aid in Yemen is still,
as we have told the Council many times, much harder than it should be. In the
south, challenges mainly include delays in signing project agreements or releasing
equipment. These challenges limit agencies’ efforts to expand their operations in the
south. Constructive discussions are under way to resolve them.
In the north, the problems remain more severe. Ansar Allah authorities
regularly delay routine processes, attempt to interfere with aid delivery and harass
aid agencies and staff. This is unacceptable.
4/33

21-02736

S/2021/167

Despite all these problems, the aid operation is still delivering. In 2020, aid
agencies helped more than 10 million people a month, working in every one of
Yemen’s 333 districts. That is no small feat.
On the FSO SAFER tanker issue, Ansar Allah authorities recently announced
plans to “review” their approval for the long-planned mission and advised the
United Nations to pause some preparations. They have now dropped this review.
Unfortunately, we heard this only after a key deadline had passed to deploy the team
in March.
It is now difficult to say when exactly the mission might go. Ansar Allah have
recently made several new demands that the United Nations cannot meet. Mission
preparations cannot be finalized until those, too, are resolved. The United Nations
remains eager to help.
My third point is funding for the aid operation. In 2020, the aid operation
received $1.9 billion, or about half of what we needed and half of what we got
the year before. That forced us to cut many of the programmes that millions of
people need.
Because there is no money, many hungry families in the north are still only
getting half as much food aid as they should. Water, sanitation and health facilities
have closed or are under threat in several areas because agencies cannot afford to
continue the support that keeps them running. There are many other examples. More
money for the aid operation is the fastest, most efficient way to support famine
prevention and other relief efforts right now. A surge in funding — mostly from the
Gulf — is what enabled agencies to stop famine two years ago. With enough money,
aid agencies can do this again.
The United Nations response plan this year will need about $4 billion. That
is on par with what we asked for in 2019, which was the last time assessments
confirmed famine-like conditions in Yemen. Donors met nearly 90 per cent of
funding requirements that year. As a result, there was no famine.
On 1 March, the Secretary-General will convene a virtual high-level pledging
event for the Yemen crisis, co-hosted by Sweden and Switzerland. This event is a
chance for countries to show their commitment to the Yemeni people. It is also a
chance to show they are serious about seizing the opportunity for peace. As I said,
the world will have wasted the current opportunity for peace if a massive famine is
allowed to take hold. So we call on all donors to pledge generously at — or better yet,
before — the 1 March event and to disburse funds right away.
The fourth issue is the economy. After years of conflict, the economy has
shrunk by more than 50 per cent. Salaries, jobs and livelihoods have all become
scarce. Coronavirus disease has depressed the remittances from abroad that millions
had relied on. Because Yemen imports nearly every-thing, the exchange rate is a
major factor in what people can buy. Today, the rial is trading at around 890 to the
United States dollar in the south — about four times higher than before the war. In
the north, the rate is about three times higher than pre-conflict levels. That means
people who do still have an income are finding their money buys much less.
The quickest way to help people afford food again is to bring down the exchange
rate. Foreign-exchange injections did this successfully in the past. If managed
properly, they could do so again. I call on Yemen’s partners to work urgently with
the Government to devise a workable programme for foreign-exchange injections,
including any necessary safeguards or oversight mechanisms — one other thing that
will allow for the payment of some of the delayed salaries of key workers.
Steps are also needed to ensure essential commodities can reach the country
through all ports.
21-027365/33

S/2021/167

Fuel imports remain near record lows. This is the result of a months-long
dispute between the par-ties over import revenue. That dispute is contributing to
serious fuel shortages, mainly in the north. Right now, 13 commercial fuel ships
are just outside Al-Hudaydah port. On average, they have been waiting 75 days for
Government permission to berth.
My final point regards progress towards peace. As I have said, there is an
important opportunity right now to help Yemen move towards lasting peace.
Preventing famine will be critical to making that opportunity a success.
But there is more we can do. First, the violence must stop. I call on the parties
to stop the dangerous escalation in Ma’rib. I also strongly support Martin’s efforts to
mediate a nationwide ceasefire — not just in Ma’rib, but across the country — and
to resume the political process. The only way to end the crisis in Yemen is to end
the war.

6/33

21-02736

S/2021/167

Annex III
Briefing by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Inga Rhonda King, in her capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014)
I have the honour to report to the Security Council on the work of the
Committee pursuant to paragraph 19 (e) of resolution 2140 (2014). The last such
briefing took place a year ago, on 18 February 2020 (see S/PV.8725). As such, this
briefing will cover the period from 19 February 2020 to date.
Since my last briefing to the Council, the members of the Committee have met
twice in the “informal informals” format via closed video-teleconference. During the
informal informals held on 14 August 2020, the Committee heard a presentation by
the Panel of Experts of its midterm up-date, which was submitted to the Committee
on 28 July. Of the 10 recommendations contained in that update, the Committee
acted on two.
During the informal informals held on 22 January 2021, the Committee heard
a presentation by the Panel of Experts of its final report, which was submitted to
the Committee on 22 December 2020. The report was transmitted to the Security
Council on 22 January and has been issued as document S/2021/79. Discussions on
the nine recommendations addressed to the Committee are ongoing. These relate
to the implementation of the targeted arms embargo, compliance with international
humanitarian law and related issues, consideration of individuals who meet the
sanctions-designation criteria, and reporting on sanctions implementation in general.
The remaining seven recommendations are addressed to the Council.
During the reporting period, the Committee approved one exemption
request under paragraph 3 of resolution 2511 (2020). No negative decision was
taken by the Committee on an exemption notification under paragraph 12 (a) of
resolution 2140 (2014).
Lastly, during the reporting period, the Committee received four
implementation reports, from India, Mexico, Norway, and Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, respectively. The Committee also continued to receive vessel-inspection
reports from the United Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism.

21-027367/33

S/2021/167

Annex IV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
[Original: English and Chinese]
I wish to thank the Special Envoy, Mr. Griffiths, the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Lowcock, and the Chair of the Sanctions Committee, Ambassador King, for
their briefings. I would like to make comments on three aspects.
First, with regard to the political situation in Yemen, since its return to Aden
more than a month ago, the Yemeni Government has tried its best to govern and
provide services for people’s livelihood, under very difficult circumstances. China
highly appreciates its efforts. We expect the new joint Government to accelerate its
internal integration, smoothly carry out its work and get ready for participating in
the comprehensive political process. China condemns the attack on the Aden airport
on the day the Cabinet of Yemeni Government arrived. We support the Panel of
Experts of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014) in conducting an investigation into the matter, within its mandate.
The escalation of conflict in northern Yemen has caused civilian casualties
and undermined mutual trust between the two sides, threatening the political
mediation efforts. We urge all parties to the conflict to heed the ceasefire appeal of
the Secretary-General, put down their weapons, exercise restraint and refrain from
any actions that may increase tension, so as to create a safe environment for the
peace process. China opposes any attempt targeting civilians and civilian facilities,
including the attack on Saudi Arabia’s Abha International Airport.
China appreciates the recent shuttle diplomacy carried out by the Special
Envoy and hopes all parties can seize the positive momentum to meet each other
halfway and create conditions to achieve lasting peace in Yemen. We welcome the
move of the United States to revoke its decision to designate the Houthis as a terrorist
group and its appointment of a Special Envoy to promote the political process in
Yemen. We hope that the United States will adopt more measures conducive to the
peace process in Yemen and commit itself to maintaining peace and stability in the
Gulf region.
The solutions to the issues in the Gulf region require joint efforts by regional
countries and the playing of a constructive role by key countries. China welcomes
the Special Envoy’s recent visit to Iran and hopes that the exchanges between them
will bring about positive impact on the political settlement. Chinese State Councillor
and Foreign Minister Wang Yi has proposed a multilateral platform for dialogue in
the Gulf region. China is ready to increase consultations with countries that have
similar ideas to advance the forging of new consensus on maintaining peace and
stability in the region.
Secondly, regarding the humanitarian situation in Yemen, the briefings we have
just heard once again brought home the severity of the economic and humanitarian
situation in Yemen. The Yemeni people are suffering from multiple challenges,
including risk of famine, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), oil shortages and
currency depreciation. The international community must increase assistance
to Yemen. The United Nations system must efficiently organize humanitarian
operations. All parties to the conflict must ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian
access. As the high-level pledging conference will be held next month, China wishes
the conference a success.
The issue of the FSO SAFER tanker requires high attention. We deeply regret
that, to date, the United Nations technical team has not been able to go on site, and we
8/33

21-02736

S/2021/167

urge the Houthis to cooperate with the United Nations to implement the agreement
on tanker maintenance as soon as possible in order to prevent catastrophic accidents.
China has been providing assistance to help Yemen prevent famine and fight
COVID-19. Food assistance provided by China has reached most of the governorates
in Yemen. In accordance with the economic and technological cooperation
agreement signed between China and Yemen, China will provide an additional
¥100 million-worth of assistance to Yemen as our contribution to alleviating the
humanitarian crisis.
Thirdly, regarding the issue of sanctions, China appreciates the work done
by Ambassador King and supports the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) and its Panel of Experts in effectively carrying
out their work within the mandate authorized by the Security Council so as to make
positive contributions to the political settlement of the Yemeni issue.

21-027369/33

S/2021/167

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I thank Special Envoy Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and
Ambassador King for their briefings.
The escalation of hostilities in Ma’rib and Al-Jawf is very alarming. We call
on the Houthis to immediately cease these assaults, as well as the cross-border
attacks on the territory of Saudi Arabia. We fully share the concern expressed by
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock that the assault on Ma’rib could cause harm to 2
million civilians and possibly force hundreds of thousands to flee.
We urge all parties to make a joint effort to end this war and resume the
political process. Only an inclusive political solution can end the conflict in Yemen.
We reiterate our call on the parties to engage with the United Nations Special Envoy
and agree on ceasefire and humanitarian measures without delay in order to begin
political talks.
We welcome all international efforts aimed at supporting the inclusive
political settlement of the conflict, such as the recent visit of several European Union
ambassadors to Aden. We also welcome the resumption, on 24 January in Amman,
of talks on the prisoner exchange, as it is an important confidence-building and
humanitarian measure.
Turning to the report of the Panel of Experts on Yemen (see S/2021/79), I
would like to extend my appreciation for the important work that the Panel has
done in carrying out its mandate, and I look forward to renewing the mandate later
this month.
We note with deep concern the report’s conclusion that all parties continue to
commit violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights
law, including indiscriminate attacks against civilians, enforced disappearances
and torture. The Panel also reports the systematic repression of journalists, sexual
violence and the recruitment and use of children in armed conflict by several parties.
The parties must cease those violations immediately, and the perpetrators must be
held to account.
With regard to the 30 December attack on Aden airport, we look forward to
the results of the Panel of Experts’ investigation.
Regarding the humanitarian situation, the rising food insecurity continues to
be a major concern, as the latest United Nations report on acute malnutrition shows
the highest levels of severe acute malnutrition since the start of the conflict.
In that context, we commend the decision of the United States to revoke the
designation of Ansar Allah as a foreign terrorist organization, as that will hopefully
prevent an even more catastrophic situation in Yemen. We also welcome the
convening of the timely high-level pledging conference for Yemen on 1 March, cohosted by Sweden and Switzerland. Estonia’s intention is to continue to contribute
in order to help alleviate the critical humanitarian situation of the people in Yemen.
We also reiterate our call on the Houthi authorities to ensure immediate and
full access to the FSO SAFER oil tanker for the United Nations team.

10/33

21-02736

S/2021/167

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths for his efforts. I also want to thank
Mark Lowcock for the remarkable work of the humanitarian actors on the ground.
And I thank the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
for her work as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014). We must be fully and collectively mobilized to finally put an end to the war
in Yemen.
France condemns the attack by the Houthis against Ma’rib, where there are
approximately 1 million internally displaced persons, as well as the attacks carried
out by the Houthis against Saudi territory. Such attacks must be stopped immediately.
We condemn the ecological blackmail by the Houthis and demand once again that
they immediately facilitate access for the United Nations inspection mission to the
FSO SAFER oil tanker.
We also deplore the violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, including the use of sexual violence as a weapon of
war. We denounce the impediments to humanitarian access and the diversion of aid
and public funds. We recall that those resources must benefit the population.
The truth must be established with regard to the attack of 30 December in
Aden. We reiterate our full support to the Yemeni Government and request that the
Panel of Experts on Yemen be allowed to report to the Sanctions Committee after its
investigation on site.
France calls on the Yemeni parties to engage in good faith in the pursuit of a
political solution. They must demonstrate responsibility and work with the Special
Envoy, to whom we reiterate our full support. The current context must make it
possible to achieve a ceasefire, confidence-building measures and a political solution.
Such a settlement is indeed the only way to end the suffering of the Yemeni people.
The humanitarian situation is catastrophic: 16 million people will suffer from
hunger in 2021. Children continue to suffer the consequences of the conflict. In that
regard, France calls for the full implementation of the conclusions of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict (S/AC.51/2020/1), adopted last year. We
have a collective responsibility to prevent such a tragedy.
The donors’ conference scheduled for 1 March is an important step. France
will be present. The decision of the United States to revoke the designation of the
Houthis as a terrorist organization is welcome. The humanitarian consequences of
such a designation would have been catastrophic.
We will not stop repeating it: respect for international humanitarian law and
the protection of civilians are obligations that are binding on all. France will remain
fully mobilized to achieve peace in Yemen and a de-escalation in the region.

21-0273611/33

S/2021/167

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, T.S. Tirumurti
I thank Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
for their briefings. I also thank my dear friend Ambassador Rhonda King for her
briefing as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014).
Ten years ago, the people of Yemen poured into the streets demanding political,
administrative and economic reforms in the country. The Security Council started
discussing the situation in Yemen, and we were part of those discussions then as
well, with the objective of ensuring a peaceful political transformation. The Yemeni
people hoped that such a transformation would bring a positive change to their lives.
It is disheartening to see that a decade later the conflict in Yemen still has no end
in sight. The formidable economic, security and political challenges confronting the
people of Yemen have only increased, leaving them in acute need of humanitarian
assistance. Today a sizeable portion of the population of the country does not have
reliable access to food. Malnourishment among children has reached high levels,
which will only worsen with the forecast of famine.
However, the underlying factors contributing to the humanitarian situation in
Yemen need to be urgently addressed. The most pressing issue of all is the need to
end the conflict. Grave food insecurity and hunger are clustered in areas affected by
the conflict. We are deeply concerned by the renewed hostilities in Ma’rib and AlJawf, triggered by recent military operations of Ansar Allah, and continuing civilian
casualties in Al-Hudaydah. All parties should immediately eschew violence and
implement the ceasefire provisions of the Hodeidah Agreement. We commend the
efforts of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA)
in engaging the parties to defuse the situation in Al-Hudaydah governorate, and we
call on all parties to remove restrictions on UNMHA’s movement to facilitate its
patrolling. The preservation and full implementation of the Stockholm Agreement
are even more critical today to ensure smooth commercial and humanitarian imports
into Yemen.
India condemns the attack on Abha International Airport in Saudi Arabia.
The targeting of the civilian airport is a violation of international law and cannot be
justified for any reason whatsoever. We also condemn the missile and drone attacks
in Saudi Arabia in recent weeks, which pose a risk to the security of that country and
also threaten regional stability. I reiterate India’s call for the strict implementation of
the arms embargo envisaged in resolution 2216 (2015) so as to effectively eliminate
such threats in the future.
We have closely followed the recent diplomatic initiatives, including the visit
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Martin Griffiths, to the region and
hope that they will contribute to reducing the tensions and kick-starting peace talks
between the Yemeni parties. An early conclusion of the prisoner-exchange talks in
Amman with a positive outcome will set the right environment for peace talks. In
that context, let me underline the following.
The hostilities must end immediately, facilitating a nationwide ceasefire
between the parties. As has been evident from the continuing turmoil in the country,
there can be no military solution to the conflict. A peaceful political settlement
through broad-based dialogue and consultations, taking into account the legitimate
concerns and aspirations of all stakeholders in Yemen, is the only way forward.
With the formation of the new Government Cabinet facilitated by Saudi
Arabia under the Riyadh agreement, the time is now ripe to get all Yemeni parties
12/33

21-02736

S/2021/167

on board for the commencement of a comprehensive peace process. In that regard,
we urge the Special Envoy to continue his commendable efforts.
Any peace process should be fully inclusive and led by the Yemenis, with the
United Nations being a facilitating partner. The role of women and young people
should be fully factored into that process and the solution. With the commitment and
resolve of all Yemeni parties, a consensus-based political solution to the country’s
crisis can be achieved. The countries of the region with influence on the various
Yemeni parties have an important role in ensuring that.
While the larger goal of national reconciliation and sustainable peace is under
consideration, the immediate dire economic, health and humanitarian situations
should be effectively addressed. Any international assistance provided to the Yemeni
people should be impartial, irrespective of who controls the territory in which
they live. That assistance should also take into account and address the prevailing
situation of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Yemen.
It must also be ensured that terrorist forces do not take advantage of the
continuing conflict. Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula and the Islamic State,
although weakened, still have the potential to spawn and strengthen terrorism in
the country and the region. The international community must speak in one voice
against terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
As I have said in the past, the cornerstone of India’s centuries-old relations
with Yemen is our people-to-people ties. Thousands of Yemeni students continue to
study in India, and a large number of Yemenis travel to India for medical treatment
in our hospitals every year. Our doors have always been open for the people of
Yemen, even during these challenging times of the COVID-19 pandemic. We also
remain committed to extending humanitarian help to Yemen.
Before I conclude, let me also join other colleagues in expressing my
disappointment over the continued stasis on the FSO SAFER issue. The United
Nations team of experts must be provided immediate access to the FSO SAFER
so as to avert an environmental and humanitarian disaster. I also encourage the
United Nations not to get bogged down in technicalities and react nimbly whenever
a window of opportunity opens up in future to resolve the issue.

21-0273613/33

S/2021/167

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
I want to say a special thank you to Special Envoy Griffiths and UnderSecretary-General Lowcock for their updates today. My thanks also go to Ambassador
King for her briefing as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014). Ireland supports the work of the Committee and regards the sanctions
regime as an important tool of the Council to contribute to a solution of the conflict
and restore peace, security and stability in Yemen.
To say that the desperate humanitarian emergency in Yemen demands urgent
action is now almost an embarrassing understatement. The real tragedy, however, is
compounded by knowing that humanitarian solutions alone cannot bring an end to
the crisis. We fully support the valiant and repeated efforts of Martin Griffiths to
broker a political solution.
After six long years of conflict, we call on all parties to seize this opportunity
for meaningful political progress. We repeat our call to do that. For a solution to the
crisis to be sustainable, we know that it must be inclusive, as well as Yemeni-led and
Yemeni-owned.
Yemeni-owned also means Yemeni-women-owned. We believe that the
structural inequalities that hold back Yemeni women are also holding back the
cause of peace. As co-Chair of the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security, we look forward to Special Envoy Griffiths briefing the Informal Expert
Group in the coming weeks.
As we just heard, violent and hostile acts have regrettably continued, as
Martin Griffiths said at the beginning, to sharply escalate since we last discussed
this issue at the Council (see S/2021/56). Ireland is particularly concerned by reports
of renewed attacks in Ma’rib, which are inflicting further civilian suffering and
clearly seriously threatening the prospects for peace.
We also condemn in the strongest terms the repeated cross-border attacks
against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Such attacks are unacceptable, and we call for
their cessation immediately.
To sum it up, and there is no other way to put it, the violence in Yemen must
end. Ireland urges all parties on the ground to engage in an immediate nationwide
ceasefire. The Secretary-General’s repeated calls and the endless rounds of talks and
consultations aimed at getting the sides to enter into political talks are, in themselves,
aimed at one thing — giving the long-suffering Yemeni people relief from conflict
and setting them on a path to a peaceful future. As Martin Griffiths himself said this
morning, we need a decision now.
As Mark Lowcock clearly reminded us this morning, we are running out of
time. Yemen has the most unwanted, and I would say dubious, distinction of being
home to the world’s largest humanitarian crisis. As the Security Council, we simply
cannot lose more time in acting to address the devastating consequences of this
conflict, the scale and nature of which are shameful.
We heard again today about the urgent need to address the imminent threat of
widespread famine. The facts are clear. Many repeated them here, and they are worth
repeating again. Sixteen million people face food insecurity. Two million children
under 5 years of age have only ever known conflict and will face malnutrition this
year, with the risk of death, unless they get urgent treatment. I think that those
figures are actually difficult to comprehend but, in plain terms, we know that 50,000
14/33

21-02736

S/2021/167

people right now, as we speak, are facing death by starvation, and a great many more
are in danger of the same fate.
As Mark Lowcock also set out for us again this morning, the crisis in Yemen
has the backdrop of a deeply damaged economy, with exchange-rate fluctuation and
other factors driving up the cost of basic food in an already stressed environment.
We call on all parties to take action to halt the catastrophe unfolding before
our eyes. I believe that we all share a moral, as well as political, responsibility to
act. We must all support the efforts of humanitarian agencies with adequate funding,
and we look towards the pledging event on 1 March in the hope that all donors will
be generous.
Today we once again insist that humanitarian agencies be enabled to carry out
their work in a safe, secure and unimpeded way. The decision of the United States
to revoke the Houthi foreign-terrorist-organization designation on humanitarian
grounds is welcome. We continue to call on all parties to the conflict to respect
international human rights law and international humanitarian law and enable
safe, unimpeded access for humanitarian organizations carrying out life-saving
work. Restrictions and impediments to the work of humanitarian organizations
are unacceptable.
Before concluding, I also want to raise the untenable situation regarding the
FSO SAFER tanker. Mark Lowcock called it a clear and present danger to everyone in
Yemen. We know that, without proper maintenance and repair, the tanker poses that
danger, with catastrophic environmental and humanitarian consequences. Surely,
given all that we have heard today regarding the suffering of the Yemeni people, it is
a problem that we can work to fix. We call on all parties, in particular the Houthis, to
rapidly conclude discussions, issue all required clearances and eliminate all further
delays so that the urgently required assessment and repairs can take place. Given the
potentially catastrophic consequences of inaction, we believe that there can be no
excuse for obstruction or delay.

21-0273615/33

S/2021/167

Annex IX
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Michael Kiboino
I congratulate Ambassador Rhonda King on her report to the Council and for
the leadership she provides as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014). I also thank Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock for
their informative briefings.
Kenya further commends Mr. Griffiths on his recent initiative to travel to the
region to conduct meetings with the relevant stakeholders. It is our hope that such
engagements will help to create a common understanding and momentum towards
the necessary consensus to enable the conclusion of and subsequent implementation
of the joint declaration for a nationwide ceasefire.
While welcoming the increased diplomatic engagements aimed at ending
the war in Yemen, Kenya is gravely concerned at the recent surge of hostilities,
especially in Ma’rib and Al-Hudaydah, as well as the cross-border attacks that raise
questions as to the level of commitment of the parties to the conflict to accepting a
ceasefire and the resumption of political talks.
That disturbing situation has greatly exacerbated regional tensions and
increased opportunities for threats from terrorist groups, including Al-Qaida and
Islamic State affiliates. Our particular concerns in this regard include: increasing
reports of maritime insecurity along the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden, especially
reports of arms smuggling off the coast of Somalia, presenting a risk to peace,
security and stability in the region; persistent attacks on commercial vessels along
key shipping routes, undermining the movement of goods, including the flow of
humanitarian aid; and rampant attacks targeting innocent civilians and civilian
infrastructure, including medical facilities and schools.
There can be no military solution to the crisis in Yemen. Any use of terrorism or
any form of violence to advance political or ideological interests must be condemned.
We therefore support the Special Envoy’s efforts towards a political settlement, and,
in agreement with the Special Envoy, we further emphasize that the only sustainable
solution has to be an inclusive Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned peace process.
We are also concerned at the continued delays and bottlenecks that are
hindering the inspection and repair of the FSO SAFER tanker. In that regard,
we urge all parties to expedite the necessary logistical arrangements for the
facility to be attended to as a matter of urgency, in order to avert a looming
environmental catastrophe.
The humanitarian situation as painted by Mr. Lowcock remains alarming. The
increasing fighting being witnessed in Ma’rib and elsewhere will put the lives of
millions more of civilians at risk, further exacerbating the already dire humanitarian
situation. To make matters worse, the humanitarian situation provides opportunities
for radicalization and recruitment into terrorism.
We call on the international community to urgently step up the necessary
support, including participation in the upcoming pledging conference on Yemen on
1 March, to be convened by the Secretary-General and co-hosted by Sweden and
Switzerland, in order to prevent the country from sliding into famine. The parties
to the conflict should, on the other hand, de-escalate, with a view to facilitating
humanitarian access in accordance with international humanitarian law.
It has been a decade since the people of Yemen passionately voiced their
aspirations for a better future. Sadly, we have only seen the situation in Yemen
16/33

21-02736

S/2021/167

deteriorate and its people endure unbearable misery and distress. Surely we have to
find ways of helping the Yemeni people to surmount the challenges facing them in
order for them to rebuild their lives. Kenya is committed to working closely with the
members of the Council towards that end.

21-0273617/33

S/2021/167

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramirez
[Original: Spanish]
I thank Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen Martin Griffiths,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Mark Lowcock and our good
friend Ambassador King for their briefings.
We have once again heard reports about the difficult situation in Yemen. But
it is truly encouraging that possibilities are emerging for a political solution to the
conflict. We cannot fail to take this opportunity to put an end to the extremely
serious humanitarian situation so that Yemen can return to political stability.
In that regard, we commend Mr. Griffiths’s efforts to advance the political
process. We also welcome the holding of the fifth meeting of the Supervisory
Committee on the Implementation of the Prisoners and Detainees Exchange
Agreement, which took place in Amman last January. We urge the parties to continue
those discussions constructively and call for the immediate and unconditional release
of all sick, injured and elderly persons, minors and women, as well as all those who
were arbitrarily detained.
We welcome the announcements made by the Administration of United
States of America President Biden relating to the situation in Yemen. We applaud in
particular the announcement that the designation of Ansar Allah as a foreign terrorist
organization would be reversed, which will allow the humanitarian organizations on
the territory controlled by that group to continue their work.
However, we cannot ignore the incidents of violence recorded in Yemen in
the past month, as noted here. We strongly condemn the recent attacks in Ma’rib,
which have resulted in the deaths of civilians as well as numerous injuries. Those
crimes only add to the long list of atrocities that must be investigated and must not
go unpunished. We also condemn the attacks on Abha airport and the city of Khamis
Mushait, in Saudi Arabia.
After almost seven years of conflict, the humanitarian situation in Yemen,
which was already very serious, continues to deteriorate. In 2020, compared with the
previous year, northern Yemen, one of the areas most affected by the conflict, saw a
52 per cent increase in the number of children victims of malnutrition. Likewise, last
year, only 55 per cent of the funding needed to meet the country’s vast humanitarian
needs was received.
Arms transfers to the Middle East region have increased substantially in
recent years. The uncontrolled flow of those weapons has fuelled the violence in
Yemen. The reports of the Panel of Experts have consistently shown clear evidence
of violations of the arms embargo and the use of increasingly sophisticated weapons
and delivery systems.
We make a strong call once again for stricter international controls on transfers
and for full respect for the arms embargo. We urge exporting countries to seriously
consider the dire consequences for the civilian population of such arms transfers, the
end users of which are largely responsible for the humanitarian tragedy in Yemen.
Finally, Mexico, like others, expresses its concern about the continual delays
in the inspection of the FSO SAFER oil tanker. We call on the Houthis to desist
from imposing new conditions so that the United Nations inspection teams can have
immediate access to the ship and thus avert a fresh environmental, humanitarian and
economic catastrophe.
18/33

21-02736

S/2021/167

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
I would like to thank Special Envoy Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock and Ambassador King, as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), for their introductory remarks.
We are alarmed by the recent escalation of violence, including the offensive
against Ma’rib and the repeated missile and drone attacks against Saudi Arabia.
Those attacks underline the need for a truce and an inclusive political process to end
the conflict. In that respect, we also urge the parties not to escalate the conflict in
Al-Hudaydah but rather to revitalize the joint observation mechanism.
We are dismayed by the lack of progress related to the FSO SAFER. The
Houthis must provide the United Nations team with immediate and unconditional
access to the tanker to assess its condition and conduct initial repairs. That is vital in
order to avert a potential environmental and humanitarian disaster. There is no time
for further delays. I would also like to stress the importance of full cooperation with
the International Organization of Migration and all United Nations agencies.
As we have heard, tens of thousands of Yemenis are at risk of starving to
death if the needed funds are not made available. That is alarming and should spur
urgent action from all of us. The high-level donor conference to be held in Geneva
on 1 March, co-hosted by Sweden and Switzerland, is very timely and will be crucial
to ensure sufficient funding for the humanitarian response plan. We urge all donors
to make generous contributions and hope to see previous donors from the Gulf
countries return with significant contributions.
However, Norway would like to stress that the only way to truly resolve the
humanitarian crisis is to find a political solution.
With reference to the briefing from Ambassador King, Chair of the 2140
Committee, Norway welcomes the recent report from the United Nations Panel
of Experts on Yemen and its trip to Aden. Their reporting on the continuous and
widespread violations of international humanitarian and human rights law by
all parties to the conflict is distressing. All parties must respect international
humanitarian and human rights law and ensure the full protection of civilians
affected by hostilities, in particular children, and those responsible for violations
must be held accountable.
Norway participated in the delegation of European countries visiting Aden
in February, led by the European Union. We welcome the establishment of the new
Government in Aden and its joint work to address the multiple challenges facing the
country. The full implementation of the Riyadh agreement is key. It will be crucial
to focus on stabilization of the South and to ensure delivery of much needed services
to the population.
In closing, Norway welcomes the renewed diplomatic efforts and dialogue
with regional partners to end the war in Yemen. Regional actors must play a role in
any political solution, while the process must remain Yemeni-owned. We urge all
parties to renounce violence and focus on the United Nations-led process. Martin
has our full support.

21-0273619/33

S/2021/167

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: English and Russian]
We thank Martin Griffiths for his briefing on the situation in Yemen and the
steps taken to resume the negotiation process. We also thank Mark Lowcock for
sharing his assessment of the humanitarian situation in the country and the Chair
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014),
Rhonda King, for presenting a review of the activities of that subsidiary body.
We reiterate our unfailing support for the efforts of the Special Envoy. We
note the need to galvanize those efforts as the confrontation in Yemen steps up.
We are concerned over the escalation in Ma’rib governorate and in other parts of
Yemen and condemn the intensifying attacks against the territory of Saudi Arabia,
in particular Abha airport. We call on all actors to stop the shooting and to launch a
negotiation process under United Nations auspices. Armed action must stop, and, in
parallel, confidence-building measures must be taken in the political, military and
civilian areas. Such measures would help improve the dire humanitarian situation of
the population. It is important to continue to fight the terrorists, who are making use
of the protracted conflict to sustain their positions in Yemen and beyond its borders.
We welcome the efforts of Mr. Griffiths aimed at creating a constructive
environment for the Yemeni political settlement and building trust at the regional
level. In our contacts with both Yemenis and regional actors, we will encourage
the quest for compromise solutions. We welcome the decision of the United States
Administration to reconsider its prior decision to add Ansar Allah to the list of
foreign terrorist organizations.
To support the implementation of the Riyadh agreement of 5 November
2019, which was designed to normalize the situation in the south of Yemen, on 18
December 2020 a new coalition Government was formed in which for the first time
representatives of the southern regions were allocated a considerable percentage of
ministerial posts.
We hope that the implementation of the aforementioned agreement will
enhance public security and allow for a focus on resolving the urgent socioeconomic
and humanitarian problems facing that part of Yemen. We are also in favour of
the practical implementation of the Riyadh provisions relating to the launch of
negotiations involving a consolidated delegation that includes the official Yemeni
authorities and the Southern Transitional Council, along with the leadership of Ansar
Allah, on issues linked to the future political structure of Yemen.
We support the efforts made by the United Nations Mission to support the
Hodeidah Agreement to back the Stockholm Agreement, which aims to promote a
comprehensive settlement.
The tremendous humanitarian problems in Yemen require an urgent solution,
that is, the prevention of hunger and disease, including the coronavirus. In that
context, we call on donors, including those from the region, to increase the financial
support needed for United Nations programmes that provide basic assistance,
including those ensuring food security for the population, access to clean water and
medical services. Humanitarian assistance for Yemen must be distributed on a nondiscriminatory basis among the entire population of the country. We call for the
rejection of unilateral steps both inside and outside Yemen that hinder the work of
humanitarian workers. We are convinced that the problem of the FSO SAFER tanker
can and should be solved through United Nations mediation.
20/33

21-02736

S/2021/167

We underscore the fact that the political settlement in Yemen would contribute
significantly to de-escalation in the subregion. We invite our colleagues to cooperate
on that track, inter alia on the basis of resolution 598 (1987) and the Russian collective
security concept.

21-0273621/33

S/2021/167

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
We, too, thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock for their briefings. We welcome — indeed, we applaud — the
important work that they and their respective teams are undertaking.
“I am saddened” — so began Martin this morning. I am disheartened. Indeed,
we remain deeply concerned at the fact that the humanitarian situation continues
to be dire and is worsening. While the threat of famine is looming for some, it is
already a reality for others. We hope that the positive momentum that comes from
the reversal of the Houthi designation will facilitate continued imports of essential
commodities into Yemen and have a tangible impact on the ground. We applaud the
United States in that regard.
Notwithstanding that, additional funding for the humanitarian response plan
and support for the economy are necessary. We express, with very heavy hearts, our
concern that more than 2 million Yemeni children under 5 years of age are expected
to endure acute malnutrition by the end of 2021. We echo the remarks of Mr. David
Beasley, who has underscored that “each malnourished child also means a family
struggling to survive”. To that end, we welcome the virtual high-level pledging event
that will be held on 1 March, and urge donors, including countries in the region, to
consider stepping up their contributions and ensure that their pledges are disbursed
as soon as possible.
We express concern that violence is continuing, including in Al-Hudaydah,
because it will undermine the political dialogue. Moreover, the recent military
escalation in Ma’rib is very alarming, as it threatens to exacerbate the humanitarian
crisis and puts millions of civilians, including internally displaced persons, at risk.
We appeal to all actors within Yemen to work in good faith with each other and with
the Special Envoy and refrain from destabilizing actions. The gains achieved by
military means will only get us so far, but then comes the political dialogue, which
is the only viable path to sustainable peace, security and prosperity.
The parties must not delay engagement. Political negotiations must resume
and, alongside this, there must be safe and unhindered humanitarian access in
accordance with humanitarian principles. All of these issues are dealt with in the
Special Envoy’s proposed joint declaration, which must therefore be concluded with
the deepest sense of urgency.
We emphasize that the only solution is a Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned
political process, inclusive of the plurality of voices within the country. In that
regard, we call on members of the international community to play their part and
support the people of Yemen. This demands that all Member States cease the transfer
of weapons to parties within the country, whether directly or through proxies or third
parties. Similarly, other forms of assistance that enable attacks on the different sides
must stop.
We call for renewed commitment to the Stockholm and Riyadh agreements.
The newly formed Cabinet was an important breakthrough, and we encourage the
parties to work together to further fulfil their obligations. We welcome reports that the
parties have resumed discussion on a prisoner exchange and recognize the continued
efforts of the International Committee of the Red Cross in that process. This is
a vital confidence-building measure that creates an atmosphere that bolsters the
parties’ ability and willingness to honour their other commitments. The most recent
prisoner exchange was evidence that the parties can work together constructively to
advance efforts towards peace.
22/33

21-02736

S/2021/167

We conclude by calling for urgent progress on the FSO SAFER oil tanker. This
issue remains outstanding despite the countless efforts to undertake and prepare for
an assessment mission. We appeal to all relevant parties to avoid politicizing this
issue and prioritize the environment and the people of Yemen and the wider Red
Sea region. The timeline for the deployment of the mission remains uncertain, as
Mr. Lowcock reminded us in his briefing earlier. Accordingly, we urge transparency
and increased communication between the parties so that further delay can be
avoided, which, as Mr. Lowcock rightly underscored, is a clear and present danger
to everybody.
We reaffirm our support to the people of Yemen and to our briefers. Our
Special Envoy implores us: politics will come later; but now the Yemeni people must
come first. The violence must stop; the conflict must end. We strongly implore all
to heed this call.

21-0273623/33

S/2021/167

Annex XIV
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Tunisia

to

the

[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I should like to thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen, Martin Griffiths, and the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mark Lowcock, for their valuable
briefings on developments in Yemen.
Although we are optimistic about the positive signs that have emerged recently
as a result of the efforts of Mr. Griffiths, in conjunction with the various parties, to
end hostilities and advance towards a political settlement, recent developments on
the ground, including the renewed escalation and the ongoing attack on the city of
Ma’rib, which we condemn, are cause for concern. These developments threaten to
further complicate the situation and reduce the chances of resuming negotiations on
a political solution, which is essential to ending the crisis in Yemen. We had hoped
that all parties would commit to de-escalation and peace and would undertake to
build on the diplomatic momentum to end the war, resort to negotiations and put the
interests of the Yemeni people above all other considerations.
This escalation, however, will further deepen the worsening humanitarian
crisis, put the lives of more than 2 million civilians at risk and result in the internal
displacement of hundreds of thousands of people, with all the possible consequences
at every level. In a country in which 80 per cent of people rely on humanitarian
assistance and hundreds of thousands of children are exposed to various kinds of
diseases, malnutrition, and the dangers of mines and war, nothing is needed but
calm, security, peace and stability.
The events of recent years, with substantial loss of life, destruction of
infrastructure and unprecedented humanitarian tragedies, have demonstrated that
the military option is not a solution, but rather exacerbates and complicates the
situation, and affects security and stability throughout the region. We therefore
condemn the targeting of civilian installations in Saudi Arabia.
We reiterate that the only way to overcome the crisis in Yemen, restore security
and stability in the country and put an end to the suffering of the Yemeni people is the
political process under the auspices of the United Nations on the basis of the agreedupon terms of reference, which comprise the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and
its Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the All-Inclusive National Dialogue
Conference, and Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2216 (2015).
We also call for an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire in compliance with
resolution 2532 (2020), to enable the resumption of negotiations on a final settlement
that restores security and stability and ensures Yemeni sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity.
We also emphasize the need to spare innocent civilians, refugees, internally
displaced persons and civilian installations, and respect international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. We look forward to the results of the
investigation into the cowardly attack on members of the Government of Yemen
upon their arrival at Aden airport, an attack intended to hinder de-escalation and
efforts to achieve peace.
The deteriorating humanitarian situation in Yemen must be addressed
urgently to prevent famine, epidemics and a humanitarian disaster, and to alleviate
the suffering of the Yemeni people. We therefore reiterate the need to facilitate the
arrival of humanitarian aid and find solutions that will enable airports to be opened,
24/33

21-02736

S/2021/167

ports to be reopened and wages to be paid. The medical assistance needed to stop the
spread of the coronavirus disease must be provided and the response to the pandemic
must be strengthened.
My delegation hopes that the donor meeting to be held at the beginning
of March 2021 will be successful and will result in the provision of the material
resources necessary to support and sustain humanitarian relief programmes.
In conclusion, the oil tanker FSO SAFER remains a priority because of the
environmental, humanitarian and economic risk it poses in the Red Sea owing to
its decaying hull. We call for the completion and facilitation of measures to deploy
United Nations experts to carry out the necessary technical inspections and repairs
as soon as possible.

21-0273625/33

S/2021/167

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Barbara Woodward
I extend my thanks to Special Envoy Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock and Ambassador King for their briefings.
For Yemen, the year 2021 started much as 2020 left off: an intractable conflict
with what threatens to be the worst famine in decades. But as we have heard,
there is an opportunity. Increased engagement by the United States of America on
Yemen, including the reversal of designation, is a welcome milestone. And we fully
support United Nations efforts to broker a deal that ends hostilities, eases economic
restrictions and leads to a comprehensive political process.
Nevertheless, the Houthis have responded to this push for peace by escalating
their attacks against Saudi Arabia and launching a new offensive on Ma’rib — a city
where 1 million Yemenis have sought refuge. It will take the collective efforts of
the Security Council to persuade the Houthis to cease that offensive. This conflict
will not end without a comprehensive deal involving all of Yemen’s key political
groups, including the Houthis. In that regard, I welcome the supportive statements
that Martin Griffiths received during his recent visits to Tehran and Riyadh and
hope that the Houthis will now receive the Special Envoy in Sana’a to discuss the
way forward.
As we have heard, while the war rages, millions of Yemenis risk starvation.
To prevent famine, the international community and Yemen’s key partners must step
up at the pledging conference on 1 March — or, as Mr. Lowcock said, before that.
History — and the Yemeni people — will not look kindly on us if we fail.
Resolution 2417 (2018) makes clear that humanitarian access must not be
impeded. In addition, as we have heard, restrictions by the Government of Yemen on
fuel imports are sharply increasing prices, threatening the delivery of basic services
and endangering the lives of Yemenis. Significant external financial assistance to
the Central Bank of Yemen is also urgently needed.
Finally, further Houthi delays to the United Nations mission to assess the FSO
SAFER oil tanker are unacceptable. With another vessel potentially identified, I hope
the United Nations can outline in greater detail what more it needs from the Houthis
for this mission to deploy.

26/33

21-02736

S/2021/167

Annex XVI
Statement by the Acting Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations, Richard Mills
I thank the President and our briefers today.
As the briefers noted this morning, the United States is preparing to
reinvigorate diplomatic efforts, alongside the United Nations and others, to achieve
a ceasefire and end the war in Yemen. As we do so, I want to be clear that we will
fully support the Special Envoy’s efforts to bring all parties to consensus on the basis
of the elements that he outlined this morning, and our goal will remain a unified,
stable Yemen, free from foreign influence.
To underline the priority that the United States places on ending the conflict
and responding to the humanitarian catastrophe in Yemen, President Biden named
Timothy Lenderking as the United States Special Envoy for Yemen, as was noted
by the briefers and many of my Security Council colleagues this morning. I want
to express my gratitude for the welcome that many Council members have given
to the news of this appointment. I think that welcome reflects that Special Envoy
Lenderking’s depth of expertise on Yemen is well known, and that expertise, I think,
is already being put to good use, as he recently travelled to Riyadh to work with
Special Envoy Griffiths and our partners there to chart a path towards peace.
In addition, in support of these diplomatic efforts, as has been mentioned,
President Biden also announced just last week that the United States is ending our
support for Saudi-led coalition offensive operations in Yemen, including the halting
of relevant arms sales. Let me be clear, however, that, at the same time, we remain
committed to helping our partners defend themselves from attacks, such as the
Houthi strike on a civilian airliner at Saudi Arabia’s Abha airport on 10 February. I
also want to take this moment to recall the Houthis’ attempted assassination of the
entire Yemeni Cabinet on 30 December, which tragically killed innocent civilians.
In our view, these attacks continue to demonstrate the Houthis’ unwillingness to join
Special Envoy Griffiths’ process, which places the Houthis squarely at odds with the
interests of the Yemeni people.
The United States is also gravely concerned about the humanitarian situation
in Yemen, which was so eloquently described this morning. In recognition of the
dire humanitarian situation and having heard warnings from Mr. Lowcock and Mr.
Griffiths — and from other humanitarian groups and from members of our own
Congress — the Biden Administration has decided that the United States terrorist
designations of Ansar Allah could have a devastating impact on Yemenis’ access to
basic commodities such as food and fuel. The Biden Administration has therefore
revoked those designations, effective 16 February, as has been mentioned.
I want to be clear that that decision was taken because it reflects the priority
we place on facilitating humanitarian assistance and the commercial import of such
critical commodities as food and fuel in the face of this dire situation. It also reflects
our emphasis on revitalizing diplomacy once more, alongside the United Nations and
others, in order to end the war itself. We will continue to enforce existing United
Nations and United States sanctions on certain members of Ansar Allah, and we
will closely monitor the group’s activities to assess whether additional actions
are warranted.
As Mr. Lowcock just informed us in his briefing, we too are concerned by the
lack of funding for the humanitarian response, particularly at a time when more than
16 million Yemenis will face severe acute food insecurity by June. The United States
was the largest humanitarian donor to the Yemen response last year, and we urge
21-0273627/33

S/2021/167

others to step forward and contribute funding so as to broaden the burden-sharing
and ensure that the life-saving programmes undertaken by the United Nations can
reach the millions of Yemenis in need. We strongly encourage all States Members of
the United Nations to provide additional funds for the humanitarian response at the
upcoming high-level pledging event in March.
As noted, the United States remains deeply troubled by continued and
unacceptable Houthi attacks in Yemen and Saudi Arabia, including the recent attacks
in Ma’rib and Al-Jawf governorates. We call on the Houthis to immediately cease
all attacks, including those that damage civilian infrastructure in Saudi Arabia, and
to immediately halt the advance towards Ma’rib, which, as we have heard, is only
bringing more suffering to the Yemeni people.
While all other parties seem intent on finding a way to get to a peaceful
solution to this horrible conflict, the Houthis’ military campaign, as we have
heard, continues unabated. We also note that more countries have reached the same
conclusion we have: that the Houthis were singularly responsible for the horrendous
attempt to assassinate the new Yemeni Government in their attack on Aden airport
on 30 December. We urge the Houthis to stop these destabilizing and inflammatory
actions and to demonstrate a true commitment to constructively engaging in the
Special Envoy’s efforts to achieve peace.
Likewise, we are very disappointed that the Houthis continue to delay the
mission to assess the FSO SAFER oil tanker. For nearly two years, they have continued
to move the goalposts. The time has come for the Houthis to cease the excuses and
the stalling. We urge other nations to press the Houthis to allow the assessment to
move forward immediately.
Finally, I want to thank Ambassador King for the update she provided as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014). The implementation of Security Council sanctions is an important tool to
put pressure on those who are undermining peace and security in Yemen and to
change their destabilizing behaviour. To that end, all of us in the Council, as has
been mentioned, have an obligation to implement these sanctions, and the United
States looks forward to working with other members of the Security Council this
month to extend the assets freeze, the travel ban and the mandate of the Panel of
Experts on Yemen. We also look forward to the Panel’s reporting on its findings
from its recent visit to Aden regarding the 30 December attack.
Let me end by saying, as President Biden has made clear, that the United
States is committed to finding an inclusive political solution to this horrible conflict.
That means Yemenis of all backgrounds should be at the table in forging a common
future for their country. We look forward to working with our partners around the
world, including the United Nations and in the Council, to make that a reality.

28/33

21-02736

S/2021/167

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
At the outset, we would like to thank Ambassador Inga Rhonda King, Chair
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014),
the Panel of Experts and her team for the tremendous works of the Committee in
2020. Under her able leadership, the Committee successfully concluded its periodic
working report (see S/2012/79).
We would like to welcome the Permanent Representative of Yemen to
the meeting.
We thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
for their informative briefings. We would also like to express our deep appreciation
to all humanitarian workers and United Nations personnel working on the ground
during this very challenging time.
The first two months of 2021 have continued to witness fierce fighting in
Yemen, especially in Al-Hudaydah and Ma’rib. We are very concerned about such
a trend of military escalation. In that regard, we also share the view of UnderSecretary-General Lowcock and Special Envoy Griffiths that the current situation
has endangered the lives of millions of Yemeni civilians.
It is extremely urgent for the parties concerned to heed the call for a ceasefire
by the Secretary-General, immediately cease all military operations and resume
negotiations for a joint declaration towards a nationwide ceasefire.
The dire humanitarian situation, food insecurity and economic crisis, among
other factors, are our other concerns. It is alarming to learn from the World Food
Programme that Yemen is teetering on the brink of a major catastrophe, as child
malnutrition rates have reached record levels. According to a joint report by various
United Nations agencies, 2.3 million children, including half of all children under 5,
are projected to suffer from acute malnutrition in 2021. Among them, nearly 400,000
children could suffer from severe acute malnutrition. More than 16.2 million people
are unable to meet their daily food needs.
Regardless of such a circumstance, humanitarian programmes could not be
fully implemented owing to the continued shortage of financial contributions. We
reiterate our support for the convening of the Yemen international donors conference
on 1 March. On this occasion, we call upon international donors and the international
community to provide further funding for Yemen. It is crucial that the financial
assistance be used for the right purpose and the right people in need, especially
vulnerable groups, including women and children.
We also stress the need for the parties concerned to comply with international
humanitarian law and the protection of civilians. We emphasize the importance of
the unhindered access for humanitarian operations in parts of Yemen.
Against the backdrop of that situation, we welcome the recent developments
to ensure that humanitarian aid reaches the Yemeni people. It is encouraging to see
commitments and efforts towards ending the war in Yemen by restoring peace talks
and other diplomatic activities. In that regard, we urge all the parties concerned
to demonstrate further restraint, create a conducive environment and take this
opportunity to give a chance to the political process in Yemen, as well as peace and
stability in the region.
21-0273629/33

S/2021/167

It is imperative for all the parties concerned to fully implement the Stockholm
Agreement and the Riyadh agreement with United Nations mediation. We reaffirm
our support for Yemen’s sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity in that
process. The meaningful participation of women in the political process should also
be ensured and promoted.
On one issue that the Council has taken up many times, the FSO SAFER oil
tanker, we again urge Ansar Allah to facilitate the approval process to allow the
United Nations technical team to assess the tanker and perform their duties. We must
prevent the risks of an environmental disaster from jeopardizing marine life and
affecting shipping operations in the Red Sea.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our support for the tireless work of
the Special Envoy and his team and for the United Nations agencies working for
peace, stability and development for Yemen and the Yemeni people.

30/33

21-02736

S/2021/167

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Yemen to the
United Nations, Abdullah Ali Fadhel Al-Saadi
[Original: Arabic]
Allow me at the outset, Ambassador, to wish you every success in your
presidency of the Council this month, and to congratulate your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Tunisia, on his successful presidency in January.
The Government of Yemen seeks, on the basis of its responsibility to the
Yemeni people, and under the guidance and leadership of the President of the
Republic, His Excellency Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, not only to stop
the senseless war waged by the Houthi militias with the support, financing and
weaponry of the rogue Iranian regime, but also to end the conflict once and for all.
The Government continues to engage constructively with the efforts of the United
Nations, through the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Martin
Griffiths, to achieve a comprehensive, sustainable peace based on the agreed-upon
terms of reference of a political solution, namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the All-Inclusive
National Dialogue Conference, and Security Council resolutions related to Yemen,
in particular resolution 2216 (2015).
In addition to engaging in international diplomatic efforts to reach a political
solution that will end the war, the Government welcomes the appointment, by the
United States Administration, of Timothy Lenderking as Special Envoy for Yemen.
Instead of positively addressing these efforts and the decision of the United States
Administration to remove the Houthis from its list of foreign terrorist organizations,
the Houthi militias have recently embarked on a dangerous military escalation in
Ma’rib Governorate, which is densely populated, including with displaced persons,
through a broad military offensive on various fronts and a bombardment involving
ballistic missiles and drones, which is entering its eleventh day. The Houthi militias
have also targeted civilian objects in Saudi Arabia; for example, they attacked
Abha airport, a civil airport, with a drone. All this has coincided with United
Nations and international action to bring peace and end the war and confirms the
group’s real position on the peace process. It is clear that the militias are operating
as a tool of Iran to thwart all efforts by friends and the international community to
end the conf lict.
We call on the Council to shoulder its responsibilities in order to stop
this dangerous escalation in Ma’rib Governorate. The Council must take a firm,
decisive stance and review its positions. The Government of Yemen has warned
the international community not to send false signals and messages. Doing so will
relieve the pressure and encourage the Houthis to escalate their criminal military
actions and terrorist attacks on civilians, and to try to impose a fait accompli
on Yemenis. We have not waited for so long only to see the adverse effects of such
messages. We therefore call on the Council to exert maximum pressure on the militias
and their backer, the Iranian regime, to stop their aggression, their military escalation
and their criminal, terrorist behaviour, and to push them towards the option of peace
in order to spare the Yemeni people further destruction and suffering.
The Stockholm Agreement represented a glimmer of hope at the end of 2018,
as a step towards achieving comprehensive peace through its three components
related to Al-Hudaydah, Taiz, and the exchange of prisoners and detainees. Today,
however, more than two years later, we see that, for the Houthi militias, the agreement
represents nothing more than a means of prolonging the war, opening new fronts and
exploiting the suffering of Yemenis. In Al-Hudaydah, the militias continue to commit
21-0273631/33

S/2021/167

serious violations of humanitarian law and target residential areas. Most recently, in
the past week, they destroyed the Qasimi Mosque in the Mandhar neighbourhood.
They have turned the city into a military barracks, including by digging tunnels and
excavations, deploying military reinforcements at the entrances to, and in the streets
of, the city, and targeting civilians, industrial installations and civilian objects. In
doing so, they have exacerbated the suffering and spread famine in some areas of
the Governorate.
It is regrettable that the United Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah
Agreement (UNMHA) has not, since it was established, been able to fulfil its mandate,
because the Houthi militias have continued to undermine the implementation of the
agreement, obstruct the Mission’s work, restrict its freedom and movements, refuse
to remove mines and prevent the opening of humanitarian corridors. The Mission
has been unable to investigate the attack on Colonel Mohammed Al-Sulayhiy,
a liaison officer, and therefore cannot protect the liaison officers who work with
it. We reiterate the call to move the Mission’s headquarters to an area that is not
subject to Houthi obstruction and coercion, and to resume its patrols, checkpoints
and maritime activities. The Houthi militias continue to commit acts of sabotage and
terrorism in the Red Sea and the Bab Al-Mandab strait by launching vessels rigged
with explosives and drones and by laying mines. Such acts are a serious threat to
the countries bordering the Red Sea and to safety, freedom of navigation and oil
shipping lanes in one of the world’s most vital waterways.
The Government of Yemen is also surprised by the silence of the international
community in the face of serious violations by Houthi militias in Taiz Governorate,
including the siege, the policy of starvation, the indiscriminate bombardment and
the use of snipers to murder civilians, including women, children and civil society
activists. The international community must take a firm stance against these
violations, hold the perpetrators to account and put pressure on the militias to
implement the Taiz understandings and lift the siege of the city.
With regard to prisoners and detainees, please allow me, Madam President,
to thank Jordan for generously hosting the last round of consultations, which began
on 23 January 2021.
Although the participants were close to reaching agreement in the first weeks
of the negotiations, the Houthis’ position changed completely after the United States
decided to remove them from its list of terrorist groups. That change adversely
affected the negotiations. Efforts are still being made in Jordan. My Government’s
delegation, which is aware of this matter’s humanitarian dimension, is approaching
the negotiations carefully and responsibly in the face of the Houthi delegation’s
intransigence and indifference.
My Government calls for pressure on the Houthi militias to release all
prisoners and detainees, including the four mentioned in Council resolutions, as well
as journalists, prisoners of conscience, political prisoners and civilian academics. We
have all welcomed the progress made recently. The Government of Yemen remains
committed to the principle of an “all for all” release and calls on the international
community to press the Houthi militias to stop delaying such a release and refrain
from using this humanitarian matter as a political negotiating tool.
Despite the cowardly terrorist attack on the Government of Yemen upon its
arrival at Aden International Airport, the Government is determined to carry out its
tasks and meet all challenges on the basis of its national responsibility. It is working
from the interim capital, Aden, to implement its programme, which includes key
objectives and priorities focused on completing the restoration of the State, ending
the insurrection, achieving security, stability and economic recovery, and putting
a stop to the suffering. My Government’s presence on the ground strengthens the
32/33

21-02736

S/2021/167

response to many of the current challenges. My Government looks forward to its
friends’ support in order to meet the economic and humanitarian challenges, and
to their active contribution to the success of its programme for 2021, which it has
named the year of recovery.
On the thorny path to sustainable, comprehensive peace, we must make
every effort to alleviate the economic and suffering of Yemenis. The technocratic
Government’s economic programme includes two objectives. The first is to
implement urgent policies to reduce economic decline, and the second is to develop
the economic and manufacturing sectors, improve the environment for investors
and increase the participation of the private sector and civil society organizations
in economic recovery efforts. In the area of infrastructure, energy and the
environment, the programme also includes the restoration and rehabilitation of
damaged infrastructure and public facilities in accordance with urgent priorities,
the normalization of the situation in the interim capital, Aden, and the liberated
areas, and the start of reconstruction activities. We therefore urge the United Nations
and its system entities, and international donors, to make a significant contribution
to help us carry out these tasks. That contribution does not require the allocation
of any additional resources; all it requires is that funds be transferred and banking
operations conducted through the Central Bank. Such a decision would greatly help
to maintain the value of the Yemeni rial and its effects would be felt in various
aspects of life.
The Government of Yemen looks forward to the success of the donor
conference for Yemen, to be held on 1 March 2021, and calls on its donor partners
and friendly countries to give generously to support the 2021 humanitarian response
plan and help alleviate the suffering of Yemenis.
The Government of Yemen has often warned of the procrastination and
intransigence of the Houthi militias, and their manipulation of the critical issue
of the oil tanker FSO SAFER which they are using to bargain with and extort the
international community, refusing to heed warnings that more than 1 million barrels
of oil may soon leak from the tanker and oblivious to the severe environmental,
economic and humanitarian consequences that such a leak would have for Yemen,
the countries of the region and international shipping. Despite the efforts of the
international community and the Council to put pressure on the Houthi militias
to allow the United Nations technical team to board the tanker to carry out the
initial assessment and maintenance in preparation for the unloading of the oil, the
international community was surprised when, after eight months of discussions with
the United Nations, the Houthis once again reneged on their commitments and refused
to grant the technical team the permits and safeguards needed to board the vessel.
The Houthi militias have often duped the international community into thinking that
there is light at the end of the tunnel, but they always reveal their true face in the end.
This is nothing but manoeuvring intended to deceive the international community
and use the issue for political haggling and extortion of the United Nations and the
Council. Since last year, we have been told that the assessment and maintenance will
begin within weeks, but we fear that those weeks will become years and that a major
disaster, to be paid for by Yemen, the region and the world, will ensue.

21-0273633/33
