TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
nd

MEETING: 19 FEBRUARY 1968

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 392) . , . . . . . , , . . . . . , , , . , . . . . . . . . . . .

‘1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . ,. . . , . . . . , . , , . , . . . . . . . .

1

The question of South West Africa:
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the representatives of Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Turkey, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia and Zambia
(S/8397);
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran, Iraq,
Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Philippmes,
Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sudan,
Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper
Volta and Yemen (S/8398 and Add. l/Rev. 1 and Add.2) I . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1392

THIRTEEN HUNDRED AND NINETY-SECOND MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 19 February 1968, at 4 p.m.
President: Mr. Miguel SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 392)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The question of South West Africa:
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Turkey, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia
and Zambia (S/8397);
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Afghanistan, Algeria, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville),
Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libya,
Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
Sudan, Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Yemen (S/8398
and Add.l/Rev.l and Add.2).
Adoption of the agenda

Sudan, Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Yemen (S/8398
and Add.VRev.1 and Add.21

1. The PRESIDENT (translated fvom Spanish): In accordance with the decision taken earlier by the Security
Council, if there is no objection I shall invite the representatives of Guyana, Turkey, Chile, Indonesia, Yugoslavia,
Nigeria, the United Arab Republic and Zambia to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,
it being understood that when the representatives wish to
speak, the speaker will be invited to take a place at the
Council table.
At the President’s invitation, Mr. E. A. Braithwaite
(Guyana), Mr. 0. &alp (Turkey), Mr. J. Pinera (Chile),
Mr. H. R. Abdulgani (Indonesia), Mr. Z. Jazii (Yugoslavia),
Mr. M. 0. Ihonde (Nigeria), Mr. M. A. El Kony (United
Arab Republic), and Mr. I. R. B. Manda (Zambia) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I should
like to inform the members of the Security Council that I
have received a communication dated 15 February
[S/8422/, from the representative of Colombia, asking to
be allowed to participate without vote in the debate on the
question now before us. If there are no objections, I shall
invite the representative of Colombia to take the place
reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber.
It was so decided.
At the President’s invitation, Mr. I? Olarte (Colombia)
took a place at the side of the Council chamber.

The agenda was adopted.
The question of South West Africa:
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of Chile,
Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Turkey, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia and Zambia
(S/8397);
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville),
Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libya,
Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,

3. The PRESIDENT (translated porn Spanish): The
Security Council will now continue its examination of the
item on its agenda. The first speaker on the list is the
representative of Brazil, and I now call upon him.
4. Mr. DE CARVALHO SILOS (Brazil): Mr. President,
allow me, first of all, to express the satisfaction of the
Brazilian delegation at your assumption of the responsibilities of the Presidency of this Council. Your experience
and wisdom assure us that, under your guidance, the
Security Council will be able to proceed effectively on the
matters before us. My delegation is extremely gratified by
the fact that you represent here a Latin American country
to which Brazil is tied by very close links and by a common
aspiration for peace and progress. May I also take this
opportunity to extend to Ambassador Shahi oipakistan the
deep appreciation of my delegation of the statesmanlike

e

In the first place, since the adoption of resolution 2145
South Africa had no right to administer the
Territory which had come under the direct responsibility of
the United Nations. Paragraph 7 of that resolution called
upon the Government of South Africa “to refrain and
desist from any action, constitution&
administrative, political or otherwise, which will in any manner whatsoever
alter or tend to alter the present international status of
South West Africa”. It is clear from the language of
paragraph 7 that the thirty-four South West Africans
concerned were not subject to the jurisdiction of South
African courts. In the second place, even if those persons
had been subject to the jurisdiction of South African
courts, the Terrorism Act,’ under which they have been
tried and sentenced, could not be accepted since it
incorporates the principle of retroactivity, whose inapplicability in the sphere of criminal law is recognized by the
legal doctrines and practice of all modern legal systems.

way in which he conducted the work of this Council last
January.

(XXI),

5. The Security Council is seized today of the question of
the illegal trial of thirty-four South West Africans and the
sentence handed down for thirty-three of them in disregard
of resolutions 2324 (XXI) of the General Assembly and
245 (1968) of this Council. My delegation is grateful to the
eleven members of the United Nations Councit for South
West Africa for having requested the meeting of the
Security Council to examine this matter.
6. Only three weeks ago, at the news of the forthcoming
trial of the South West Africans, the Security Council met
[1387th meeting] to consider the problem and unanimously adopted resolution 24.5 (1968), which condemned
“the refusal of the Government of South Africa to comply
with the provisions of General Assembly resolution 2324
(XXII)” and called upon the Government of Pretoria “to
discontinue forthwith this illegal trial and to release and
repatriate the South West Africans concerned”. In the same
resolution the Council decided “to remain actively seized of
the matter”. On that occasion the Brazilian delegation
expressed its deep concern about the fate of the prisoners
and strongly supported Security Council resolution 245
(1968).

11. In examining again today the question of the illegal
trial and sentencing of the South West Afribans, the
Security Council should bear in mind the fact that, in the
last analysis, that problem and the twin question of
jurisdiction over South West Africa should be considered in
the broad context of the policy of apartheid officially
followed by the Government of South Africa. Racial
discrimination
exists as the product of the complex
interplay of social, cultural and economic factors. But in
many countries there is a clear-cut realization that racial
discrimination is a terrible evil, a curse that can weaken and
eventually destroy the very fabric of even the most stable
and organized of societies. In many countries there is a
lucid endeavour in the economic, political and social fields
to change hateful patterns of behaviour and to abolish
racial discrimination for ever. Unfortunately, South Africa
does exactly the opposite by promoting ‘racial hatred.
Apartheid is the official doctrine of the State and the whole
Governmental apparatus is geared to foster and implement
such a doctrine.

7. Today this Council is confronted with the fact that the
Government of South Africa embarked upon the dangerous
course of ignoring the decision of the Council and
proceeded to the trial and sentencing of thirty-four of the
South West African prisoners. It is a matter of the utmost
dismay to my Government that the South African Government thus acted in sheer and challenging disregard not only
of that Security Council decision, but also of General
Assembly resolution 2324 (XXII) and of the overwhelming
expression of indignation by so many independent and
private institutions throughout the world.
8. The Brazilian Government’s position on the problem of
South West Africa and on the question of the thirty-four
prisoners in particular has already been made clear, My
delegation, together with other Latin American countries,
played a significant part in the process by which the
twenty-first session of the General Assembly shaped the
historic decision contained in resolution 2145 (XXI)
terminating the Mandate conferred upon South Africa over
the Territory of South West Africa. On the other hand, the
Brazilian delegation co-sponsored resolution 2248 (S-V)
which established the United Nations Council for South
West Africa. During the twenty-second session of the
General Assembly Brazil voted for resolution 2325 (XXII).

12. Today this Council is confronted by the need to act
and to act boldly and effectively in order to secure the
release of the South West African prisoners. During the
debate several delegations submitted concrete proposals on
how to come to gripswith the issue before us. In evaluating
them, my delegation is convinced that this organ should try
to base its decision on what the representative of Canada, in
his speech at the 1391st meeting Iast‘Friday, 16 February,
called “the maximum weight of approval possible among
the membership of the United Nations”.

9. With regard to the illegal arrest, deportation and trial of
the South West Africans, Brazil co-sponsored resolution
2324 (XXII), which condemned such acts, as “a flagrant
violation by the Government of South Africa of their
rights, of the international status of the Territory and of
General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI)“.

13. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): Mr. President, permit
me, first of all, to extend to you the warm congratulations
of my delegation on your assumption of the high office of
the President of the Security Council for this month. It is a
matter of great satisfaction to us to see a distinguished son
of a great Latin American nation presiding over our
deliberations. You have, Sir, already impressed us with the
admirable way in which you carried out the lengthy and
delicate consultations before convening this series of

10. In supporting General Assembly resolution 2324
(XXI) and Security Council resolution 245 (1968), my
delegation was moved by the conviction that the illegality
of the South African Government’s decision was twofold.

1 Act to Prohibit Terroristic Activities and to Amend the Law
relating to Criminal Procedure; and to Provide for Other Incidental

Matters. Act No. 83 of 1967.

2

meetings. My delegation has no doubt that under your wise
leadership the Council will be able to deal with its tasks in
an effective and expeditious manner.

ruled by the people that he wants to be ruled by, and not
those who rule him because they have more guns than he
has.”

14. I should also like to congratulate Mr. Agha Shahi of
Pakistan on the excellent leadership that he provided to the
Council during his presidency last month. Mr. Shahi
presided over the numerous formal and informal meetings
with tact and wisdom. My delegation would like to express
its sincere appreciation to him for his notable’contribution
to our work.

17. The inhumanity and barbarity explicit in the judgement are obvious and do not need any detailed comment
from my delegation. The so-called trial was a sheer political
vendetta against the heroic South West Africans whose only
so-called crime was to challenge the illegal occupation of
their land by the racist regime of Pretoria. The attempt to
hide it behind a judicial cloak was much too transparent
and could not deceive the world. The so-called trial has
been rightly described by Dr. Larson, a well-known authority on international law, who attended the trial in Pretoria,
as “the most monstrous travesty of law I have ever had the
misfortune to witness”. A similar conclusion has been
reached by our distinguished colleague, Mr. Goldberg, in his
lucid analysis of the proceedings in his statement last
Friday at the 1391 st meeting. It is indeed a tragic irony
that a court which has no legal jurisdiction over the
defendants it is trying under a law which has violated every
legal norm as understood in civilized nations, should accuse
the innocent people of being guilty of high treason. This
Council and the whole world knows who is the guilty party
in this case.It is the Government of South Africa which, by
its iIlega1 occupation and administration of South West
Africa and by its brutal methods to suppress the legitimate
aspirations of the nationals of South West Africa, is guilty
of the most deplorable and inexcusable offence against the
people of South West Africa.

1.5. The Security Council is once again called upon to
consider the tragic and deplorable situation in South West
Africa. Barely four weeks ago the Council had met in an
emergency meeting to deal with the grave threat to fife and
liberty which was then facing the thirty-five South West
Africans who were being illegally tried in Pretoria, The
Council at that time acted with commendable speed and
unanimity. But the fact that the Security Council decided
to remain actively seized of the matter showed that it had
no illusions about the response of the pathologically racist
South African authorities. Alas, our worst fears have proved
to be justified. The Government of South Africahas dared
once again to defy the unanimous decision of the highest
organ of the United Nations, in keeping with its unrepentant policy of contemptuous disregard and defiance of
world opinion. Within two weeks of the adoption of
Security Council resolution 245 (1968) which called upon
the Government of South Africa to discontinue forthwith
the illegal trial and to release and repatriate the South West
Africans concerned, the SuprCme Court of South Africa
imposed life imprisonment
on nineteen South West
Africans, twenty-year terms on nine, and five-year terms on
two under the universally discredited Terrorism Act. Two
of the remaining three South West Africans are sentenced
to five years under the Suppression of Communism Act.
The last of the prisoners who became ill due to police
brutality is yet to be tried. It is reported in the press that
Justice Joseph Ludorf, while delivering the sentence,
characterized the freedom fighters as “cowards, assassins
and ordinary criminals”, and warned them that the Court
will not necessarily hesitate to impose death sentences in
future.
16. We are familiar with the manner in which colonial
authorities smear the people fighting for their freedom and
independence. But the Council may be interested to know
how the movement is viewed by the South West Africans
themselves. This has been poignantly expressed by Toivo
Herman Ja Toivo who is accused No. 24 in the illegal ti-ial,
and I quote:

18. That the South African authorities indulge in most
barbaric forms of torture is, of course, a well-known fact.
The report of the Ad Not Working Group of Experts set up
in accordance with resolution 2 (XXIII) of the Commission
on Human Rights throws ample light on the treatment of
prison& in South African jails. Let me, however, give just
one example. Mr, Mbindi, a sixty-year old South West
African, has been held under detention for about eight
months under the infamous Terrorism Act. Four of the
accused in the illegal trial have submitted sworn affidavits
about the torture inflicted on Mr. Mbindi. According to
these affidavits Mr. Mbindi was taken to the offices of the
Special Branch on 19 December 1967, handcuffed to an
iron water pipe and hung up so that his feet barely touched
the floor, He was blindfolded and punched many times in
the face and kicked and threatened with death. As a result
he suffered facial and ear injuries. Two of the other accused
said that they also had been cruelly assaulted by the
security police in a similar n..nl;ner after detention and
during interrogation.
19. It is pertinent to ask as to how South Africa, in the
face of universal condemnation of the illegal trial, could
persist in its blatant defiance. The answer, or at least a
substantial part of it, must be found in the fact that South
Africa is assured, tacitly or otherwise, that some of its
friends and allies will not concur in any action of a coercive
nature to be taken against it. It is a matter of profound
regret to my delegation that the Governments of countries
having diplomatic, economic and other relations with South
Africa are not prepared to exercise such pressure as the
international community expects of them.

“We know that whites do not think of blacks as
politicians-only
as agitators. Many of our people,
through no fault of their own, have had no education at
all. This does not mean that they do not know what they
want. A man does not have to be formally educated to
know that he wants to live with his family where he
wants to live, and not where an official chooses to tell
him to live; to move about freely and not require a pass;
to earn a decent wage; to be free to work for the person
of his choice for as long as he wants; and finally, to be
3

,e,;
,,

Council. Very respectfully I would say how much I share
both the indignation which our debate has already shown
and the realization which has been clear that if we wish to
serve the best interests of the people of South West Africa
in general and the prisoners of Pretoria in particular we
must act with a full sense of the heavy responsibility which
rests upon us.

20. The situation now is this. On 25 January 1968, the
Security Council acted unanimously in adopting resolution
245 (1968). Operative paragraph 2 of that resolution called
upon the Government of South Africa to discontinue
forthwith the illegal trial and to release and repatriate the
South West Africans concerned. South Africa has defied the
resolution by going ahead with the trial and passing severe
sentences on South West African patriots. The Security
Counti is now duty-bound to take early and effective
measures to obtain the release and repatriation of the South
West Africans concerned, Obviously the starting point for
any action by the Council is resolution 245 (1968), or
rather South Africa’s defiance of that resolution. But a
mere re-affirmation of resolution 245 (1968) in howsoever
strong terms would be tantamount to adoption of academic
postures. My delegation believes that the time has come for
effective action against South Africa-effective action
which is open to the Council under the provisions of the
Charter and in particular Chapter VII thereof. Having
unanimously approved resolution 245 (1968) we believe
that ail members of the Security Council, permanent and
non-permanent, have the moral, legal and political obligation to take effective and if necessary coercive action to
secure the compliance of the Government of South Africa
with the decision of the Council. My delegation is,
therefore, prepared to throw its full weight behind any
resolution which calls for sanctions against South Africa.

24. This is not the time to go over again the arguments
which have been so fully discussed in the General Assembly
regarding the whole question of the future of South West
Africa and the international responsibility for that Territory.
25. On that main issue I have had opportunities before to
state in the Assembly the aim my Government set and the
method we proposed.
26. The aim is to enable all the people of South West
Africa to proceed to free and full self-determination and
independence.
27. As to method, our contention throughout has been
that we should act together not by words alone, however
passionately sincere, but by considered and deliberate
action within our clear capacity.
28. But today we put aside the basic issues affecting the
future of South West Africa and turn again our attention to
the Pretoria trial and the deep concern which we all share
that the Government of South Africa has not responded to
the urgent pleas of the international community.

21. The argument is sometimes advanced that all diplomatic possibilities had not yet been exhausted and that the
South African Government should be given another chance
to comply with resolution 245 (1968). Being aware of
South Africa’s total defiance of the international community during the last two decades or so, my delegation
does not share the view that diplomatic methods have any
chance of persuading the South African Government to
come to its senses.Those who continue to believe in such
methods should put before the Council the basis for their
confidence. In its absence the Council must come to the
conclusion that sanctions against South Africa can no
longer be avoided.

29. Let me repeat in very plain terms the attitude which
my Government has already stated towards both the
Pretoria trial and the Terrorism Act under which it has been
conducted.
30. We abhor and condemn that Act.
31. We condemn it because it operates retroactively, and
specially we deplore retroactive criminal legislation carrying
the death penalty.

22. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
first of all let me congratulate you on your Presidency of
the Council, and let me join with other members of this
Council in paying tribute to the distinguished Ambassador
of Pakistan who presided over our deliberations last month.
At a critical time Ambassador Shahi set us all an example of
courtesy and impartiality and devotion to the best traditions of the Council. He was tireless in his determination
to keep us all fully informed and indefatigable in leading us
in the search for common ground of agreement which is the
overriding obligation of us all. And you, Mr. President, have
already shown us what care and skill you bring to the
continuing commitment to make this Council a centre not
for reflecting and intensifying dispute but for the high
endeavour to secure agreement and action in concord. All
of us, I am sure, will wish to respond to your lead, and in
that co-operative effort to give you every possible support.

32. We condemn it because in a very wide range of
circumstances the Act transfers the burden of proof from
the prosecution to the defence, and so undermines the
basic principle that it is for the prosecution to establish the
guilt of the accused.
33. We condemn it because the Act stigmatises virtually
any conduct of which the South African administration
disapproves as an offence punishable by the same penalties
as are provided for the offence of treason.
34. We condemn the Act because it is offensive to the
principles which should underlie the framing of criminal
legislation: it is indeed at variance with the standards which
even the South African Government itself professes to
support.

23. We return today to consider a question which raises
issues of freedom and justice in which everyone of us must
be deeply concerned and involved, and I have studied with
the greatest care the speeches made last Friday in this

35. It is because of our abhorrence of the Act that we
voted for Assembly resolution 2324 (XXII) and Security
Council resolution 245 (1968) which condemned the trial
and called upon the Government of South Africa to stop it.
4

I

1

36. We did so because we wished to leave no doubt
whatsoever by our votes that we wished fully to associate
ourselves with the deep international concern provoked by
the trial. We wished to join with the overwhelming majority
of the Assembly and with all members of this Council in
the urgent plea made to the South African authorities.
37. All members of the United Nations were invited by
those resolutions to use their influence with the Govemment of South Africa. This we have done. My Government
demonstrated its concern about the trial by sending an
observer to its sessions since the trial was resumed on 26
January, and our Ambassador in Pretoria has conveyed to
the South African Government the concern of my Govemment both about the trial and about the legislation under
which the prisoners were charged.
38, So much for the action already taken. I go on to say
that we welcome the moves already made to enter into
consultations on the decisions which we should now reach,
and we are very ready to consider proposals already made
in this Council and indeed any other proposals which may
come forward in the course of consultations,
39. On entering into these consultations let me advocate
once more what I have advocated before in the General
Assembly and these are arguments which I have put to the
Assembly consistently as we have debated questions affecting South West Africa in previous sessionsof the Assembly.
40. First, we must act within our clear capacity: if we do
not we would be guilty of raising hopes we cannot fulfil.
41. Secondly, we should do everything possible to act in
agreement together.
42. Thirdly, I emphasize once again that if we do
otherwise we shall give comfort and encouragement not to
those whom we wish to help, but only to those whose
policies and actions we reject and condemn.
43. Lij Endalkachew MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): Mr. President, since this is the first time that I intervene in the
Council after your assumption of the high office of
President of the Security Council, allow me to congratulate
you and to offer you the assurances of my delegation’s
compliments and best wishes.
44. I should also like to join those who have spoken
before me in expressing appreciation and gratitude to our
colleague Ambassador Shahi of Pakistan for the excellent
manner in which he has presided over our deliberations
during the month of January.
45. A number of my colleagues who have preceded me
have already expressed most eloquently and most convincingly the dangers and grave consequences that this latest
defiance of South Africa presents to the authority and
prestige of the United Nations. They have rightly emphasized the need for strong and effective action in keeping
with the international obligation that the United, Nations
has undertaken for South West Africa and for the future of
its people,

46. I have already had occasion in my statement before
the Council at its 1387th meeting on 25 January 1968 to
sound a warning of South Africa’s possible response to the
Council’s decision contained in resolution 24.5 (1968)-this
in painful anticipation of what I knew to be the inevitable.
Long and bitter experience of dealing with the blindhearted racist government has taught us to expect nothing
but the negative from a regime which is the very negation
of human values and of international morality.
47. In spite of our fear and suspicion that South Africa
might once again reject the call of the Council, we joined in
that restrained call, hoping against hope that the solid wall
of South Africa’s resistance could be penetrated somewhat
by reason and common sense and we therefore voted for
resolution 24.5 (1968). But alas, as the saying goes, no
amount of saintly supplication can turn Satan from his
devilish ways, and in this particular case it appears that it
will take more than the mere message of a resolution to
bring South Africa to its senses.
48. Not that resolution 245 (1968) has been without
effect. We have seen how even South Africa, despite its
outward attitude of defiance and arrogance, could be
shaken by world opinion and by fear of United Nations
action. We have seen how it lacked the courage to go ahead
with its previous plans for the trials and how it engaged in
an absurd race for time by changing its plans and moving
the dates forwards and backwards in a most telling fashion.
This is, of course, very reminiscent of the kind of
manipulation of judicial process which was a well-known
characteristic of the Fascist dictators of Europe of whom
South Africa has every reason to be the rightful heirapparent. It is indicative of what could happen if only the
United Nations and this Council acted with decisive will
and determination.
49. Again, and perhaps more significant and important
from the point of view of our effort in the Council, it is all
too evident that had it not been for the timely preoccupation of the United Nations as well as for the mounting
pressure of world public opinion, some at least of the South
West Africans now imprisoned, notably those sentenced to
life imprisonment, would not perhaps be alive today. Thus
the United Nations and all civilized humanity can take
some consolation from the fact that innocent lives have
been spared from the cruel death penalty retroactively
imposed by the so-called South African Terrorism Act of
1967.
50. Having thus helped to deter the executioner from
committing his final act of crime and injustice, the Council
is now duty bound to see to it that its efforts get through,
by ensuring that the persons unlawfully imprisoned are set
free and that they are repatriated to the country of their
origin.
51. In this respect, let me hasten to add that, in the view
of my delegation, the challenge hurled by the racist
Government of South Africa is two-fold in nature. Having
for years refused to recognize any United Nations responsibility and indeed its own responsibility to the people of
South West Africa under the League of Nations Mandate, it
has now escalated its defiance of the ultimatum by usurping

decisions of the Council without at the same time contra.
vening his Charter obligations, which, I must, repeat, are
obligations freely entered into.

altogether the international Territory of South West Africa,
for which the United Nations has assumed a unique and
special responsibility since the adoption of Assembly
resolution 2145 (XXI). This defiance has, of course,
assumed particular significance with South Africa’s rejection of the Council’s decision of last month to discontinue
forthwith the illegal trial of thirty-five South West Africans
in Pretoria.

57. It is because we view the continued defiance of South
Africa as a challenge to the authority of the Security
Council and, indeed, as a refusal to carry out the decisions
of the Council, in the language of Article 25, that we urge
that the Council should contemplate more effective
measures to see that South Africa carries out Security
Council resolution 245 (1968). At any rate, in our
assessment,the very least that the Council could do is not
to rule out the possibility of invoking more effective action
on the basis of Article 25 of the Charter. Any action short
of that will indeed be regarded as an inadequate gesture
aimed only at appeasing an indignant and aroused public
opinion.

52. No one can indeed describe the illegal nature of these
trials without begging the essential question-that is, these
trials could not have been legal or just, as they are based on
the illegal usurpation of power. Since the adoption of
Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI), whatever responsibility
South Africa might have had with respect to South West
Africa, a responsibility which it refused to discharge, such
responsibility PS had existed has been terminated. The
United Nations has since assumed direct responsibility for
the administration of the Territory. South Africa cannot
thus legally promulgate law, arrest and try South West
Africans or administer justice, let alone injustice.

58. Sooner or later the Council will, of course, have to
face up to the basic problem of South West Africa, and
indeed to all the colonial problems in southern Africa. No
amount of postponing will eventually remove this eventuality. Thus in a sense any reluctance to respond adequately
to the requirements of the situation that now obtains in
South West Africa is bound to be counterproductive.
Developments of late in southern Africa have shown that
the more the United Nations waits the more its detractors
interpret this as a signal to escalate their defiance. It cannot
be overemphasized that the time to act is now.

53. It must be made clear in the Council that it had
already condemned the trials not because the trials of
South West Africans were illegal per se but precisely
because they had preempted United Nations responsibility.
Indeed the Council would be treading on flimsy ground if it
were to content itself only with the finding that the trials
were illegal because the act under which they were
conducted violated basic norms of justice and law.
Although this aspect is significant and relevant in this
specific context, the overriding consideration, I submit,
should be that the trials were illegal because they are based
on an exercise of power, acquired and now maintained by
force.

59. Our first order of business should therefore be to take
more effective action which, in the view of my delegation,
must contain the following specific essential provisions:
first, South Africa’s refusal to comply with the terms of
resolution 245 (1968) must be condemned; second, the
Council must demand tl,e immediate release and repatriation of the South W-st Africans concerned; third, the
Council must call on all those Member States that have
political and economic relations with South Africa +o exert
a maximum influence in order to make South Africa
comply with the decisions of the United Nations on South
West Africa, and in this particular case the decision with
regard to the release and repatriation of the prisoners; and
fourth, in view of South Africa’s rejection of a specific
decision of the Council, the Council should contemplate
more effective action to see that its previous decision is
implemented.

54. Now after rejection by South Africa of Council
resolution 245 (1968), a rejection communicated to us
through the Secretary-General, and the meting out of
punitive sentences to the South West Africans involved, the
question arises as to whether or not this defiance of South
Africa comes under the purview of Article 25 of the
Charter. The answer to this question is clearly stated in
Article 2.5 of the Charter, and I should like to quote that
Article:
“The Members of the Urited Nations ag:ee to accept
and carry out the decisions of the Security Council in
accordance with the present Charter.”

60. It seems to my delegation that this is the least that the
Council should do as an immediate response to South
Africa’s challenge.

55. It is obvious to us that in refusing to abide by Security
Council resolution 245 (1968), the Government of South
Africa has in fact refused to carry out a specific decision of
the Council. Thus, any action the Council sees fit to
contemplate at this juncture should, in our assessment,be
based on the recognition of the fact that what is involved is
nothing less than Article 25 of the Charter, that is, the
failure of a State Member of the Organization to carry out
decisions of the Council.

61. Some delegations have indicated that the Council
should content itself with reaffirmation of resolution 245
(1968). It is all very well to affirm past resolutions; but,
with all due respect to those who put special emphasis on
the need for affirmation, I must say that mere affirmation
of a resolution done under changed circumstances, cannot
be enough. Any resolution of the Council at the present
stage must go beyond resolution 245 (1968) if it is to have
any significance to the cardinal issue of United Nations
responsibility for South West Africa.

56. It cannot be too strongly emphasized in this respect
that decisions of the Council are decisions of the Organization which, on signing the Charter, each one of us has
agreed to honour and carry out, No one can indeed ignore

62. We have likewise heard other suggestions made concerning related measures that the Council may take in the
6

matter; I have in mind suggestions such as the ones put
before us by our colleague Ambassador Goldberg and by
others. We shall of course give careful consideration to
these suggestions. We shall never rule out any reasonable
and sincere suggestion that will supplement and enhance
the effort of the United Nations and of this Council. But
first things must be done first, and that is why we urge that
the Council act without delay in the manner described
above.

68. This situation arisesfrom, among other things, the fact .
that the Security Council, reaffirming General Assembly
resolution 2145 (XXI), wished to place in its true context
the problem raised by the arrest and condemnation of
South West African nationals, in other words, to test the
true intentions of the South African Government in that
region by determining whether it would reconsider its
decision to maintain its authority over a territory for which
the responsibility had fallen to the United Nations, and to
the Security Council in particular.

63. Finally, I beg your indulgence to repeat that the
question of the trials is obviously but one part of the bigger
question of South West Africa. The trials are in fact a test
of strength by which the South African Government is
trying first to erode and then to destroy the international
status of the Territory. The grave and inevitable question
that we have to face sooner or later-and I believe that we
shall have to face it sooner rather than later-is this: will the
United Nations live up to its responsibility for this
international Territory and its people, or will it abandon its
historic responsibility and high trust?

69. The situation was such that in the Security Council a
certain humanitarian interpretation led the Council to wish
to limit the foreseeable consequences of the adoption of
resolution 24.5 (1968) merely to the release of unjustly
imprisoned persons.
70. We repeat and insist that the problem facing the
Security Council is political and purely political. Nevertheless, the ambiguity within the Council concerning the real
scope of resolution 245 (1968) has produced an equivocal
unanimity, with the result that the Council has been unable
to draw all the conclusions from the situation.

64. So far as my delegation is concerned, the reply that
this question deserves is self-evident. By making the historic
commitment of resolution 214.5 (XXI) the United Nations
has assumed direct responsibility for South West Africa and
has taken upon itself the duty of leading the people thereof
to self-determination and independence, There cannot and
there must not be a failure in the fulfilment of this historic
commitment; for such a failure could only undermine the
authority of the United Nations Organization and the
peaceful future and progress of the whole southern African
sub-continent.

,71. This new meeting of the Security Council results from
a merely formal unanimity, solving no problems and leading
us today to reconsider the question in its true dimensions.

those of the previous speakers and pay a well-deserved
tribute to the Ambassador of Pakistan, Mr. Shahi, for the
distinction and capability with which he presided over our
work during ,the last month. Allow me also to address to
you our best wishes and our hope that your work will be
crowned with equal success. We are well acquainted with
your great personal integrity and your qualities as a man
and as a diplomat, and these are sufficient guarantee to us
for the successful outcome of our work under your objective
and enlightened guidance.

72. The Council must now re-examine the facts of the
matter in regard to the South West African prisoners in the
context of the whole situation, namely, the contested
authority of the United Nations over a Territory under its
trust. At this point, we are faced with an alternative. We
can examine the problem as we did on 25 January and
arrive at a similar conclusion which would in fact confirm
resolution 245 (1968); but we do not see what effect or
impact such a decision would have. The alternative is to
seek more concrete means of ensuring respect for the
United Nations authority over South West Africa, particularly in connexion with the release of nationals of that
Territory, Our feeling is that it would be futile to
re-examine the problem, if that were to result in the
solution of 25 January. We feel instead that other measures,
such as those provided for in Article 40 of the United
Nations Charter, are necessary.

66. At its meeting on 25 January, the Security Council
called upon the South African Government to halt the
illegal trial and to release and repatriate the South West
African nationals involved. The South African Government
responded to this resolution by continuing the trial, which
resulted in the sentences of which we are all aware,

73. These measures, while of a provisional nature, would
make it possible nevertheless to put an end to the illegal
detention of the South West Africans and would open up
possibilities for achieving a lasting solution of the problem
before us.

6 5. Mr.

BOUATTOURA

(Algeria)

(translated

front

French): Allow me first, Mr. President, to add my voice to

74. We must realize, however, that in default of a firm
stand by the Security Council on the provisional measures
that should be taken, there can be no solution.

67. In a letter dated 30 January 1968 [S/8370/, addressed
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of South Africa
acknowledged receipt of the Secretary-General’s telegram
and recalled his country’s position on the South West
Africa question as set forth in the communication of 26
September 1967.2

75. The basic elements of the problem are in fact quite
simple: South Africa is illegally occupying and administering a Territory which is under United Nations authority.
Within that framework the South African Government has
taken irregular decisions consistent with the whole of its
apartheid policy. The United Nations must specifically put
an end to such activities.

2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, Annexes, agenclaitem 64, document A/6891, annex II,

enclosure2.

7

84. Reduced to its simplest elements, the situation is the
following: the United Nations now finds itself faced with
the responsibility of ensuring respect for the basic principles of law in South West Africa and of leading that
country to independent status, providing the conditions for
harmonious ebonomic, social and political development,

76. Consequently, the Security Council must use practical
means to halt this violation of law, since, by all indications,
South Africa does not intend to abide by its obligations.
77. This was already the situation when resolution 245
(1968), constituting the lowest common denominator of
the Powers represented in the Council was adopted. The
only problem is to determine whether there is any
possibility of inducing the Powers possessing effective
means to put them to use in order to compel the South
African Government to apply the basic principles of law.
Otherwise, we must resign ourselves to adopting yet
another resolution, which will generously be considered as
“strengthened”, but which everyone will immediately agree
to be ineffectual.

85. The Council has hitherto

been content to draw up

pious resolutions and evince its fear of a trial of strength.

The South African Government sees this as a clear
encouragement to carry on its policy.
86. In no circumstances will the Security Council and the
other United Nations bodies be able to abdicate their
responsibility, and, willy-nilly, the conflict will have to be
resolved in all respects, To postpone such a solution could
only make the conditions of settlement yet more unpleasant for the United Nations than they would be today.

78. Whether the measures to be taken are provisional or
final, if they are to have. an effect, the great Powers must
agree once and for all to throw the weight of their influence
into the balance and to reappraise thoroughly the objectives
and methods of their policy in regard to South West Africa
and particularly the South African Government.

87. In our view, the United Nations can assume these
responsibilities in one of two ways: either the Security
Council will be content to act as it has already done in the
case of Rhodesia, or it will confront with courage and
perseverance a complex, but not insoluble problem. There
is no other choice.

79. It is for that reason that the Algerian delegation, still
convinced, despite everything, that there is a real possibility
of achieving a solution leading both to the release of the
people illegally detained in Pretoria and to a solution of the
question of South West Africa in accordance with the
principles of the Charter, considers that the Security
Council must, at the present meeting, decide to take such
practical steps as will make,it possible to put an end to the
alarming consequences of the policy of the Government of
South Africa.

88. In this connexion, we must not be afraid to emphasize
that the moral and political authority of certain great
Powers is at stake, since their efforts have not met with
successin a matter where the concept of interference in the
internal affairs of a State was not even implied. Indeed, in a
case where the fulfilment of strict international obligations
is concerned, such wavering on their part would, if it were
to continue, lead to the breakdown of such unanimity as
they have tried to bring about within the Council.

80. The “Terrorism Act”, aptly so named, in that it was
intended to spread terror, is but one clement of the South
African policy of repression against African liberation
movements, a policy which is also expressed in various
other terms such as “the Suppression of Communism Act”,
an expression which also reflects the fear of certain States
before the will and determination of colonial peoples to
regain their independence.

89. It is not possible, and it will not be possible, to
interpret another retreat on the part of the Council as
anything other than a capitulation by these same great
Powers which bear the responsibility both for the effectiveness of the Council’s action and for South Africa’s
submission to the rule of law.
90. The Council thus faces a choice which can result in
various measures. One possibility is that we shall be content
with a mere, ineffectual reaffirmation of resolution 245
(1968); another is that we arrive at a “strengthened”
resolution-and we do not see how a strengthened resolution 245 (1968) could be implemented, given that it was
impossible to implement the original one; or, lastly, we
could decide to take the necessary measures, if only
provisional ones, with the object of achieving both the
quickest possible release of the prisoners and the legal and
political consolidation of the Security Council’s position on
this matter.

81. It seems to us quite futile to discuss the legalistic
casuistries put forward by the South African authorities as
legal justification of their hold over South West Africa, This
attempt is only part of an imperialist policy aimed at
extending apartheid and creating a huge white enclave
protected forever against the unshakeable resolve of the
African peoples to win back their independence.
82, Of course, we have no doubt that the adjective
“anti-communist”
applied to this terrorist law will win its
authors the discreet but eager support of the usual experts
who never fall to see the communist menace lurking, in
Africa, in Asia and in Latin America, behind every
nationalist movement-in
other words, whenever their
interests are at stake.

91. To consolidate the political position of the Council
means also, ln the last analysis, to make full use of the
enforcement prerogatives provided in the various articles of
the United Nations Charter.

83, The problem is thus reduced to determining which
interests would be most seriously endangered if the
apartheid policy of South Africa were to end in failure. The
answer is well known, and we shall not dwell on it.

92. In this connexion my delegation wishes to insist that
special attention be given to measures which, in the first
phase, could support preventive action, while helping to
create the conditions necessary for long-term action.
8

93. With this in mind we would point out that it might be
useful to make reference to Article 5 of the Charter; such a
reference would help US, if not immediately, to find the
way we are seeking in order to give real effect to the direct
responsibility assumed by the United Nations for South
West Africa.
94. Mr. LIU (China): Mr. President, I wish first of all to
associate my delegation and myself personally with the
words of welcome that have been so warmly extended to
you on your assumption of the Presidency of the Council.
95. Once again the Council is dealing with a situation
involving South Africa. Less than a month ago, on 2.5
January, the Council unanimously called upon the Govemment of South Africa to discontinue the illegal trial of the
South West Africans charged with acts of terrorism. It is no
exaggeration to say that the conscience of the world has
been profoundly shocked by the judgement of the Supreme
Court in Pretoria in defiance of the Council’s resolution
245 (1968) and of General Assembly resolution 2324
(XXII). My delegation joins responsible opinion everywhere
in strongly deploring the harsh sentences that have been
meted out under a bad law in a court without competence.
96. South Africa has always professed to be a nation
under the rule of law. This claim can hardly be reconciled
with the retroactive Terrorism Act and the trial and
conviction of the South West Africans under that Act.
97. The conduct of this case is all the more deplorable
when we bear in mind the international status of South
West Africa. In the face of Pretoria’s defiance the Security
Council is in duty bound to take further steps to ensure
South Africa’s compliance with its resolution.
98. My delegation agrees with those who demand swift
and effective action on the part of the Council to secure the
release and repatriation of the South West African
prisoners. It must, however, be recognized that any steps
which the Council may take must have the full and
unreserved support of all Members of the United Nations,
particularly those who are capable of making their influence felt in South Africa. Without such support, no action
taken by the Council will be effective.
99. It is in that light that my delegation will study the
proposals that may be put forth in the course of the present
debate,
100. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): At this
stage of the debate, I should like to make a statement in my
capacity as representative of PARAGUAY.
101. On 25 January we met in this chamber to examine
the situation resulting from the persistence of the South
African Government in ignoring the decisions adopted by
the General Assembly in its resolution 2324 (XXII), by
detaining, deporting and illegally bringing to trial a group of
South West Africans in flagrant violation of General
Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI), which terminated the
Mandate under which South Africa had previously administered the Territory of South West Africa.

102. On that occasion, my delegation felt that, despite all
appearance to the contrary, it was perhaps not too late to
make another urgent appeal to the South African Govemment, through the voice and using the influence of the
Security Council, with a view to securing the release and
repatriation of the persons concerned. The Council then
unanimously adopted resolution 245 (1968), condemning
South Africa’s refusal to comply with General Assembly
resolution 2324 (XXII) and calling upon it immediately to
halt the illegal trial, to free the prisoners and to return them
to their country of origin.
103. We now find ourselves confronted with a new and
flagrant violation on the part of South Africa, which not
only has ignored the unanimous decision of the Security
Council, but has gone so far as to impose sentencesextremely harsh ones-on the majority of the prisoners, If
in the opinion of the Security Council which my delegation
naturally shared, the detention, deportation and trial were
illegal, the imposition of sentences is far more so and thus
takes on the character of an open challenge.
104. Other speakers have argued that the laws applied to
the prisoners are illegal asbeing contrary to world practice,
and these considerations are certainly very important. But
the most important, the basic consideration is still, in view
of my delegation, the absence of any right on the part of
South Africa to take action in South West Africa, as if it
was fully entitled to continue to do so, when that right had
been terminated by adoption of General Assembly
resolution 2145 (XXI).
105. Now, as then, as in December 1967, the basic
objective is the release and repatriation of the prisoners.
This factor, along with others, must appear in any decision
that may be adopted by the Security Council. South Africa
deserves to be condemned once more for challenging
Security Council resolution 245 (1968). It must immediately revoke and annul the sentences passed on the
prisoners and release and repatriate them forthwith.
106. We must also take into account other prompt and
effective measures indicating the subsequent steps to be
taken by the Council if South Africa persists in its refusal.
Hence until the release and repatriation take place, the
Council must retain the question in its agenda.
107. My delegation is confident that the Security Council,
which acted unanimously on 25 January, will find a
formula for achieving unanimity once more at this new and
serious stage of the problem. My delegation believes that
the fate of these men who have been sentenced concerns
the entire international community and that it depends on
the decisions the Security Council will take. We feel sure
that the Security Council will somehow find a way to
implement resolution 245 (1968) and to obtain prompt
compliance on the part of the South African Government.
My delegation is prepared to work towards this objective
with all the members of the Council.
108. Speaking again as PRESIDENT, the next speaker on
my list is the representative of the United Arab Republic.
In accordance with the decision adopted earlier by the
Security Council, I invite the representative of the United
Arab Republic to take a place at the Council table.

assist and help in putting into effect the decisions of the
United Nations, Otherwise, as the representative Of Guyana
said at the 1391st meeting “in the final analysis these
resolutions will not be worth the paper on which they arc
printed . . .I’.

109. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): Mr. President, I wish to express to you and to the members of the
Council my gratitude for being allowed to address the
Council on the subject under discussion.
110. We have come to the Council, for the second time in
less than one month, seeking its assistance and help to
secure the release and the repatriation of the thirty-five
South West Africans who have been arrested, tried and
sentenced in a manner reminiscent of the dark ages and
unprecedented in the civilized world.

117. We are faced today with another factor which
aggravates further the situation; namely, the utter defiance
of the South African Government of the resolution of the
Security Council. This is in fact the direct reason which has
brought us here today, This defiance is conclusive evidence
that the South African Government is determined to
impose its jurisdiction and sovereignty over the Territory of
South West Africa in violation of the resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council.

111. The United Nations Council for South
West Africa,
which has been legally authorized to administer the
Territory of South West Africa until independence, felt
duty bound to draw the attention of this august body to a
situation which, if allowed to continue, will not only lead
to the destruction of human lives, but may shake the faith
of millions in this international Organization, as well as in
justice and morality.

118. It is a further indication of the South African
Government’s determination
to usurp the powers and
authority of the United Nations over the Territory of South
West Africa, This matter must not be met with a stilled
conscience even by those who have certain interests. It is
expected that this Council will act firmly, not only to set in
motion the principles and purposes of the United Nations
Charter, but also to preserve its prestige and to strengthen
its authority, It is high time that the South African
Government should learn how to honour its obligations and
carry out its responsibilities as a State Member of the
United Nations. It is high time that the South African
Government should learn how to respect the will of the
international community,

112. We have come to the Council not seeking its
sympathy; commiseration is not what we come for. We
have come to the Council not to seek the alleviation of the
sufferings inflicted upon the thirty-five South West
Africans, because it is neither the first, nor will it be the last
case in which the peaceful peoples of South West Africa.are
subjected to humiliation, degradation and brutal treatment.
For, as long as the forces of aggression occupy the Territory
of South West Africa, its peoples will be subjected to all
kinds of suppression. But we have come today to call on
the Council to uphold the principles of the Charter and to
preserve the prestige of the United Nations.

119. The following statements indicate how the South
African Government views its rights and obligations arising
from its membership in this Organization. The Minister of
Transport
of South Africa stated in Pretoria on
5 September that membership in the United Nations has
certain advantages for the present, but this did not mean
that the position might not have to be reconsidered in the
future. He continued to say that membership gave South
Africa the chance to meet its attackers face to face, and
that it also gave South Africa membership in certain
important world agencies and help it to build up valuable
contacts.

113. It will be recalled that the Security Council, on 25
January last, unanimously adopted resolution 245 (1968)
by which it called upon South Africa to release and
repatriate thirty-five South West Africans, This action of
the Security Council wasbased on three simple facts.
114. The first is that South Africa has no right to
administer the Territory and, therefore, it has no jurisdiction over the persons concerned in the trial. On this basis
the Security Council concluded that the trial was illegal,

120. The Prime Minister of South Africa stated in regard
to the trial:

115. The second is that the United Nations has a special
responsibility toward the people and the Territory of South
West Africa. It is the responsibility of the United Nations
Council for South West Africa to lead the people of South
West Africa to self-determination
and independence
through its direct administration of that Territory. Equally,
it is the responsibility of the Security Council, according to
the resolutions of the General Assembly, to assist and help
the United Nations Council for South West Africa in the
discharge of its functions. The Security Council, in its
resolution 245 (1968), has already recognized the special
responsibilities assigned to it by the General Assembly.
Needless to say, the Security Council has sufficient powers,
under the provisions of the Charter, to cope with any
situation resulting from the defiance of the Government of
South Africa.

“We say that this question is before the Courts of South
Africa and the Courts of South Africa will decide
it . . . not the United Nations Organization.”
121. It should be clear by now to all of us that the South
African Government is determined to break the will of the
people of South West Africa in their struggle for freedom
and independence. There is no indication whatsoever that
South Africa will heed the appeals of this Organization or
comply with its resolutions, unless it is forced to do so. One
may wonder why South Africa is able to defy the whole
international community and yet this Organization does
not raise a finger. Is it because the United Nations Charter
does not provide the adequate measures to deal with such a
situation? IS it because the United Nations has no
competence to deal with such matters? Is it because the
legal grounds of the case are in doubt? Or is it because of

116. The third fact is that States Members of the United
Nations, collectively and individually, have an obligation to
10

members
the’ unwiIlingness to act on the part of certain
which have the power to shape the decisions of the Security
Council?

122. It was a source of Satisfaction, as well as encouragement to my delegation to note that the Security
council
adopted UnanimOUSly resolution 245 (1968). There
is mm
reason than ever now that the Security Council
should
act
this time, in the same spirit, in the face of the South
African defiance of the unanimous will of
the
United
Nations.
123. The PRESIDENT (translated from sparzish):
There
are no more speakers on my list. If no other representative
wishes to speak at this stage, I propose to adjourn
the
meeting.
124. Some of the members of the Council have
indicated
that they would like to have time for consultations;
I
therefore suggest that we leave open the date and time Of’
our next meeting. I shall keep in touch
with
all the
members of the Council to arrange a date
and
time
convenient to ah; we shah then continue our discussion
of
this item. If there is no objection, I shall take
it as SO
agreed.
125. Lij Endalkachew MAKONNEN (Ethiopia):
Mr. President, the arrangement that you have announced
to US is, of
course, in keeping with the tradition of the
Council
to
afford itself the opportunity of consultation
after
hearing
the policy statements of its members, and to this extent
my
delegation fully agrees with and supports the proposal
you
have made to us. At the same time, I feel it my duty to
point out that this is a very urgent matter
affecting
the
unlawfully
rights, if not the lives, of people who are

imprisoned-the
illegal manner in which they have been
deported from their country and held prisoner has been
recognized by the Council itself. Therefore, while agreeing
that a certain amount of time should be given for
consultations, I hope that you, Mr, President, and the
members of the Council will agree with me that we should
try to expedite these consultations in order to reach some
decision in a matter of a few days. I am thinking in terms of
finishing our work possibly by the middle of the week or at
the utmost at the end of the week. I hope that consultations will not be so extensive as to prevent us from
reaching a decision on the first step that we have to take
together, at any rate. As a number of representatives have
pointed out, this matter is bound to remain on the agenda
of the Council, so that the suggestions that have been made
from here and there could always be considered after we
had adopted the first decision that is required, namely, a
decision calling for the release and repatriation of the
prisoners. I feel that a decision on that is most urgent and I
appeal to you, Mr. President, and to the members of the
Council to enable us to take that decision as soon as
possible.
126, The PRESIDENT ftmnslated from Spanish): I believe
I am interpreting the view of all the members of the
Council correctly if I say that we are all fully aware of the
urgency of this debate and the need to reach a decision as
soon as possible. I therefore fully subscribe to the appeal
which the representative of Ethiopia has just addressed to
us.
127. Since there has been no objection to my previous
proposal, the meeting is adjourned.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

11
