UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

2248’”

MEETING:

28 SEPTEMBER

i&J>3
E18PARY

1980

h’EW YORK

CONTENTS
Pllge

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2248)

. .. .. .. ... ... .. .. .. ... .. ... .. .. ... ...

Adoption of the agenda ................................................

1
1 :; ! ..

The situation between Iran and Iraq .....................................

1 ’

SlPV.2248

’

.

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed”of capital letters corn’
’
bined with figures: Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
;
Nations document.1. .
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
‘.
’
quarterly
Suppleni@s’of
the OJ%Gd Records qf the Security Cwncil.
The date
,. ^
.,
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears”or m which information about
I ,_-. it is given.’
,
‘I
/ _’
The resolutions ‘of the’ Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system ‘adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes ‘of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the, Secwrity Ckuncil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions’adopted before 1January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.
..I
‘.
-’
..‘..
:z
,’
z
..,’
_ ,,“T
.
‘,’
.,
*.
,
.
1
<
. ..,
.
..“_
.,‘-,
.
:.
_
,, .’(.
; ,I
,a,
/I.
‘/
.
.’ I
,% 1 .’
‘_
1
_.
.’
,,
.,.
, :
,’
’
,.
.,
.
/‘,
,. ..
I
‘.
, ,’
‘.
I
:
” ,.
,
.’
‘..
I..
_’
( r.
_:
e, ‘.
. .
’,
.‘;.
,,
: 1
,:
‘,.,.’
I’,,:
_.
.
.
;.
_
.., ‘.
.,
,‘,>
f .r
(..
,‘/
:
“,_,
,. ,.
‘i,
,;.. ., “...
* :...
..,.#I .’
,_ 5.::
.<..
.,’
/
I’
,’
..
.L * _’ .’
, .,.
:‘I

.,-

,

2248th MEETING
Held in New York on Sunday, 28 September 1980, at 3 p.m.
President:

Mr. Taieb SLIM (Tunisia).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/22481

1. Adoption of the agenda

.’ * ”

I

2. The situation between Iran and Iraq
The meeting

wus called to order at 5.1s p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation

‘ I

,,

C’
I. . .

between Iran and Iraq

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom
French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2247th meeting, I invite the representative of Iraq to take a place
at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President,
took a place ut the Council table.

Mr, Kittani

(Iraq)

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative
of Japan in which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In
accordance with usual practice, I.propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representative of
Japan to participate in.the discussion, without the right
to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Nisibori
(.iupan) took the place reservedfiw him ut the side of
the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from ,French):
I wish to draw the attention of members of the Council to document S/14199, which contains the text of
a letter dated 26 September from the Secretary-General
to the President of the Council.

4. The situation prevailing between Iraq and Iran
makes it incumbent upon us to maintain our vigilance
and to follow developments very closely, day by day
and hour by hour. The Secretary-General and I,
together with all the members of the Council, have
been doing precisely that.
5. I am happy to note that the combined action of
the Secretary-General and the Council, action undertaken from the very outbreak of hostilities, has begun
to bear fruit. In response to’our appeal of 22 September and in response to the messagesI sent on 25 September to the Presidents of the Republic of Iraq and
:of Iran, the Iraqi Govemment’has officially informed
me on 26’September that it was accepting the offer
of good offices which was mentioned in my message.
That offer of good offices emanated from a regional
organization, the Islamic. Conference.
6. I was informed oficially yesterday that the mission of that regional ‘organization, consisting of the
President of Pakistan and the Secretary-General of
that organization, had arrived in the Iranian capital,
where it had been well received. The mission was to
proceed immediately afterward to the Iraqi capital.
I was also informed that the mission would be coming
to New York as soon as possible to make contact with
the Council.
7. This morning the representative of Pakistan transmitted to me a message from his President, in which
he expressed to me his appreciation of the efforts
made by the Council and reported to me on the progress of that mission.
8. I welcome the fact that the information and goodoffices mission is continuing, and I should like to
express wishes for its complete success, since it is
pursuing the same objectives as the Council and
constitutes complementary action which should be
encouraged, in accordance with the principles of the
Charter.
9. I hardly need to recall that ever since the outbreak
of hostilities the Council has spared no efforts; consultations have been carried on uninterruptedly, day
and night; contacts have been maintained permanently
with all the parties directly concerned and others;
appeals and messages have been sent through the
President and the Secretary-General; and a first oficial meeting of the Council has already taken place,
on Friday [2247th meeting]. However, if the Council

in its wisdom has deemed it useful not to take any hasty
decisions, taking into account considerations of
effectiveness and timeliness, it is nevertheless true
that its action, because of its persistence and its discretion, has been useful and has aroused some favourable response.

course and will be able to make all the comments he
deems necessary to help the Council in its present and
future deliberations.

10. Our objective, indeed, is to see to it that the
fighting ceases as soon as possible and that the two
parties, with the assistance of all possible good will,
have recourse to peaceful means to settle their dispute
and safeguard international peace and security. It is
in that spirit that we are meeting here today. After
lengthy consultations among the members of the
Council, I am happy to announce that we have before
us a draft resolution, submitted by Mexico [S/142011.

19. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have noted
the terms of the resolution that the Council has just
adopted. I shall, of course, continue to do my utmost
to carry out the intentions of the Council. I am appreciative of the confidence that the members of the
Council have displayed in me in the palagraphs of
the resolution concerning the role of the SecretaryGeneral. I note in particular that paragraph 5 requests
me to report to the Council within 48 hours. I wish
here merely to remark that my ability to make a useful
report in that time will depend on the responses of the
parties concerned, and I take this opportunity to
appeal to them to respond urgently to the resolution.

18. I shall now call on the Secretary-General, who
wishes to make a statement.

11. I understand that the Council is ready to vote on
the draft resolution. Since there is no objection, I shall
put the draft resolution to the vote.

20. Mr. President, I wish to take this opportunity to
express my sincere gratitude to you personally and to
the members of the Council for the most’ valuable
co-operation extended to me in this grave and difficult
situation.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution
(resolution 479 (I 980)).

was adopted

12. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
I call on the representative of Iraq.

unanimously
from French):

21. Mr. MUfiOZ LED0 (Mexico) (interpretation
Spanish): From the beginning of the conflict
with which we are dealing, the Council has worked
tirelessly and with a total sense of responsibility.
Barely two days ago we decided to convene in open
meeting and, in this brief period of time, all delegations
seem to have agreed on a draft resolution-a text
which Mexico had the honour to submit, with the full
support of Norway and of the developing countries
members of the Council, which worked together very
hard in the drafting of the text. This is not the first
step we have taken, but it is a firm step.

from

13. Mr. KITTANI (Iraq): I thought that, in accordance with the provisions of the Charter and the provisional rules of procedure of the Council, my delegation was invited here, as a party to the dispute, to
participate, without a vote, in the deliberations of
the Council. Is that understanding correct?
14. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
I thank the representative of Iraq-

from

French):

15. Mr. KITTANI (Iraq): No, I only wanted to ask
you a question. I am surprised, Mr. President, that
when I wanted to make a brief statement before the
vote you did not give me the floor. I simply wanted
to draw the attention of the Council, at this stage, to
two paragraphs of the verbatim record of the Council
and to bring something of extreme importance to the
attention of the Council. If you do not interrupt me,
I should like to do that now that you have adopted
the resolution.

22. There are few instances, in conflicts of such
gravity, of the Council’s having acted so expeditiously, rationally and in keeping with the complex
international reality which we are facing. It has been
our purpose from the outset to encourage the mediation efforts which had begun and not to interfere with
them in any way whatsoever. Our constant concern
has been to ensure that the authority of the Council
is safeguarded and is exercised in a decisive, prompt
and constructive manner.’

16. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I believe that the request by the representative of Iraq
for participation was inscribed and accepted by the
Council. In accordance with the normal procedure,
we proceeded to a vote, and I am happy-and I hope
that the representative is as happy as I am-that the
vote-was unanimous.

23. I believe we have acted in accordance with our
‘duty and that we must continue to do so in the future,
avoiding a situation in which the many pressures
unleashed by conflicts of this type hinder or hasten
our actions and trying to exert a positive influence on
the course of events.

17. We shall now give all members of the Council
an opportunity to express their views. If the representative of Iraq wishes to speak, as I know he does,
he will of course be given the opportunity in due

24. What is most important now is the cessation of
hostilities, and that is provided for in the resolution
we have adopted. It is also indispensable that the settlement of the conflict should be in conformity with the
2

principles of justice and international
law so that the
peace which we are attempting to foster may be established on solid foundations and in keeping with the
Charter.

work made by the Foreign Minister
Mr. Frydenlund,
when he addressed
Assembly on 22 September.*
33.

25. It is absolutely necessary for the parties in conflict to heed this imperative call from the competent
body of the United Nations; but it is also necessary
that no State should intervene in the conflict under
any pretext or in any circumstance.

The Charter is clear. Article

of Norway,
the General

24 states:

“In. order to ensure prompt and effective action
by the United Nations, its Members confer on the
Security Council primary responsibility
for the
maintenance
of international
peace and security,
and agree that in carrying out its duties under this
responsibility
the Security Council acts on their
behalf.”

26. The developing countries non-permanent
members of the Council have been particularly careful to
analyse all the elements of the situation and all possible solutions. We believe that, since this problem
affects and involves sister countries, we must act in
common agreement. That we have done and will continue to do.
.’

34. The Council usually experiences difficulty in
bringing to a rapid end a serious outbreak of hostilities.
On occasion we fail. But the Council cannot abdicate
the heavy responsibility
which the Charter has given
to it and to which the entire membership of 154 independent nations has agreed.

27. We heeded the appeal of the President of Pakistan, who is also President of the Islamic Conference,
to postpone by one day the vote on this draft resolution while he was conducting the negotiations that he
had personally undertaken.
We .are gratified that he
has achieved initially satisfactory results in his negotiations and that he agrees with us that it is opportune
and appropriate for the Council to adopt a resolution..

35. In common with other Member States, the United
States supports the initiative undertaken by the Organization of the Islamic Conference. We are heartened
that President Zia of Pakistan has been willing to
undertake his present mission. He should know that
the United States stands ready to assist him in any
way that may be appropriate.

28. We trust that the activities which the SecretaryGeneral has been pursuing unceasingly during the last
few days may help in the achievement of a speedy
and just settlement of the conflict and we await further
information from him in that respect.

36. At’the same time as we support the Islamic Conference mission, we in this room are obliged to act in
fulfilment of our own responsibilities.
We are bound
by treaty and we are bound by 35 years of history to
do so.

29. The’ sense of responsibility
shown by all States
members of the Council and the active work of their
delegations have made it possible for this body to
shoulder its, responsibility and become the centre of all
the efforts now being made to bring about peace.

37. The United States has therefore supported the
resolution just adopted, as a reasonable action by
the Council that may help to bring these extremely
serious and tragic hostilities to the earliest possible
halt. Too many lives have been lost, and we are gravely concerned that more lives may be in jeopardy. We
share with many others the opinion that the Council
must raise its collective voice towards the end of
bringing this conflict to a conclusion. We believe that
the Council’s discharge of its duties is entirely compatible with the mission that has been undertaken by
the Islamic Conference.

30. We hope those efforts will soon be crowned with
success, with the co-operation
of the parties concerned, to whom the resolution we have adopted is
primarily addressed.
31. Mr. McHENRY
(United States of America):
Mr. President, on behalf of the United States, I want
formally to acknowledge
your tireless efforts this
month and those of your predecessor last month. As
President of the Council, your dedication to the principles of the Charter which define our work has been
obvious to all.

38. I should like .now to turn to the views of the
United States with regard to the conflict between Iran
and Iraq.
39. The President of the United States has set forth
the principles which guide the position of my country
with regard to this dispute. It may be useful to review
those principles here.

32. The United States has historically
supported a
strong and effective Security Council. President Carter
himself has taken a deep interest in’the work of the
Council. In 1977, at the start of his Administration,
the President advanced for consideration a number of
suggestions for strengthening the conduct of the Council’s business. Many other States have joined in that
effort and I invite the attention of members of the
Council to the statement concerning the Council’s

40. First, the-united States will continue to observe
a strict and scrupulous attitude of neutrality in this
dispute. We have not been, and we will not become,
involved in the conflict except to assist, to the extent
of our power to do so, the efforts which are made by
3

,

the international community to bring the conflict to an
end.

48. I should like to say a word of thanks- to all my
colleagues round the table for the kind words they
said about my presidency of the Council last month;
In my turn, I should like to express gratitude to all of
them for their useful advice and constant support. In
this expression of appreciation I would include the
staff of the Council for their unfailing competence and
dedication.

41. Secondly, we expect that other nations will
follow the same policy of neutrality and non-interference in this dispute. In particular, we expect all
concerned to resist the temptation to exploit this conflict for their own purposes.
42. Thirdly, the freedom of navigation to and from
the Persian Gulf, which is of primary importance to
the international community, must not be infringed
in any way.

49. The Government and the people of Portugal have
been following with great concern the very serious
situation resulting from the conflict between Iran and
Iraq. What began as an exchange of verbal attacks
soon became a series of border incidents and has now
developed into full-scale war. The escalation must
stop before the conflict spreads and involves other
parties. Whatever the reasons both Governments feel
they might have, they should utilize all peaceful means
to solve their differences, avoiding the use of force and
all the sacrifices it imposes on their peoples. j

43. Fourthly, this dispute must be settled at the
negotiating table, not on the battlefield, and there must
be an immediate cessation of hostilities.
44. The Council began informal consultations on
this violent conflict six days-ago. On 23 September,*
the President of the Council, speaking in the name of
all of the members of the Council, underlined our
grave concern that armed activity must cease forthwith. The President appealed to both sides to cease
all threats and acts of violence against one another.
It is a matter of deep regret that this appeal has not
yet been heeded. We urge the Council, together with
the Islamic Conference and all others who may be in a
position to assist in the restoration of conditions of
peace, to act to help Iran and Iraq find a way to bring
the fighting to an end and to begin the long and difficult task of seeking a resolution of their dispute by
peaceful means.

50. It is certainly not our intention to enter now into
the substance of the matter. Before doing so-we shall
have to listen to the parties involved. In this context,
we cannot help expressing our, appreciation for the
readiness shown by Iraq to send to New York a special
representative to ‘state his Government’s position
before the Council.
51. In the name of the international community that
we all represent here, we solemnly appeal to the Governments of Iran and Iraq to cease forthwith all military activities and start discussing their differences
peacefully. We have taken note with deep satisfaction
and appreciation‘of the offer of,good offices made by
the Secretary-General, who once again in this difficult
situation has shown his statesmanship and dedication
to the cause of peace. We have taken note also of the
timely and constructive decision of the IslamicConference to undertake a mission of good will. Its task
is indeed a very”difficult one, and it would be unfair
to expect it to yield immediate results. But we believe
that both parties will make full use of all the mediation
efforts offered to them, and we hope that peace will
_~
soon be restored in the area.
‘.
52. Mr. LEPRETTE’ (France). (interjwetutlon from
French): Since my delegation has not yet had an opportunity to do so, we should like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for September. I am happy
to see the representative of a country with which
France enjoys close, friendly relations -assuming this
high ofice at such a delicate time in international relations. As our recent meetings have once again demonstrated, your long diplomatic experience and
your deep knowledge of the United Nations have been
and continue to be particularly useful to the Council.

45. I wish to add one final, word. Throughout the
week of this grave conflict, the Secretary-General and
his staff have laboured with high intelligence and devotion to assist in bringing the hostilities to an end.
Indeed,’ the Secretary-General has shown great initiative in this regard. He and his staff have given of
themselves untiringly. We believe that they deserve
the warm thanks of the community of nations for their
efforts. ;.
I,
46. We look forward to.the report of the SecretaryGeneral that is called for in the resolution that hasjust
been ,adopted.
47. Mr. FUTSCHER PEREIRA (Portugal) (iirterpreMr. President, since I have not
had an opportunity to do so before, I should like, on
behalf of my delegation, to congratulate you most
warmly on your assumption of the duties of President
of the Council. We are very well aware of your talents
as a diplomat and of your skills and firmness as a
mediator. They have been demonstrated once again
during the past few days. We wish you every success
in the delicate and important task that has been entrusted to you.

tution from French):

[The spcukrr continued

53. I should like also to thank Ambassador Futscher
Pereira for the exemplary manner in which he conducted our proceedings in the particularly important

in English.]

4

and complicated discussions held by the Council last
month.

wish to record our appreciation of your tireless efforts
over the past week.

‘54. We are met together here to examine a particularly tragic situation. Two Member States, Iraq and
Iran, are involved in a military confrontation which
entails grave risks not only for the region but also for
the rest of the world. That situation arouses considerable feeling. The Islamic Conference has undertaken
a number of efforts to promote the establishment of
a climate propitious to a return to peace. France
welcomes these initiatives, and particularly what is
now being done by the President of that Conference,
General Zia.

62. I also take the opportunity to pay tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Futscher Pereira of Portugal, who so ably presided over the Council’s work
-during the month of August.
63. We are meeting today to consider a matter which
is most serious and-most urgent: the conflict between
Iran and Iraq. We have been aware for some time of
the existence of differences between these two neighbouring countries which have now developed into
open conflict. Jamaica is deeply saddened by this
development, particularly since the parties, like my
own country, are developing countries and are members of the non-aligned movement. Uppermost in our
minds is the human tragedy involved, the loss of life
and the destruction which is occurring. We are also
gravely concerned over the possible widening of the
conflict; I<

55. On 23 September, the nine. countries of the
European Community, for their part, expressed their
profound. concern at the. conflict.
t.,
56. In.the face of the persistence of the dangers, my
Government itself four days ago insisted on the need
for a political settlement of the dispute between the
two parties.
5
,.
‘I
57. Aware of its ‘responsibilities., the Council reacted
with effect from 23 September by issuing through its
President an appeal to the Iranian and the Iraqi Governments.* The Secretary-General and you, Mr, President, have ceaselessly since that time made representations to the two parties.so that this appeal may be
heeded. I ,should like to congratulate you and to thank
you for that. We know how tirelessly you have worked
for reconciliation. Similarly, I should like on behalf
of the French delegation to express our appreciation
to our colleagues from Norway ,and Mexico, whose
action has been decisive in the drafting. of the resolution which we have just adopted.
:,
:~
58:. ’ Nevertheless, hostilities are still going ‘bn”bk:’
tween Iraq and Iran, leaving misfortune and suffering
in their wake. People are dying and, the destruction is
mounting. One voice must be heard above the clash
of arms, and it must be that of the Security Council.

64. ,Like other members of the Council, Jamaica is
fully aware’ of the very ‘serious responsibility which
resides in the Council in this situation and the need
for the Council to act promptly and judiciously. My
delegation understands that it is not our purpose at this
stage,to enter into the substantive aspects of the issue.
What we must seek is a cessation of hostilities and the
promotion of efforts to reach a peaceful solution to
the dispute between the two countries.
65. Members of the Council have spent a considerable amount of time and effort on this issue. The’
Council has already launched an appeal through its
President, the Secretary-General has worked strenuously in the matter and has offered his good oflices
and other organizations, notably the Islamic Conference; are currently and actively involved in efforts
towards mediation;.
. I
66. ‘.My delegation expresses its appreciation for all
these actions and the hope that the offers of mediation
will be accepted and that the fullest use will be made
of them. This, as my delegation sees it, is the basic
objective of the draft resolution which has been
adopted by the Council. We have supported it and we
commend those mainly responsible for preparing it
and for bringing it to the Council. We hope that both
parties will heed its call for peace and for conciliation.

59. Without prejudging any questions .of substance,
the Council is in duty bound to explore and encourage
all avenues which would make it possible to resolve
thisdispute in a peaceful way, in accord.ance with the
p~rinciples of the Charter. This is the. reason for our
meeting today, and for its unanimous conclusion.
6g,. For its part, France, in voting for the resolution
which the Council has just adopted, intends to support
any initiative that .may be taken by the Council to
attempt to restore peace between. Iraq and Iran.

67. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United’ Kingdom)i
I have not yet had the opportunity to offer you my congratulations, Mr. President, on your assumption and
your conduct of the presidency for this month: I do so
now most warmly and most sincerely .on behalf of
myself and of my whole delegation. You have worked
indefatigably in pursuit of the unanimity which we
have just demonstrated.

61. Mr.-MILLS (Jamaica): The delegation of Jamaica
congratulates you most warmly, Mr. President, for
the very able and effective manner in which you have
been carrying out your functions as President of the
Council for this month, when new and particularly
difficult problems have been brought before us. We

68. My delegation would also ‘wish to thank your
predecessor, Ambassador Futscher Pereira of Por5

tuga!, for his extremely skilful handling of the Council’s business last month. I cannot in honesty say that
I regret having been on holiday during the month of
August, but I could wish to have been here to congratulate him in person.

74. Today we have taken our first step in public,
and my delegation was glad to support the resolution just adopted unanimously. It is, of course, as
1 have just said, only a first step. From now on the
Council must continue to consider how best it can
contribute further to bringing about a cessation of
hostilities and to the restoration of peace in the area.

69. My Government, which has for centuries been
closely concerned with that region which is now known
as the Middle East, is acutely sensible of the great
dangers to international peace inherent in the bitter
fighting which has broken out between Iraq and Iran.
We profoundly deplore a!! armed conflict, with its
inevitable toll of death, suffering, displacement of
people and material damage. This particular conflict
has even wider implications, not just for the parties
themselqles but for the stability of the whole region.
It also has grim potential consequences for the present
fragile state of the world’s economy.

75. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (intcrprt~tcrtirm
jiwm
Russian):
Mr. President, first of a!! I should like to welcome you, the representative of Tunisia, a country friendly to the Soviet
Union, to the ofice of President of the Council for
this month and, in this regard, express my certainty
that you will successfully perform the important task
of conducting the proceedings of the Council.
76. At the same time, we wish to express our satisfaction with the way the representative of Portugal,
Ambassador Futscher Pereira, so successfully and
skilfully conducted the proceedings of the Council in
August.

70. The world can be in no doubt of my Govemment’s views. They have been stressed on numerous
occasions by the Prime Minister of my country and
the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs. Our concern was also underlined in the statement issued here on 23 September on behalf of the
nine States of the European Community.

77. The delegation of the Soviet Union would like to
stress that the conflict which has arisen between two
neighbouring States, Iran and Iraq, cannot fail to cause
us profound concern and alarm. The fighting between
the two countries is becoming ever more fierce and
bitter. This development of events is particularly
distressing: because it is occurring between two nonaligned States which are striving to strengthen their
independence and to develop their economies, and
whose peoples have much in common in their historic
past, culture and customs.

71. Irrespective of the claims and counter-claims of
the parties, the clear need is for the immediate cessation of the fighting to be followed by a negotiated settlement. It is our sincere wish that the Governments
of Iran and Iraq will heed the international call for
a cease-fire. It is essential that a!! States should exercise the utmost restraint to avoid any escalation of
the current perilous situation, an escalation with
incalculable consequences, not only for the parties but
for us a!!.

78. It is the profound conviction of the delegation
of the Soviet Union that disputes, differences and
conflicts between Iraq and Iran are against the interests
of their peoples. They lead to unjustifiable casualties
and to an accumulation of further obstacles to the
attainment of a peaceful settlement of controversial
issues by means of talks. The current fighting between
the two countries is only playing into the hands of
reactionary and imperialist forces. Those forces are
attempting to exploit this conflict so as to destabilize
the situation and to divide the peoples of the Near
and Middle East who oppose the attempts of the
imperialists to consolidate their military and political
presence in that area and to divert the attention of
Iraq and Iran, and other countries, from the important
and urgent problems of the struggle against the continuing aggression of Israel, for the implementation
of their legitimate rights and for the bringing about of
a just and lasting settlement in the Middle East.

72. I need hardly sav that mv Government is readv
to continue to do everything- in its power to bring
about a peaceful solution through the Council. We
support the efforts that both you yourself, Mr. President, and our untiring Secretary-Genera! have been
making. We are encouraged by the activity of the
Islamic Conference. We understand that President
Zia-ul-Haq of Pakistan has completed his first visit
to Tehran and is now on his way to Baghdad. Some
public statements which we have heard today on the
radio are not encouraging. But we should not for that
reason despair. We did not expect President Zia to
achieve instant success, and we urge him and the
Islamic Conference as a whole to continue their efforts.
73. As regards the Council, the outside world may
we!! fee! disappointed and frustrated that we have so
far been unable to act decisively. This has not been
through lack of effort on the part of the Council. In
previous situations of comparable complexity and
danger, it has often been the case that the Council has
been unable to act publicly within the first days of a
conflict. I shall not bore the Council with precedents,
but they exist.

79. The Soviet Union holds unswervingly to the
principle that in resolving disputes arising between
States, and also in resolving controversies, force
should be avoided. This kind of conflict situation
should be resolved exclusively by peaceful means, by
means of talks on mutually acceptable terms in the
light of the interests of the States and peoples involved.
6

That is one of the most fundamental requirements of
the Charter, which obliges all States Members to
resolve their international disputes by peaceful means
in such a way as to avoid threatening international
peace and security.

brothers suffering at each other’s hands in this fratritidal conflict, which benefits neither side nor anybody else.
86. It is against this background that Bangladesh
has supported all initiatives directed at halting the
conflict and resolving the crisis in a mutually acceptable and peaceful manner. The Foreign Minister of
Bangladesh, Mr. Muhammad Shamsul Huq, being at
the United Nations, took the very early initial step of
apprising some members of the Council of the gravity
of this fratricidal war and impressed upon them the
urgent need to bring the armed action between Iraq
and Iran to an immediate end. When the appeal of the
President of the Council was made, we expressed our
full support for it.

80. The delegation of the Soviet Union would like to
express its conviction that both parties will display
the necessary good will so as to restore good-neighbourly relations between them and bring about the
resolution of their differences by peaceful means
through talks. We hope that the leaders of Iran and
Iraq will find ways and means of settling their conflict.
Experience has shown that differences can be settled
through calm, business-like negotiations, taking into
account the just interests of the parties, without
fighting or bloodshed.

87. We warmly welcomed the initiative taken at the
extraordinary ministerial meeting of the Islamic group
and thank the President of Pakistan and the SecretaryGenera1 of the Islamic Conference for undertaking the
consequent mission.

81. The Soviet Union appeals to both parties in this
conflict to display restraint and good sense. We call
upon them to lay down their arms and sit down at the
negotiating table. We are convinced that the early
elimination of tension between Iran and Iraq would
promote an improvement of the political climate in
the area and would make it possible to normalize
relations between the two countries and to develop
those relations in a spirit of peace and co-operation.

88. Our positive response is based on our principled
stand that conflicts and problems, bilateral or multilateral, must be resolved within the framework of
the Charter of the United Nations, which enjoins upon
us the utmost necessity of settling disputes through
peaceful means and by abjuring the use or threat of
the use of force. The President of Bangladesh
expressed the following in his appeal addressed to
the Presidents of Iran and of Iraq:

82. With regard to the resolution just adopted by the
Council, the Soviet delegation, on the basis of its
position of principle which I have just set forth, voted
in favour of it. At the same time, we continue to hold
the view that it would have been better if the Council
had had an opportunity, before the resolution was
adopted, to hear the parties state their position on the
substance of the matter, in accordance with their own
wishes.

“We are greatly disturbed and distressed bv the
escalationof armed activities between Iran and-Iraq,
two Islamic and non-aligned countries. This conflict has already assumed a grave form resulting
in serious loss of life and property. Continuation
.of this conflict is bound to endanger the security of
the entire region and lead to most dreadful consequences, hurting not only Iraq and Iran but also
the Islamic world as a whole and the non-aligned
movement. In the circumstances, out of deep
anguish and concern, I am addressing this earnest
appeal to you to end this fratricidal conflict and
agree to an immediate cessation of hostilities pending
a just and honourable settlement of the dispute
through peaceful negotiations.*’

83. Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): Mr. President, it is
a pleasure to see you, the representative of a fellow
non-aligned country, Tunisia, with which Bangladesh
has traditional ties of friendship, presiding over this
meeting of the Council. For the diplomatic skill and
dedication that you have brought to the Council, thus
enabling it to arrive at a conclusion at this meeting,
we express our profound gratitude.
84. Your predecessor, Ambassador Futscher Pereira
of Portugal, deserves our sincere gratitude for the
efficient way in which he conducted the activities of
the Council last month.

89. In discharging the responsibilities that devolve
on my country as a member of the Council, we-have
voted for the draft resolution just adopted, which
meets the point of view of the delegation of Bangladesh. We thank our colleague the representative of
Mexico for sponsoring and explaining it. We also
thank Ambassador Alghrd of Norway for his efforts
and support.

85. We have assembled here again today to discuss
the armed conflict between Iran and Iraq, two Islamic
and non-aligned countries. The bond of fraternal relationship that Bangladesh has with those two Islamic
countries is deeply rooted in past traditions, history
and religion. We have shared with them common goals
and objectives both as Islamic and as non-aligned
countries. We have taken a common stand on diverse
social, economic and political matters in the past
decades. We are grieved, therefore, to see the two

90. While I reserve the right to speak again at the
appropriate time, I fervently appeal to the Govemments and peoples of Iran and Iraq to end this fratritidal armed conflict, which brings untold sufferings
7

to their own peoples and will cause eventual suffering
for the peoples of the entire world, particularly those
of the third world. I make this appeal in this august
body in the name of the brotherly people of Bangladesh
and of its President.
91. Before I conclude, I want to put on record our
deepest sense of appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his dedication in pursuing the realization of the
purposes and principles of the Charter, and to his staff
for their endeavours in the difficult task that the Secretary-General is discharging.’
92. Mr. LUSAKA (Zambia): Mr. President, on behalf
of my delegation, and, indeed, on my own behalf,
I extend to you sincere congratulations on your assumption of the presidency and guidance of the work
of the Council during this month of September. You are
a sensitive, skilful and competent diplomat whom we
are fortunate to have as President ,when the .Council
is considering a delicate question involving two nonaligned countries. I assure you of the full co-operation
of my delegation.
93. May I also take this opportunity to commend my
friend and colleague Ambassador Futscher Pereira
of Portugal for having presided over the deliberations
of- the Council last month with distinction.
r
94.. My ,delegation views the war raging between Iraq
and Iran with deep regret and concern. We are of
course a&%&ethat it is not for us to discuss the bilateral
differences between the two countries which gave
rise to’ the current armed conflict between them. But,
in the spirit of non-aligned brotherhood, my delegation
wishes to appeal .to the two countries immediately to
come to a cease-fire, as requested by the Council in
the decision it has just taken, and to initiate discussions with a view to finding a negotiated and amicable
solution. :Both Iraq and Iran are important non-aligned
countries situated in a sensitive part of the world.
Everything possible should be done to prevent further
loss of life and destruction of property on both sides,
and certainly the armed conflict should not be allowed
to spread.’
95. We are encouraged that the Secretary-General
has promptly offered his-good offices with a view to
assisting the parties to resolve their differences. We
hope, ,that,this offer will be found acceptable;
. ,.*.,
96. ‘As a member of the Council, Zambia remains
ready to do everything possible to promote a peaceful
settlement in accordance with the principles of the
Charter., It was against that background that my delegation vbted ‘in favour of the resolution the Council
has just adopted.
97. Mr.‘, LING Qing (China) (interpretation
from
C&nese): First of all, on behalf of the Chinese delegation, I wish warmly to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council

for the current month. I believe that under your presidency the Council will make positive contributions to
the smooth solution of the crisis confronting us and
to the preservation of international peace and security.
98. At the same time we should like to express our
congratulations to Ambassador Futscher Pereira for
the exemplary discharge of his responsibilities as
the President of the Council for the month of August.
99. The Chinese delegation wishes to thank the
Secretary-General for his report 12247rh meeting] on
the development of the conflict between Iran and Iraq
and his mediation efforts. Since 23 September, when
the Council started informal consultations on this
matter, the armed conflict between Iraq and Iran has
continued to intensify, and the situation remains very
serious. Iraq and Iran belong to the third world, and
both have friendly relations with China. We are deeply
concerned over the armed conflict between them. 1
100. We always maintain that differences among
the third world countries can and must be settled.
peacefully through consultation or negotiation without
resort to force. ,We sincerely hope that Iraq and Iran
will take to heart the overriding interest of combating
hegemonism and ,safeguarding world peace so that
they will exercise restraint and seek a peaceful solution to their dispute through negotiations without
letting’the situation get out of hand. This would be in
the fundamental interest of the Iraqi and Iranian peoples as well as that of peace and stability in the Middle
East and the Gulf region.
101. Proceeding from the foregoing consideration,
the Chinese delegation endorsed the statement made
by the President of the Council on 23 September,*
Accordingly, we voted in favour of the resolution
which the Council has just adopted. We sincerely hope
that the Governments of Iraq and Iran will .respond
positively to that resolution and act speedily in this
direction. In the meantime, we also hope, that the
efforts‘undertaken by the Islamic Conference for the
same purpose will achieve the results expected. ....
102. Mr. FLORIN (German Democratic Republic)
from Russian): Mr. President, since
this is the first time I have spoken in the Council this
month, permit me most cordially to congratulate you
on your assumptionof the presidency of this important
body and to wish you success.

(interpretation

103. I should also like to associate myself with the
words of appreciation addressed by my colleagues to
the representative of Portugal, who presided over the
work of the Council last month.
104. As a matter of principle, the German Democratic Republic favours the peaceful settlement of
disputes between States. The German Democratic
Republic, which maintains good relations with Iran
and Iraq, very much regrets that those two neigh-

bouring States have become involved in an armed
conflict.’ A conflict of this kind, as it has now developed, entails the danger of being exploited by imperialistic circies in pursuit of their own selfish goals
which have nothing whatsoever in common with the
interests of the States of the region. In the press of
the host country, -for example, we find reports about
caIculations on the part of certain imperialistic circles
the goal of which is that of direct intervention in the
affairs of the Persian Gulf. The Council must not be
allowed to facilitate such ambitions; it must act responsibly; it must take no step that might serve to
exacerbate the existing conflict or give rise to developments that would be contrary to the interests of
international peace and security.

sources arouse in various ‘quarters in a world coni
stantly haunted by the spectre of the energy crisis.
108. The Niger keenly deplores the fact that the use
of arms has broken this tranquillity in the Gulf, when
there are other ways of settling problems. The Niger’s
diplomacy, which has to its credit many often successful mediation efforts, still believes in the virtues of
dialogue, ,enlightened concertation and resort to the
wisdom of others. We are gratified, therefore, by the
tireless efforts of the Secretary-General,, whose vigilance and readiness to make himself available’havk
never been lacking. We would also praise the respon:
sible and constructive reaction of the Islamic Con;
ference, whose President and Secretary-General have
been valiantly grappling with the situation, in par:
titular, by travelling to’the very theatre of the ‘opera-,
tions we deplore. But we do ‘not forget that other
expressions, of good will have been manifested on ah
continents, with the insistence that hostilities be halted
and that peace be restored between the belligerents.
We appreciate those ‘manifestations of good will and
wish to declare our firm support for them.
‘.
.’
109.. The Niger urgently appeals to Iraq and Iran to
overcome’ their ‘disagreement, to ~~refrain.from any
further recourse to force and to proceed.withdut delay
to settle their dispute by peaceful means. We urge
them to accept the offers of mediation that have been
made, and appeal, to other nations ‘that. outside the
peace efforts nothing shall be done or attempted that
might contribute to intemationalize, a conflict whose
consequences are already, ~incommensurable and
tragic.
,,
f“-‘
,:
_,
110. Par ah those reasons, the Niger voted in favour
of the resolution : we ,’have just adopted.
.,
._ I.
,I
I1 1. Mr. YANG0 (Philippines): Mr.,‘President, my
delegation is,pleased with the manner in which you are
handling the affairs of the Council at this time ,of crisis.
You have been patient but firm in providing guidance
and leadership to the other Council members. Our
confidence in your -diplomatic shills ,and experience
.: ,;;
has not been misplaced.
~

105. As the Council knows, considerable efforts
have been made to bring about a cease-fire and to
prevail upon the parties to resolve the issuea’between
them by talks. The Charter provides for a number
of ways and means of peaceful settlement of disputes.
The delegation of the German Democratic .Republic
believes that we have by no means exhausted all possible or relevant ways and means. The CounciI must
see to it that all steps towards the restoration of peace
can have their proper effect. Among such steps we
would include the good offices of the’ SecretaryGeneral. We hope that his efforts and those of the
various bodies and organizations to which both parties
‘:
to the dispute belong will be successful. .’
106. Mr.- OUMAROU (Niger) (interprerurion from
Mr. President, permit me, first of all, to con:
vey.to you my congratulations and to express the great
admiration of my delegation ‘for the wisdom, mastery
and high sense of responsibility and authority with
which you have been conducting the proceedings of
theCouncil during this month of September,, the,least
one’can say of which is that it has been anything but
restful. We are especially pleased with your’performante because you are the representative of a country
with an already established prestige,, Tunisia, ’ with
which the Niger enjoys special relations forged by our
common membership of the continent of Africa, Islam
and the non-aligned movement. I hope that you will
find in what I have said the assurance of our ‘constant
readiness to help you in the discharge of the delicate
responsibilities entrusted to you. My deiegation is also
happy to express its warm appreciation for the remarkable way in which Ambassador Futscher Pereira of
Portugal conducted our proceedings in August.

French):

112. To Ambassador Futscher Pereira of Portuga
goes our deepest appreciation for the’manner in which
he presided over the deliberations of the. Council in
the month of August. We congratulate him’on. the
truly precise and elegant way in which .he conducted
’
‘, ,.:’ _: ,*’
the proceedings of this body.

107. The events which have been confronting us for
a week now are indeed tragic and grave; they are one
of the manifestations which humanity fears most in
relations between nations, and which the United
Nations has as its primary responsibility to discourage
and prevent. They are all the more alarming because
they concern two fraternal countries which should
always retain their solidarity and vigilance in the face
of the daily threats in their region arising from the
great covetousness which the region’s vast oil re-

113. My delegation is fully conscious of the’e‘jrtieme
gravity of the situation between Iran and Iraq, and of
the adverse effects it may have on international peace’
and security. We should bear in mind that in a situation such as this the Security Council has a responsibility incumbent upon it to discharge under the Charter. We would wish, therefore, to make clear for the
record our strong and unqualified support for all the
initiatives undertaken so far by parties with a view to
9
.’

the cessation of hostilities between Iran and Iraq, and
to urge the settlement of their dispute by peaceful
means.
114. We are particularly mindful of and grateful for
the prompt appeal made by the Secretary-General to
the two parties to end armed hostilities and to begin
to negotiate a settlement of their dispute. The appeals
directed by the President of the Council to Iran and
Iraq for the same end were cogent and specific. My
delegation also welcomes all initiatives taken by any
other party that will defuse the dangerous situation in
the region and encourage the parties to cease all armed
activity and bring their differences to the negotiating
table.
115. It is in this sense that we associate our delegation with the statements made by Mexico and Norway
on 26 September [2247th meeting] in introducing the
item that we are now discussing. We believe that the
essential elements of a cessation of hostilities and the
settlement of the dispute by peaceful means should
be pursued by the Council as the prime objectives of
any resolution that it may adopt at this stage, and we
feel that this is the minimum that we can undertake.
We feel that this is a positive and constructive stand
as it does not prejudge the issue, nor does it place the
onus or blame on anyone. We believe that such a position accurately reflects the consensus, as well as the
anxiety, of the international community and for this
reason it cannot be ignored.

of us and secondly because you are the President of
the Council; and we do indeed have great respect for
the Council. Because of this, and also because of our
warm personal friendship of over 20 years, it pains
my delegation that it should feel compelled to put the
following on the record.
121. You know that I had asked to address the Council very briefly before the resolution was adopted.
There was no objection to this, at least from the 12delegations I personally contacted. They told me that they
had no objection. Because of these facts we regret
that you, in your wisdom as President of the Council,
being aware of these facts, yet saw fit to go back on
the understanding you gave me that you would give me
that opportunity, without informing my delegation.
122. As I said earlier, I merely wanted to refer briefly
to two paragraphs of the verbatim record of the last
meeting of the Council. I shall do that now, and then
I have something of grave importance,to say which is
directly related to the resolution which the Council
has just adopted unanimously. I should like to bring
this matter to the attention of the Council because
I think it will be of interest to the members.
123. Of the two paragraphs to” which I wished to
refer, the first concerns something I said and which
I should like to repeat. In my statement to the Council ,at its last meeting I said the following:
“There is one other matter I wish to bring to the
attention of the Council. As the consideration of the
matter in the Council proceeds, we have one request
to make: if the Council is at any time going to move
into substantive discussions of the conflict and
perhaps consider draft resolutions that might be
submitted officially to it, we would humbly request
that an opportunity be given to our Government to
present its case in full, through its Foreign Minister,
who is willing and ready to come here when we
inform him of the request of the Council or when
we inform him that such substantive debate and
consideration of draft resolutions is to take place”.

116. My delegation took note of the appeal made to
the Council by the special emissary of the Government
of Iraq, Mr.’ Kittani, that his Foreign Minister be given
the opportunity to appear before the Council so that
Iraq, as a party to the dispute, may be fully enabled
to present its side of this conflict. This request by Iraq
appears to us to be a reasonable one. As the urgent
consideration of the item has begun and as substantive
discussions of the issues in the Council may soon
follow,’ we anticipate that the Foreign Minister of the
Government of .Iraq, in line with that Government’s
request, will be in our midst at the earliest opportunity.

[2247th meeting,

117. The Government of Iran should likewise be
given the same opportunity. It seemsto my delegation,
however, that in the meantime the Council can take
such measures as would enable it to deal as expeditiously as possible with the worsening situation in the
area.

para. 38.1

124. Especially now that the Council has indeed
embarked on substantive discussions of the matter and
adopted a resolution, and for the proper conduct of
the affairs of the Council, we wish to register our regret
that our request was not accepted by the Council.

118. ‘ For all the foregoing considerations the Philippines voted in favour of the resolution which the Council has just adopted.

125. Incidentally, in reply to the representative of
the Philippines, I wish to assure him and the Council
and to confirm what I have told you informally, that
my Minister will arrive tomorrow afternoon in order.
to present the case of Iraq in full to the Council.

119. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Iraq, on
whom I now call.

126. The second paragraph to which I wanted to
refer is in the statement of the Secretary-General.
He said:

120. Mr. KITTANI (Iraq): Mr. President, we have
great respect for you, fast of all because you are one
10

“In his message of 25 September the President of
Iraq expressed his appreciation for my initiatives
and emphazised Iraq’s concern that international
peace and security should not be threatened and
that economic and oil interests of States should not
be exposed to danger. In repeating the position
stated in the letters from the Foreign Minister of
Iraq, the President emphasized that Iraq’s objective
was to gain Iran’s irrevocable recognition of Iraq’s
rights in its lands and sovereignty over its national
waters. He” -that is, the President of my country- “also asked whether Iran was ready to accept a
cease-fire.” [Ibid., paw. 9.1

130. The PRESIDENT (interpretuticm.from
French):
I should like to make a brief statement to indicate that
the procedure I have adopted for conducting the proceedings of the Council at this meeting is the customary procedure and that I have followed it after
consultations with the members of the Council. I am
convinced that the representative of Iraq, who is a
friend and whose country is one with which Tunisia
entertains the best of relations, will recognize the
fact that at this meeting the Council has addressed
itself to the major principles of the Charter relating
to the establishment and restoration of peace and
security in the world.

127. I believe there is no one in this room today-not
on 25 September-who does not know that Iran has
already rejected the cease-fire. The resolution is
addressed to both parties, and it takes two to cease
fire, and I do not believe anyone has any intention of
asking one party to accept a unilateral cease-fire.

131. The substance of the problem, which is a matter
of keen concern to us, will be studied at other meetings.
We hope-and this is the generally held consensusthat the Iraqi Foreign Minister will participate in our
proceedings and help us to enable the two parties to
find a peaceful solution.

128. The matter of importance I want to bring to your
attention is this: President Saddam Hussein of Iraq
at this hour in Baghdad is making an important statement to the Iraqi people and to the world. We have
been able to get over the telephone, in Arabic, excerpts
from that speech which are of extreme importance
and directly related, as I have said, to the resolution
and I think the Council will be interested to know
what they are. I hope you will excuse the hasty translation into English. The President said:

132. I shall confine myself to that statement and
thank the representative of Iraq for the excellent
statement he has made, which will help us in our work.’
133. The next speaker is the representative of Japan,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and
to make a statement.
134. Mr. NISIBORI (Japan): Mr. President, I should
like, first of all, to express my appreciation for being
given the opportunity to present Japan’s views on the
vital issue that is now being considered. I should also
like to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of September.
We are convinced that under your skilful guidance the
Council will fulfil its responsibilities in dealing with
various compelling issues throughout the world. I wish
also to extend my warm regards to Ambassador
Futscher Pereira of Portugal, who, as President last
month, demonstrated his diplomatic skill and wisdom.

“Iraq is ready to stop the fighting immediately,
if the other side responds to this sincere call. We are
also ready to negotiate with the Iranian side directly
or through a third party or any international body
or organization that we respect and trust in order
to arrive at a just and honourable settlement which
would guarantee our rights and our sovereignty.
We are not of those who are tempted by power and
those who lose :their sense in victory to impose
illegitimate condrtrons on others, even if they were
aggressors with evil intentions.”

135. The Government .of Japan finds it most regrettable that a conflict involving armed activities has
arisen between two Member States, Iran and Iraq. It
is profoundly concerned that the conflict seems to be
escalating and is resulting in the loss of life and material destruction on both sides.

The President of Iraq also said the following:
“We affirm that Iraq will do all it possibly can for
the success of these initiatives to arrive at a peaceful settlement of this conflict on the basis of the
principles of justice which we have mentioned.
We warn any foreign State which would attempt to
exploit the situation in order to interfere in the
affairs of the region, as the countries in the region
are capable of safeguarding their security.‘*

136. The implications of such a situation .are not,
of course, confined to the bilateral relations of the two
parties, but constitute a grave threat to the peace and
security not only of the neighbouring countries but
also of the entire international community. Furthermore, considering the political and economic significance of the region, a continued escalation of the
conflict will have incalculable effects on the world
political and economic situation. In this connection,
we should like to stress that the safe navigation of
third-country vessels through the Straits of Hormuz
and adjacent waters must be assured.

129. As I have said, my Foreign Minister will be
here and he will be at the disposal of the Council to
address it and to present the case of Iraq in full. It
remains for me simply to say that my delegation and
I personally are deeply grateful to you, Mr. President,
to every member of this Council and to the SecretaryGeneral for the courtesies you have shown in allowing
us to participate in the work of the Council.
11

137. My delegation regards as most appropriate the
prompt statement made by the Secretary-General on
22 September, in which he expressed his profound
concern and urged the parties to find a peaceful solution to the conflict.
138. ‘We also believe that the statement made by
you on 23 September* “on behalf of the Council members reflects very well the unanimous views shared
at this stage by the international community, namely:
first having considered the extremely serious situation between Iran and Iraq, and having taken note of
the deterioration in relations and of the escalation in
armed activity leading to.loss of life and heavy material
damage, the members of the Council are concerned
that this ,conflict may become increasingly serious and
could pose a grave threat to international peace and
security; seconclly, they fully support the offer that
the Secretary-General has made of his good offices;
thirdly, they appeal to the Govemements of Iran and
Iraq to desist from all armed activity and all acts that
may worsen the present situation, and to settle their
dispute by peaceful means.

143. Tunisia. an Islamic countrv. regrets and deenlv
deplores the fact that two States l&mb>rs of the Uniieh
Nations, two Islamic countries, brothers and neighbours with every reason for understanding and cooperation, have reached such an extreme, situation;
That a military confrontation of such gravity has
taken place and is continuing in that particularly sensitive region of the world merely increases our concern and disquiet.
144. We have every reason to believe that, this
extremely grave situation constitutes a real threat to
international peace and security. We all know when
and how conflicts begin; unfortunately, we do not
know how they may develop.
145. On Tuesday, 23 September, the Tunisian Government expressed its concern and anxiety at the turn
events have taken and made an urgent appeal to the
two countries concerned.
“to cease fighting immediately, so that reason may
prevail, and to have. recourse to peaceful means
for the settlement of all disputes between them
within the framework of Islamic solidarity and of
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations”

139. In his statement made in the general debate in
the General Assembly on 23 September,3 Foreign
Minister Ito of Japan expressed the hope that the dispute would be solved in accordance with the Charter
and that the fighting would cease immediately. That
view of the Government of Japan was similarly
expressed in another statement made in Tokyo. And
now, once again, I take this opportunity to reaffirm
Japan’s basic position on the peaceful settlement of
any international dispute and to urge the parties to halt
immediately the exchange of fire. We also appeal to
third parties, including the major Powers, to observe
the principle of non-interference and to exercise selfrestraint. My delegation is very pleased that the Council has just adopted a resolution along those lines.

[S/1419.5! annex].
..

146. It is in that spirit that my delegation has voted
in favour of the draft resolution in document S/14201.
I am delighted that the Council adopted -that draft
resolution unanimously.
147. Moreover, my delegation is pleased that the
mission composed of the President of the Islamic
Conference-the
President of Pakistan-and the
Secretary-General of the Conference has already
contacted the two parties. We hope that the mission
will be a complete success and reaffirm our conviction that this particularly useful action complements
the action of the Council.

140. Japan also wishes to express its readiness to
co-operate positively in whatever way it can in attempts
to achieve the solution of the conflict. We should like
to add in that connection that Japan welcomes all
initiatives aimed at a peaceful solution of the conflict,
including that of the Islamic Conference, and is closely
following their development.
‘.
141. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
There are no further speakers on my list, and I should
now like to make a statement in my capacity as representative of TUNISIA.

148. Speaking now as PRESIDENT,of the Council,
I may say that the Council will continue to follow the
course of events closely and will await the report of
the Secretary-General in accordance with paragraph 5
of the resolution just adopted in order to continue its
thorough consideration of the question.
The meeting

142. For nearly a week now the world has seen conditions of war. The idea of war, which we had all
hoped had been banished for ever from our immediate
concern, to be evoked only, if necessary, as a hypothetical warning, has today unfortunately become a
reality. The news which reaches us from western Asia
confirms in effect that the conflict which has broken
out between Iraq and Iran has taken an alarming turn
and degenerated into open and generalized war.

rose ut 7 p.m.

NOTES
I Oficial Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-f$th Session,
Plenary Meetings, 5th meeting.
2 See Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Cnuncil, 1980,
p. 23.
3 OJkiai Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ffth Session.
Plenary Meetings, 7th meeting.

12
)

‘,

-.
:

s.,

I.

I,

..;..

.

,‘..

a_

!

*
1

.<.

. .

__

I

I~,

? :,

._

‘.

t,,
. I

./,

I ..

./.
. .

_.-.
:,.
.

,.
::.

’

:
:
/

I.

,.,,

.

:;.,

‘1’.
.,
:

i

..

.\.
,-r,<.
.*. .,

.,’

(/

. .

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PtiLlCA’TIONS
I

Uniteh Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PURLICATIONS

’

DES NATIONS UNIES

les publications des Nations Unies sent en vente dans les librairies et les agenccs depositaim du
monde entier. lnformez-vous aupr& de votre Ebraitx ou adresser-vous & : Nations Unies, Section
des venta. New York ou Get&c

ZI3namfi
3miax
Baxuex

Opram3asuw

H areximmax
K~~~~KROM

HaunR stoxKw0 KynHTb
rnpa.
HanonxTe
cnpasxx
no axpecy
: Opranx3auun
HJjtaHAR, HbK)-FfOp@t
mm Xexesa.

Othe~mxemsbIx
BO ncex
pafioxax
uara3xxe
xnx nmuxfe

HaunR, CeKuHR no nponaxe

COMO CONSECUIR PURLICACIONES

e XXHxUibIx
uara06 x3AaxxRx
B
OWbeatnxexxbm

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas cstin en venta en brerfas y casas distribuidoras en
todas panes de1 mundo. ConsuIte a su libmru o dirljase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccidn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations. New York

83-61462-October 1987-2.050
