United Nations

A/RES/56/279

General Assembly

Distr.: General
25 April 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 121

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/734/Add.1)]

56/279. Report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the United Nations
system common services at Geneva
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 54/255 of 7 April 2000,
Having considered the report of the Joint Inspection Unit entitled “United Nations
system common services at Geneva, part II: Case studies (ICC, JMS, TES, DPS, JPS)”,1
and the note by the Secretary-General2 transmitting his comments and those of the
Administrative Committee on Coordination3 thereon,
Having also considered the report of the Secretary-General4 submitted pursuant to
paragraph 9 of its resolution 54/255,
Having further considered the information contained in the first report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,5
1.
Takes note of the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit1 and the
comments of the Secretary-General and the Administrative Committee on Coordination
thereon;2
2.
Reiterates that the use of common services at Geneva should be one of many
tools available to organizations and managers to obtain goods and services in the most
efficient and effective manner;
3.
Encourages the organizations concerned, in their continuing efforts further to
expand areas of cooperative arrangements, to give priority to those services that lend
themselves to common delivery using the criteria of efficiency, productivity and cost
effectiveness and, where feasible, to take into account the recommendations contained in

_______________
1

See A/55/856.
A/55/856/Add.1.
3
The Administrative Committee on Coordination was renamed the United Nations System Chief
Executives Board for Coordination pursuant to Economic and Social Council decision 2001/321 of
24 October 2001.
4
A/56/417/Rev.1.
5
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 7 (A/56/7), chap. I,
sect. E.14, para. 124 and chap. II, sect. A. paras. I.68 and VIII.97-VIII.103.
2

01 49512

A/RES/56/279

the report of the Unit,1 bearing in mind also the distinct mandates, roles, tasks and rules of
each individual participating organization;
4.
Welcomes the comments and views contained in the relevant paragraphs of the
first report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,5 in
particular regarding telecommunications and information technology services, conference
services, printing and publishing, as well as general administration;
5.
Notes the efforts made to date by the Geneva-based organizations of the United
Nations system for the enhancement of common services, and encourages them to pursue,
with a more structured approach, the improvement of existing common services and the
development of new common approaches, within the framework of the Management
Ownership Committee and the Task Force on Common Services and its working groups;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to encourage the Management Ownership
Committee, when determining the scope and pace of implementation of common services
arrangements at Geneva, to adopt streamlined consultation procedures that would promote
timely agreement on which services should be delivered in common or jointly, with a view
to the possible full launching of the plan of action for Geneva common services earlier
than the targeted year of 2010;
7.
Invites the Unit to continue to monitor progress in the development and
consolidation of common services at Geneva, and at other duty stations where the United
Nations system offices and agencies are established, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its fifty-eighth session in the context of its annual report;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fiftyeighth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
97th plenary meeting
27 March 2002

2
