S/2016/430

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 May 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 35 of Security Council
resolution 2232 (2015), in which the Council requested me to report every 120 days
on the implementation of the resolution, including on the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), and paragr aph 17 of resolution
2245 (2015), in which the Council requested me to report regularly on the
implementation of that resolution, specifically on any challenges faced by the
United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS) in carrying out its mandate.
The report covers major developments in Somalia during the period from 1 January
to 30 April 2016.

II. Political and security overview
A.

Political developments
2.
Somali leaders agreed on the format of the electoral process scheduled for
August 2016. On 28 January, after several weeks of consultations with regional
stakeholders had failed to reach a consensus, the Federal Government of Somalia
announced an executive decision whereby a 275-member lower house would be
elected by broad-based electoral colleges rather than being chosen only by clan
elders, as in 2012. The seats would still be allocated to clans on the basis of the 4.5
clan power-sharing formula. Meanwhile, an upper house would be created with 48
seats divided equally among the six federal states, plus three additional seats each
for Somaliland and Puntland. A total of 30 per cent of electoral college seats and of
the seats in both houses of the Federal Parliament would be reserved for women.
3.
The decision of the Federal Government was accepted by the Jubba, South West and Galmudug Interim Administrations as a necessary step to renew the
mandate of the federal institutions and as a bridge to universal el ections in 2020.
However, the Government of Puntland expressed strong opposition to the use of the
4.5 formula, which many Puntlanders believe disadvantages their majority clan. An
agreement reached with the Federal Government in Garoowe on 3 April facilit ated
the acceptance by Puntland of the electoral process.
4.
On 12 April, the National Leadership Forum agreed on detailed modalities for
the 2016 electoral process. The Forum also agreed to adopt, at its meeting in May, a

16-07157 (E)

110516

*1607157*

S/2016/430

political road map for the period 2016-2020, comprising benchmarks and timelines
leading to universal elections in 2020. Meanwhile, the Federal Parliament began
deliberating on the electoral process modalities following a presentation by the
Prime Minister, Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke, on 30 April.
5.
The business of the Federal Parliament was otherwise dominated by security
concerns. After hearings with the Prime Minister, the Minister of Internal Security
and commanders of the security forces, it issued a resolution calling upon the
Federal Government to adopt a series of measures to stabilize the security situation.
On 6 April, in Mogadishu, the Federal Government launched an inclusive “right
path” national strategy for countering violent extremism.
6.
There was notable progress in efforts to ensure the inclusion and
representation of interim regional administrations. On 25 March, the President of
the Interim Jubba Administration, Sheikh Ahmed Islam “Madobe”, and opposition
leaders from the Marehan subclan announced an important reconciliation agreement
in a 10-point communiqué in which, among other things, the parties committed
themselves to a fair distribution of positions for all Juba clans and further militia
integration. Pursuant to the agreement, some 50 armed members of the Barre Hirale
militia returned to Kismaayo. The agreement also paves the way for the formation
of a new Interim Jubba Administration Cabinet. Meanwhile, the Interim South -West
Administration regional assembly, which is 21 per cent female, held its first plenary
session on 10 March under the leadership of the Speaker, Abdulkadir Sharif
“Sheikhuna”.
7.
In Mudug, plans for a reconciliation conference between the Galmudug
Interim Administration and the group Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama’a were put in place
with the support of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and funding
from the United Nations. The conference will seek agreement on the power -sharing,
reintegration of security forces and the establishment of the Galmudug Interim
Administration capital in Dhuusamarreeb, which is controlled by Ahl al-Sunna
wal-Jama’a. However, the start of the conference was delayed by internal clashes
within Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama’a.
8.
The process to form the only remaining federal member state in Hiraan and
Shabelle Dhexe faced challenges. A state-formation conference that had been
launched on 12 January in Jawhar, Shabelle Dhexe, encountered serious difficulties
over clan representation and was boycotted by a major clan. Repeated visits by
senior federal officials, including the President, Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, did not
succeed in resolving the issues, although the state-formation conference was
relaunched on 12 April. UNSOM continues to use its good offices to facilitate a
Somali-brokered solution.
9.
In “Somaliland”, the political scene continued to be dominated by preparations
for the presidential and parliamentary elections scheduled for March 2017. On
16 January, the National Electoral Commission launched a biometric voter
registration process that was later temporarily susp ended owing to the continuing
drought. Meanwhile, no progress was reported on talks between the “Somaliland”
authorities and the Federal Government. My Special Representative paid his first
visit to “Somaliland” on 14 and 15 March.

2/20

16-07157

S/2016/430

B.

Security developments
10. The security situation worsened during the first half of the reporting period, as
Al-Shabaab stepped up asymmetric and conventional attacks. At the same time, the
Somali security forces, the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and other
partners also inflicted heavy losses on the group, especially in March and April.
11. Mogadishu witnessed an increase in assassinations, especially in April, with
Somali government personnel targeted the most. There were three complex attacks
during the reporting period. Attacks at the Lido beach in Mogadishu on 21 January
and on the Somali Youth League hotel and peace garden on 26 February killed more
than 45 people, including a United Nations national staff member, and injured 80
others. Al-Shabaab claimed responsibility for the incidents, as well as for a
coordinated twin bombing in Baidoa, Bay region, on 28 February, which killed 30
people and injured 60. In another worrisome development, a pro -Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) website reported on 25 April that ISIL fighters in
Somalia had carried out their first attack in Somalia, hitting an AMISOM convoy
with an improvised explosive device on the outskirts of Mogadishu. AMISOM
acknowledged the explosion, but denied that the convoy had been hit .
12. There was an increase in mortar attacks, including against the presidential
compound, Villa Somalia, and airports co-located with AMISOM and United
Nations offices. The AMISOM protected area of Mogadishu International Airport
sustained mortar attacks on 1 January and 11 February, resulting in injuries to two
AMISOM soldiers. Villa Somalia was similarly targeted on 7 January, 1 and
25 February and 3 and 7 April, leaving at least 12 people dead and 22 injured,
including a member of Parliament. Kismaayo airport sustained mortar attacks on
14 and 27 February, while several rounds landed in the perimeter of the Baidoa
airstrip on 21 February. There were no casualties from those attacks.
13. Two unsuccessful bombings demonstrated new tactics on the part of
Al-Shabaab. On 2 February, an explosive device hidden inside a laptop computer
detonated on a commercial flight from Mogadishu to Djibouti. The late departure of
the plane saved many lives, given that the timed explosion occurred before the cabin
was fully pressurized. The suicide bomber was ejected in mid -flight from the plane,
which landed safely in Mogadishu. Two passengers sustained minor injuries. On
7 March, at Beledweyne airport, a small detonation occurred during a luggage
search by AMISOM soldiers. Explosives were found hidden inside computer
equipment, which was scheduled to be shipped as cargo to Mogadishu.
14. AMISOM and the Somali national army sustained a series of attacks by
Al-Shabaab in January and February. On 15 January, hundreds of Al -Shabaab
fighters raided an AMISOM base in El Adde, Gedo region, killing several soldiers
and looting weapons and military vehicles. Later in January, AMISOM vacated its
base at Ceel Cade and those in Badhaadhe and Bulo Gaduud, Juba Hoose, citing
tactical reasons. On 16 February, Al-Shabaab launched a heavy assault on AMISOM
and Somali national army positions in the town of Afgooye, only 30 km north of
Mogadishu.
15. There were some strategic military successes in March. A drone strike by the
United States of America hit a training camp in Raaso, Hiraan region, on 5 March,
reportedly killing more than 150 newly recruited fighters and some senior
commanders. A joint United States-Somali military operation in Juba Dhexe and

16-07157

3/20

S/2016/430

Juba Hoose carried out from 31 March to 2 April resulted in the killing of a senior
Al-Shabaab leader, Hassan Ali Dhoore. Also in early March, an attempted large scale advance by Al-Shabaab into Mudug and Puntland was repelled by local
security forces. The Government of Puntland reported that its forces had killed at
least 67 Al-Shabaab militants and detained 100, while the Galmudug Interim
Administration announced that its forces had killed 115 and captured 110
Al-Shabaab militants.
16. Early in April, AMISOM resumed major offensive operations under the third
phase of Operation Juba Corridor, with the aim of destroying Al -Shabaab
strongholds and cutting their supply routes in central Somalia. As part of this
operation, the town of Adan Yabal, Shabelle Dhexe region, and the village of
Galcad, Galguduud region, were liberated on 6 and 11 April, respectively.

III. Support for peacebuilding and State-building efforts
A.

International coordination and political support
17. My Special Representative continued to work in close coordination with
Member States maintaining diplomatic representations in Mogadishu or Nairobi,
convening regular meetings to harmonize views on the key issues and coordinate
partner support for key political processes. In particular, and under the leadership of
my Special Representative, international partners coordinated support for the 2016
electoral process, including by deploying an international delegation to the capitals
of the emerging federal member states from 4 to 16 February to help to foster
acceptance of the decision of the Federal Government on an electoral model so as to
enable the timely preparation and implementation of the process.
18. The third ministerial meeting of the High-level Partnership Forum was hosted
by the President of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, in Istanbul, Turkey, on 23 and
24 February. The meeting, which was co-chaired by the President of Somalia and
the Deputy Secretary-General, was attended by 46 Member States and 11
international organizations. The meeting enabled Somalia and the inter national
community to reflect on the achievements and challenges faced in the
implementation of the peacebuilding and State-building process in Somalia and to
identify key deliverables for 2016 and beyond. The Forum called for the timely
implementation of the electoral process and security sector reform, including the
development of a new national security architecture. The Government of Puntland
did not participate in the meeting’s political discussions owing to its opposition to
the 2016 electoral model.

B.

Inclusive politics
19. Much work remains to be done in order to achieve a common vision of the
federal system in Somalia. However, the reporting period saw some progress in
defining the way forward, in particular with respect to the revision of th e
Provisional Federal Constitution of 2012.

4/20

16-07157

S/2016/430

Constitution
20. In January, constitutional experts supported by UNSOM and United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) visited Mogadishu and met with the President,
the Prime Minister, the Speaker of the Federal Parliament, the Oversight Committee
and the Minister of Constitutional Affairs. They helped Somali stakeholders to reach
an agreement on key topics and provided options for addressing some contentious
issues, including the role of the upper house, executive branch powers, the
distribution of power between the federal and state levels, revenue -sharing and the
status of Mogadishu.
21. On 15 February, the Speaker of the Federal Parliament outlined a road map for
the constitutional review process. The road map includes consultations led by the
Oversight Committee with the regional assemblies, involving the executives and
civil society, a national constitutional conference to be held in Garoowe, Puntland,
from 25 May to 5 June, and a drafting retreat by the Independent Constitutional
Review and Implementation Commission to finalize draft amendments. Also on
15 February, the Committee submitted amendments to 10 of 15 chapters of the
Provisional Federal Constitution, addressing mostly technical issues, to t he Federal
Parliament. Speakers from the South-West, Jubba and Galmudug regional
assemblies attended the parliamentary sitting. Puntland did not participate and
instead issued a statement on 21 February in which it said that the resolution of
long-standing grievances should precede any participation by it to the current
review.
22. The first public outreach and civic education exercise on the constitutional
review process was conducted in Baidoa from 14 to 17 March. The event was
hosted by the Interim South-West Administration and organized by the Federal
Ministry of Constitutional Affairs, with UNDP assistance.
23. The Federal Government continued consultations with the existing and
emerging federal member states on substantive aspects of the federal syste m,
including financial and fiscal arrangements, the judiciary, the security sector and the
revision of the Federal Provisional Constitution. In addition, the Boundaries and
Federation Commission began introductory meetings on federal state boundary
delimitation criteria that will be submitted to the Federal Parliament. With United
Nations support, the Commission has also drafted a strategic framework on
federalism that focuses on five interconnected pillars: outreach to government
stakeholders on clarity of roles and responsibilities; the promotion of the national
dialogue process; clarity on federalism and other models; the production of
boundary demarcation criteria; and the evolution of a dispute resolution platform.
Elections
24. Consistent with the Mogadishu Declaration of 16 December 2015, government
and international partners at the High-level Partnership Forum in February endorsed
a twin-track approach comprising the 2016 electoral process and universal elections
by 2020, the latter to be organized by the National Independent Electoral
Commission.
25. The United Nations continued to support the institutional development of the
National Independent Electoral Commission through training programmes, including
those on gender-responsive elections and governance and leadership, international

16-07157

5/20

S/2016/430

workshops organized jointly with the UNDP Arab States Regional Programme and
participation in a voter registration study hosted by the Electoral Commission of
South Africa. In the immediate term, UNSOM and UNDP continue to support the
preparations and planning for the 2016 electoral process.

C.

Rule of law and security institutions
26. Considerable progress was made in developing a federal framework for the
rule of law and security institutions. A draft national security policy was developed
on the basis of a national threat assessment. The draft policy was circulated to the
leaders of the existing and emerging federal member states during the National
Leadership Forum on 11 April and will be considered in detail at its next session, in
May. In the meantime, technical-level workshops to discuss the policy will be held
in the regional capitals.
27. During a three-day consultative workshop in March, supported by UNSOM,
AMISOM and UNDP, the Federal Government and the regional states agreed on the
main features of a federal policing model for Somalia. The proposed police system
will have a two-tier, civilian-administered structure at the federal and state levels.
This agreement constitutes a key building block in establishing viable police
services throughout Somalia and provides a much-needed nationally owned
framework for structured police support. The recently concluded joint World Bank
and UNSOM security and justice public expenditure review p rovided valuable
information on the affordability and sustainability of different models.
28. Militia integration is progressing, albeit slowly, in line with the integration
plan of the Federal Government. Both it and the Somali national army have
increased support and enhanced training to address these challenges in Kismaayo.
UNSOM and the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) are seeking
to implement a support package as swiftly as possible for the integration of 3,000
Puntland troops into the Somali national army.
29. The military stipends project, funded by the Governments of the United States
and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, for Somali national
army soldiers continues. During the reporting period, 18,818 registe red soldiers
were paid stipends totalling $2.9 million. The regular payment of salaries for
security personnel continues to be a major issue, with direct implications for the
country’s security situation. Army salaries are estimated to be between 6 and 13
months in arrears, and salaries for the police up to 15 months.
30. The European Union provided $5.5 million in support of police stipends and
committed itself to delivering funding for an additional year, until April/May 2017.
With the support of the European Union, 6,354 federal police officers were paid
eight months’ worth of outstanding stipends. Stipend payments to all eligible
officers are expected to be completed by April 2016. Concurrently, the Department
for International Development of the Government of the United Kingdom provides
stipends to regional police officers in Baidoa and Kismaayo who complete a three month training course conducted through the AMISOM police component. At
present, 397 officers of the 1,200 expected graduates are receiving stipends.
31. The review of the draft Heegan (Readiness) Plan for the development of the
Somali police force continues, including on the new policing model. The non -lethal

6/20

16-07157

S/2016/430

support package for the Somali police was updated in January. Germany has
pledged funding for the package, amounting to $2 million through UNOPS.
32. Progress was also made in weapons and ammunition management following a
workshop facilitated by UNSOM and the United Nations Institute for Disarmament
Research, held from 7 to 11 February and attended by representatives of the Somali
national army, the Somali police force, the National Intelligence and Security
Agency and the Custodial Corps. The Federal Government agreed to begin
deploying mobile weapons-marking and registration teams, harmonizing registration
databases, improving the army weapons reception and storage area within
Mogadishu International Airport and developing legal frameworks. The United
Nations Mine Action Service will provide technical support to these activities,
which will support the aim of the Federal Government to meet the terms for the
partial lifting of the arms embargo.
33. The United Nations Mine Action Service donated vehicles and equipment to
the Ministry of Internal Security to support the training and operati ons of police
bomb-disposal teams dealing with incidents relating to improvised explosive device
and the clearance of unexploded ordnance. At the nineteenth International Meeting
of Mine Action National Programme Directors and United Nations Advisers, held in
Geneva from 16 to 19 February, the Somali Explosive Management Authority
launched the Badbaado (Protection) Plan for explosive hazard management.
34. On 18 February, the Federal Government held the official stone -laying of the
Mogadishu prison and court complex, which is supported by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and UNOPS. The court is intended to adjudicate high security cases in the civilian justice system, including cases against members of
Al-Shabaab. On 1 March, the Interim South-West Administration launched a
rehabilitation pilot project financed by the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund for
high-risk prisoners in Baidoa.
35. The community development projects of the Federal Government to
reintegrate former combatants received a boost when the Government of Japan
agreed to fund 20 reinsertion projects in Mogadishu, Baidoa, Kismaayo and
Beledweyne. Half of the beneficiaries will be ex-combatants nearing the end of their
rehabilitation process, with the remaining other half from the community. In
Kismaayo, the Federal Government, the Interim Jubba Administration, the German
Embassy and the International Organization for Migration concluded an agreement
to establish a transitional facility for disengaged Al -Shabaab operatives, with
funding from the Government of Germany.
36. With UNSOM technical assistance, the Federal Government completed the
draft Naqude (Captain) Plan to train and equip the navy and coast guard. UNSOM is
facilitating the ratification of a revised Somali maritime code with the Federal
Government. At the request of the Minister of Fisheries and Marine Resources,
UNSOM will help to mobilize international support to counter illegal, unreported
and unregulated fishing off the Somali coast.

16-07157

7/20

S/2016/430

D.

Economic foundations
37. The reporting period saw noticeable progress in economic governance and
policy priorities. A bill to combat the anti-money-laundering and combating the
financing of terrorism was signed into law by the President on 21 February. The
Federal Parliament had passed the bill on 26 December 2015, enabling the Central
Bank of Somalia to put in place measures to improve the financial regulatory
environment and safeguard remittances from the diaspora. The President appointed
two Bank board members to complete the management team that will approve
important pending regulations.
38. In recognition of the progress achieved in macroeconomic management, on
6 April, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced that it would
recommend a 12-month staff-monitored programme, which would help to establish
the foundations for the full reengagement of international financial institutions in
Somalia within the framework of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries initiative.
The programme will not involve direct financial suppor t, but will instead be a
necessary step towards a potential future IMF loan programme. Less positively, the
membership application of Somalia to join the East African Community was
rejected on 3 March as a result of insecurity, depriving Somalia of an oppo rtunity to
revive its economy through regional integration and access to a market with 170
million people.
39. The export of live animals to Gulf nations continues to be the leading foreign
exchange earner for Somalia. According to data from the Food and A griculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO), in 2015, Somalia exported 4.9 million
goats and sheep, 295,000 head of cattle and 72,000 camels, bringing an estimated
$384 million in revenue for livestock owners. The livestock sector continues to offe r
significant growth potential, boosted by continued export -focused interventions,
good prices and growing markets in the Middle East. Earnings from livestock
account for 40 per cent of the gross domestic product.
40. On 23 January, the Federal Deputy Prime Minister, in coordination with FAO,
launched a national biodiversity strategy and action plan to serve as a road map for
balancing the consumption and conservation of resources that are derived from
biodiversity.
41. A forum for agriculture ministers, held in Mogadishu in January, marked a
historic milestone. For the first time, federal and regional ministries of agriculture
gathered to implement a harmonized strategy to support agricultural growth and
food security throughout Somalia, increase resource mobilization and strengthen
accountability with local and international partners.

E.

Revenue and services
42. The Federal Government continued its efforts to draft a national development
plan for the period 2017-2019, organizing extensive consultations in the regions.
Notably, it has prioritized critical issues, including social protection, nutrition and
young people, as it aligns national priorities with the Sustainable Development
Goals.

8/20

16-07157

S/2016/430

43. Government leadership in inclusive consultations with regional authorities
enabled the development of a bottom-up health sector strategic plan and a
multisectoral national water, sanitation and hygiene policy, which are intended to
enhance the provision of critical social services. Data -collection efforts, such as the
first government-led school census published in early 2016, provided a critical
baseline for interventions targeting Somali children.
44. Saudi Arabia provided $50 million to Somalia: $20 million for budget support
and $30 million in investments. Officials from the Federal Ministry of Finance
confirmed the receipt of the support financing, helping to close a gap in the 2016
budget.
45. The Governor of the Central Bank emphasized the need for a new currency for
Somalia, although concerns remain about the capacity of the Federal Government to
disseminate and manage a new currency.

F.

Cross-cutting issues
Community recovery
46. On 19 March, the President launched the Wadajir National Framework for
Local Governance. The Framework outlines a community-led process for the
formation of representative administrations in districts and consists of four
components: social healing, peace dividends, civic dialogues and local governance.
Prior to the launch, the Ministry of the Interior and Federal Affairs conducted a
consultation exercise with representatives of the state authorities and civil society.
47. In January, ministers of the interior of the Interim Jubba and South -West
Administrations convened meetings with their respective district officials to review
district stability assessments and discuss the prioritization of activities. Community recovery initiatives were conducted in Kismaayo and Afmadow and Baraawe,
involving a broad range of local stakeholders, including representatives of civil
society, local authorities and the private sector. The projects were supported by the
United States Agency for International Development. Meanwhile, AMISOM
continued to implement early-recovery projects at the community level that
included support for health facilities in Beledweyne, Baardheere and Taraka.
48. The Peacebuilding Fund provided $2 million in direct support for local
administrations through the Somalia Development and Reconstruction Facility
national window. This modality was used by UNDP to facilitate payments for 11
district administrations in the southern and central area. The Facility will make it
easier to continue payments for this and other projects, effectively contributing to
the establishment of a financially functional federal system.
49. Initiatives to empower Somali young people have been gaining momentum
and remain high on the agenda of the Federal Government. The United Nations
Population Fund is supporting the Federal Government in the development of a
national youth policy through funding and technical support to the Ministry of
Youth and Sports, which is leading the process. UNSOM held an event for young
people in Mogadishu, which brought together 250 representatives of young people,
75 of whom were delegates from the regional level, to agree on specific
recommendations to implement Security Council resolution 2250 (2015) on youth
and peace and security in Somalia. During a side event on investing in Somali

16-07157

9/20

S/2016/430

young people, held at the High-level Partnership Forum in Istanbul, the Deputy
Secretary-General launched a United Nations strategy for young people in Somalia
and announced the creation of a fund for them.
Human rights
50. Operations by security forces resulted in 105 reported civilian casualties. Of
those casualties, 28 deaths and 45 injuries were attributed to the Somali security
forces, 3 deaths to AMISOM and 29 deaths to air strikes by the Kenyan military
operating bilaterally. In addition, two civilians were reportedly injured by United
States helicopter air strikes. One case of rape involving the Somali security forces
was documented. Civilian casualties attributed to Al -Shabaab or unidentified
individuals totalled 121 deaths and 230 injuries. Thirty-two abductions were
suspected to have been carried out by Al-Shabaab, which released 50 captives on
3 April.
51. In addition to civilian casualties, air strikes by the Kenyan military from 15 to
23 January in the Gedo region reportedly resulted in the killing of livestock and the
destruction of water wells and houses. In this regard, allegations of cluster
munitions were reported by the media and local communities. However, the
Government of Kenya has officially denied them. Unexploded sub -munitions are
reported to have been used by Al-Shabaab as improvised explosive devices during
attacks. On 31 January, the Federal Government announced a committee to
investigate the impact of the air strikes, but the committee has yet to begin its work.
52. Seventeen death sentences were carried out, including seven in Somaliland
(including three civilians), four in Mogadishu and two in Puntland. Four individuals
were summarily executed by authorities without due process, one by the Interim
South-West Administration and three by the Interim Jubba Administration.
53. At a public trial, the First Instance Military Court in Mogadishu sentenced
Hassan Hanafi to death, a former Al-Shabaab journalist and media officer, for his
involvement in the killing of at least five journalists. On 26 March, the High
Military Court in Mogadishu confirmed the death sentence, which was carried out
on 11 April.
54. A total of 900 people were arrested, most of them arbitrarily, in various parts
of Somalia for association with Al-Shabaab. Of those arrested, 613 were released,
while 287 remained in detention pending further investigation, including 68
juveniles forcefully enrolled by Al-Shabaab.
55. In January, the Human Rights Council reviewed the human rights record of
Somalia under the universal periodic review process. The Council noted gains made
since the last evaluation in 2011, including the adoption of action plans to
implement the human rights road map to end sexual violence in conflict and on the
rights of children.
Gender equality and women’s empowerment
56. The political participation and security of So mali women received muchneeded attention, creating new momentum for action ahead of the 2016 electoral
process. A meeting on women and peace and security at the High-level Partnership
Forum in Istanbul brought the Federal Government and its partners toget her and
highlighted the urgency of strategic intervention and further investment in the

10/20

16-07157

S/2016/430

women and peace and security agenda, including women’s political participation.
During plenary deliberations at the Forum, the Federal Government highlighted its
plans to ratify the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination
against Women.
57. Women’s participation in the 2016 electoral process was the main focus of the
2016 International Women’s Day celebration. Women leaders, including ministers,
members of Parliament and representatives of civil society organizations, shared
their concerns at the open day organized by the Special Representative, a European
Union-United Nations joint panel discussion and during activities organized by civil
society organizations and ministries for women throughout the country.
Child protection
58. Children continued to be disproportionately affected by conflict in Somalia.
The United Nations-led country task force on monitoring and reporting mechanism
on children and armed conflict documented 1,101 violations affecting 993 children
(166 girls and 827 boys) in 488 incidents between 1 January and 31 March. This is
an increase from the previous quarter. The majority of the violations concerned the
recruitment and use (472), abduction (268) and killing and maiming (281),
committed mostly by Al-Shabaab, the army and clan militias.
59. The United Nations provided support to the Government of Puntland in the
handling of children captured following military operations agai nst Al-Shabaab in
March. Up to 50 of those captured may be under 18 years of age. UNSOM and the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) are also providing support to the
Galmudug Interim Administration to assist in the rehabilitation of children captured
in similar military operations. Preliminary findings indicate that the number of
children captured in both the Puntland and Mudug operations is some 50 per cent of
216 detainees.
60. The United Nations continues to provide support to the Federal Government
on the implementation of the action plans to end and prevent the recruitment and
use and killing and maiming of children. On 15 March, the UNSOM Child
Protection Unit and UNICEF supported the finalization by the Somali national army
of a one-year workplan to support their implementation.
Prevention of sexual violence
61. Progress in the implementation of the national action plan on ending sexual
violence in conflict includes the finalization of a sexual offences bill, which is now
before Cabinet, and the development of a pilot women and children protection unit
within the Somali police force.
62. Challenges facing the implementation of the national action plan include a
lack of adequate coordination, limited donor resources and the inadequate
engagement by the interim regional administrations. It has been agreed that, in t he
second quarter of 2016, the focus of work will be to mobilize additional resources
and to establish a coordination cell embedded within the Ministry of Women and
Human Rights Development in order to enhance coordination with stakeholders.

16-07157

11/20

S/2016/430

Targeted sanctions
63. In his briefing to the Council on 18 February, the Chair of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia
and Eritrea highlighted some of the latest findings of the Monitori ng Group on
Somalia and Eritrea. The findings indicated that, among the key challenges posing a
threat to peace, security and stability in Somalia, was the increased international
interest in the country’s rich maritime and mineral resources, which has not been
matched by adequate efforts to manage and protect them. Meanwhile, on 14 March,
the Committee adopted a second implementation assistance notice to assist Member
States and other relevant actors in effectively implementing the arms embargoes in
place for Eritrea and Somalia.

IV. Humanitarian situation
64. The humanitarian situation in Somalia remains fragile. The most recent
assessment of the Food Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit, released in February,
confirmed persistently high and alarming levels of food insecurity and malnutrition.
An estimated 4.7 million people, or 38 per cent of the population, are food insecure
or in crisis, with nearly 1 million people unable to meet minimum food needs.
Internally displaced persons comprise more than two thirds o f acutely food insecure
people. Some 305,000 children under five years of age are acutely malnourished,
58,300 of whom could face death if they do not receive urgent treatment.
65. Severe drought exacerbated by El Niño conditions has hit parts of Puntland
and Somaliland, affecting 350,000 people, especially in the Awdal, Bari, Nugaal,
Sanaag, Sool and Woqooyi Galbeed regions. A further 1.3 million people risk
slipping into acute food insecurity if they do not receive assistance. The situation is
expected to worsen owing to the depletion of available water resources in affected
areas and a poor forecast for the coming rainy season. The drought conditions
follow four successive seasons of below-average rains in parts of Somaliland
(spanning two years) and a below-average Deyr rainy season in Puntland (October
to December 2015). Early forecasts indicate an increased likelihood of near -normal
to below-normal Gu rains (April to June) in Somaliland and northern parts of
Puntland, which will have a further negative impact on the affected people who are
struggling to meet their daily needs.
66. Humanitarian partners are providing critical life-saving assistance to the most
vulnerable, notwithstanding limited resources to avert a deterioration in the
situation. The Central Emergency Response Fund has released $11 million to
support the scaling-up of critical life-saving humanitarian assistance in the droughtaffected areas. The Humanitarian Coordinator has allocated an additional
$6.5 million from the Somalia Humanitarian Fund. To date, the 2016 Somalia
Humanitarian Response Plan has received $102.9 million, or 12 per cent, of the
$885 million dollars requested.
67. Health conditions remain worrisome, with some 3.2 million people in need of
access to emergency health services. As of January 2016, at least 10 health facilities
had reduced their services or closed owing to insufficient funding, according to
non-governmental organizations. Partners continue to face difficulties in providing
life-saving health services at the scale required. Basic health posts and clinics are

12/20

16-07157

S/2016/430

struggling to meet primary health needs, and many organizations have withdrawn
health workers from high-need areas for lack of funds.
68. Work continued in order to find durable solutions to the plight of the
1.1 million internally displaced persons in Somalia. The humanitarian country team
is working on an initiative that is aimed at alleviating the hardship of the internally
displaced persons through return, resettlement or local integration an d will depend
heavily on the political will of the authorities. The draft national development plan
of the Federal Government includes durable solutions on internally displaced
persons under its resilience pillar.
69. Humanitarian access remains a challenge owing to increasing insecurity,
limited capacity and funding. The operating environment in Somalia remains
dangerous and challenging, with attacks against humanitarians on the rise, even in
areas where they have long had access. In January and February alone, 22 violent
incidents had a direct impact on humanitarian organizations, accounting for the
death of one humanitarian worker, the injury of two others and the physical assault
and detention of five more.

V. Support to the African Union Mission in Somalia, the
national army and the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia
70. Against the backdrop of increasingly sophisticated attacks by Al -Shabaab, the
participants in a summit of Heads of State and Government of AMISOM troop contributing countries, held in Djibouti on 28 February 2016, stressed the need for
improved command and control. They also noted with concern the decision by the
European Union to reduce financial support to the AMISOM troop allowance by 20
per cent at a crucial juncture. In addition, they emphasized the need for better
coordination of operations and logistics between AMISOM, the national security
forces and UNSOS.
71. Efforts to improve the performance of AMISOM were also the focus of a
meeting of the African Union-United Nations joint task force on peace and security,
held on 22 March. Following up on the work of the joint task force, a joint African
Union-United Nations working group was established to develop options for
improving the effectiveness of AMISOM operations and securing predictable
funding for its uniformed personnel. During the inaugural meeting, held in Addis
Ababa from 15 to 19 April, the working group identified priority initiatives aimed at
improving AMISOM command and control.
72. On 17 March, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia
met the President and key security donors to discuss salaries and stipends and
national security architecture. The Federal Government committed itself to
delivering a consolidated security budget and promptly paying salary arrears. The
Ministry of Finance presented a report on the financial constraints and the payment
of salaries and stipends in 2015, including arrangements for the payment of arrears.
The meeting marked a shift in the attitude of the Federal Government with regard to
salary payment, with a recognition of the seriousness of the payment crisis and a
willingness to take a more assertive stance with the security agencies.

16-07157

13/20

S/2016/430

73. As requested by the Security Council in its resolution 2245 (2015), UNSOS is
developing two separate quantifiable compacts for the delivery of support to
UNSOM and AMISOM, both of which are in the final drafting sta ge. Building on
the performance management framework of the Department of Field Support, the
compacts include objectives, measures and targets for the various areas in which
UNSOS delivers services, developed jointly with the clients of UNSOS. The
compacts also cover performance measures for resource management, compliance
with rules and regulations and normative policies and standards.
74. During the senior leadership coordination forum, held in Mogadishu on
16 March, the Special Representative of the Chair of the African Union Commission
for Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in Somalia and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia agreed on four joint priorities
that would guide the support operations of UNSOS moving forward: support for the
electoral process and electoral security, support for the Somali security sector,
community recovery and extension of State authority, and the implementation of the
human rights due diligence policy.
75. The umbrella memorandum of understanding between the African Union and
the United Nations has been amended, and signed, to align it with recent Security
Council resolutions. Discussions are continuing in order to finalize the tripartite
memorandum of understanding between the African Union, the United Nations and
troop- and police-contributing countries, which will set out the administrative,
logistical and financial terms and conditions to govern the reimbursement of eligible
contingent-owned equipment provided by the contributing countries in support of
AMISOM. The new framework will allow UNSOS to better support AMISOM
through the joint formulation of force requirements and by ensuring that only
equipment that has been verified by tripartite signatories will be supported by
UNSOS, in line with Council resolution 2245 (2015).
76. The lack of access to main supply routes, however, remains a challenge, with
UNSOS continuing to supply 70 per cent of AMISOM forward operating bases and
other locations by air. The introduction of military air assets is an important aspect
of the efforts of AMISOM to adopt a more mobile and offensive posture. The
pledges by Kenya and Ethiopia of two and three attack helicopters, respectively,
will be an important contribution in this regard. A continuing gap, however, remains
the provision or reimbursement of ammunition, which falls outside the scope of the
logistics support package and would have to be covered by either the troop contributing countries or through bilateral assistance from Member States. In
support efforts to enhance the mobility of AMISOM, UNMAS has established a
presence at the force headquarters integrated support office of AMISOM in
Mogadishu and a joint office with AMISOM in Beledweyne, enhancing technical
advice and planning support as it pertains to explosive hazard management and
mitigation.
77. The United Kingdom began to deploy military personnel to support UNSOS
and UNSOM, further to paragraph 14 of Security Council resolution 2245 (2015)
and an exchange of letters with the Secretariat. The contingent will consist of
military engineers, military medical trainers, staff officers, military information
analysts, combat-vehicle engineers and logisticians with expertise in ammunition
and vehicle management. It is expected to deploy in three phases. The first eight
members of the 70-strong contingent were deployed on 17 April.

14/20

16-07157

S/2016/430

78. As authorized by the Security Council in its resolution 2245 (2015), UNSOS
has increased support for Somali national security forces through the delivery of
field defence stores to the Somali national army in Mogadishu and its sectors and
the provision of communications support. Alongside bilateral partners and
AMISOM, UNSOS trained 15 army personnel in the use of HF/VHF radio
communication equipment to improve interoperability with AMISOM during joint
operations. In addition, UNSOS conducted four medical evacuations for national
police officers during joint operations with AMISOM.
79. The trust fund in support of the Somali national army has an available balance
of only $8 million, which is sufficient to support army operations for the next six
months. The trust fund balance for contributions in the support of AMISOM remains
at $1.6 million, which is earmarked for continuing projects. Without additional
resources, UNSOS will be severely hampered in its ability to support the army and
AMISOM at this crucial juncture.
Human rights due diligence policy
80. With regard to the human rights due diligence policy, the two compacts of
UNSOS highlight the commitment of the Support Office to engage in coordination
forums, share information, facilitate monitoring and risk assessments, and build
AMISOM into a preventive measure.
81. One such preventive measure is the conduct of human rights due diligence
policy training during joint predeployment visits. In March, two training events
were held for the Ugandan and Burundian armies. Almost 80 commanders and
senior officers were briefed on human rights, international humanitarian law and the
obligation of the United Nations to implement the policy, as well as the implications
for support for AMISOM. All participants signed forms acknowledging that they
would ensure troops under their command were similarly briefed and committed
themselves to ensuring that they would report any alle gations of human rights
violations or sexual exploitation and abuse through their command chain.
82. In February, during the summit of AMISOM troop-contributing countries in
Djibouti, the countries acknowledged the importance of strict compliance with
human rights and international humanitarian law during operations and identified
the human rights due diligence policy in the final communiqué as a tool to help to
ensure compliance. The joint AMISOM-United Nations working group on the policy
met in March and discussed mitigation measures for the human rights violations
against AMISOM, information-sharing with the United Nations within the Civilian
Casualty Tracking, Analysis and Response Cell framework and the need for
background checks of incoming commanders and senior officers.

VI. United Nations presence in Somalia
A.

Expansion
83. The staff ceilings remained the same throughout Somalia, with the exception
of Mogadishu, where a new commercial accommodation facility was opened.
Therefore, in the capital, the staff ceiling for international personnel increased from

16-07157

15/20

S/2016/430

415 to 445. As a result, the overall staff ceiling for the country increased from 592
to 622.

B.

Integration
84. UNSOM continues to implement its mandate through a close partnership with
the United Nations country team and, in several areas, through fully integrated join t
operations. Of note during the reporting period, the UNSOM -UNDP Integrated
Electoral Support Group delivered fully integrated electoral support to the National
Independent Electoral Commission and to regional consultations on the 2016
electoral process. Similarly, the global focal point arrangement in police, justice and
corrections enabled joint UNSOM-UNDP operations in support of the Somalia Joint
Rule of Law Programme. In both cases, a UNDP -contracted deputy supports the
responsible head of unit in UNSOM, allowing for a seamless connection between
technical advice, political support and programming.
85. Work is continuing in order to deepen collaboration in the area of human
rights and the protection of women and children. On 17 March, the senior
management group, comprising UNSOM, UNSOS and the United Nations country
team, decided to integrate specialized protection functions into the human rights
component.

C.

Staff safety and security
86. The Security Management Team maintains a robust presence in Somalia to
enable United Nations staff to stay and deliver in challenging security
circumstances.
87. During the reporting period, United Nations staff in Mogadishu, Kismaayo and
Baidoa were indirectly affected by stand-off attacks involving mortars and B-10
rockets. There is an increased risk to United Nations and other air operations in
Somalia from low-yield explosives concealed in electronic equipment and smuggled
on to aircraft. The Security Management Team also closely monitored reports of
Al-Shabaab movements and operations, in particular in Shabelle Hoose, with
possible implications for the United Nations.
88. In the light of the above risks, contingency planning linked to specific
indicators and triggers was updated and relevant issues discussed with the African
Union and AMISOM. Two United Nations air operators, the United Nations
Humanitarian Air Service and UNSOS, reviewed procedures in support of the
Federal Government Civil Aviation Authority. In addition, UNSOS commissioned
an independent assessment of aviation safety by the International Civil Aviation
Organization. A review of security arrangements at airport terminals in Somalia,
including enhanced passenger, baggage and cargo screening, is continuing. A
routine crisis management simulation exercise was conducted in Mogadishu in
April.

16/20

16-07157

S/2016/430

VII. Observations
89. Somalia is undergoing a critical period in its political transition. Security and
political challenges are affecting the pace of progress in key priorities outlined in
Vision 2016 of the Federal Government. Nevertheless, there is now momentum to
plan and undertake an indirect, limited-franchise election in 2016. Doing so will be
a milestone marking decisive progress and pointing the way to more democratic and
inclusive politics in the coming years. However, with the mandates of the legislature
and executive expiring later this year, time is not on our side. I therefore urge
Somali stakeholders to proceed expeditiously with all the practical preparations for
the electoral process.
90. In the coming period, it is essential that effective measures be taken to address
the security threat represented by Al-Shabaab, especially to ensure that the electoral
process is conducted in a safe and timely fashion. I am concerned, in particular,
about Al-Shabaab build-up in Shabelle Hoose and parts of Shabelle Dhexe, which
has an impact on the security situation in Mogadishu and is increasing the frequency
of asymmetric attacks. This development has also created a more restrictive
operating environment for the United Nations and other international partners.
91. I pay tribute to AMISOM, the national army and their allied forces for their
continued efforts under difficult conditions, as well as the sacrifices that they
continue to make in the interest of peace and stability in Somalia. I reiterate the
need to maintain the pressure on Al-Shabaab through a comprehensive approach to
the threat of violent extremism.
92. I am concerned about the gaps in funding for AMISOM operations, which risk
undermining the effort to regain momentum in efforts to combat Al -Shabaab. I urge
Member States to step up their support to AMISOM to help to cover costs incurred
during joint operations, in particular for the reimbursement of troop stipends. The
reduction in stipends for AMISOM personnel as at 1 January 2016 has resulted in a
financial deficit for the African Union and AMISOM. The United Nations remains
committed to assisting the African Union in finding a suitable solution for the
sustainable and predictable funding of AMISOM stipends.
93. Stronger AMISOM command and control structures are crucial to improving
its operational effectiveness. In this regard, I welcome the concurrence of AMISOM
troop- and police-contributing countries, as stated at the summit of Heads of State,
held in Djibouti on 28 February, that all air assets should fall under the supervision
of the Head of Mission. Doing so will not only reduce the burden on logistical
operations, but also facilitate commercial activities that are critic al for community
recovery, as well as facilitate the effort to secure major supply routes.
94. Ultimately, it is critical that the Somali security sector be developed to a level
at which it would be able to assume security responsibilities in the country. I
therefore welcome the focus of the Federal Government on developing a federal
security architecture, while noting that questions around the command and control
of the security forces will require political engagement at the highest level. In this
context, the agreement on the main parameters of a new policing model for Somalia
constitutes a major milestone in creating viable police services in a federal Somalia
and provides a framework for coordinated international assistance. I urge the
Federal Government to ensure regular and predictable payment of Somali national

16-07157

17/20

S/2016/430

army salaries, which remains a central requirement for effective security sector
reform.
95. I applaud the efforts undertaken by Somali actors to reach an agreement on a
2016 electoral model and 2020 political road map. I welcome, in particular, the
decision to reserve 30 per cent of the seats in both houses of the Federal Parliament
for women. The United Nations stands ready to provide the support necessary for
the realization of this critically important objective. I welcome the commitment
made at the High-level Partnership Forum in Istanbul that there must not be any
impediments to the timely implementation of the electoral process and call upon all
Somali stakeholders to advance preparations.
96. I encourage the Federal Government to prioritize financial support to the
National Independent Electoral Commission to facilitate the timely recruitment and
capacity development of the Commission’s secretariat, which will be required to
initiate the planning of electoral preparations for the constitutional referendum and
universal elections.
97. I note that, while some progress has been made over the reporting period on
state formation and reconciliation, the overall federalization process is lagging. In
particular, lack of progress on the state formation process in Hiraan and Shabelle
Dhexe is of concern. I urge all stakeholders to engage in constructive dialogue and
advance the social reconciliation efforts necessary to enable the formation of an
interim regional administration in Hiraan and Shabelle Dhexe without further delay.
98. I welcome the progress made in advancing the review of the Provisional
Federal Constitution and encourage its speedy conclusion. I also welcome the
continuing efforts to include the federal member states, in particular Puntland, in
this process and urge the greater inclusion of civil society.
99. I note the substantial reduction in the number of allegations of human rights
violations against AMISOM since the previous repor ting period. However, military
air strikes that affect the civilian population continue to be a source of serious
concern. I am also concerned about allegations of human rights violations by
national security forces and the blurring of identities between t hem and their
AMISOM counterparts during military operations. This is both a serious
accountability issue and has an impact on the reputation of AMISOM, the African
Union and the United Nations. I urge strict compliance with international
humanitarian law during joint military operations and prompt and independent
investigations into allegations of violations.
100. Looking ahead, it is critically important to ensure a coordinated and
appropriately resourced strategy for community recovery, one that deliver s the core
functions of the State to newly recovered areas. These efforts need to demonstrate
the value of the role of government institutions to a generation of citizens who have
grown up in the absence of a State. To this end, I welcome both the launch o f the
Wadajir National Framework for Local Governance and the use of the Development
and Reconstruction Facility national window.
101. The current drought induced by El Niño — in Puntland and Somaliland
remains a concern to humanitarian partners. There is an urgent need to ensure that
humanitarian funding is commensurate with assessed needs in the affected regions.
The humanitarian appeal remains underfunded, at only 16 per cent of the
$885 million required. Humanitarian partners require $105 million immed iately to

18/20

16-07157

S/2016/430

provide critical life-saving assistance to more than 1 million people in Puntland and
Somaliland over the coming six months.
102. I pay tribute to my Special Representative, Michael Keating, my two Deputy
Special Representatives and the staff of UNSOM, UNSOS, United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes, and other international and regional organizations in
Somalia for their continued hard work under challenging conditions. I also thank the
African Union, AMISOM, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
European Union and other development partners for their sustained support. Our
partnership must endure and continue to deepen in the quest for lasting peace and
stability in Somalia.

16-07157

19/20

S/2016/430

20/20

16-07157
