United Nations

A/RES/63/77

General Assembly

Distr.: General
13 January 2009

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 90 (f)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 2 December 2008
[on the report of the First Committee (A/63/390)]

63/77. United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 42/39 D of 30 November 1987 and 44/117 F of
15 December 1989, by which it established the United Nations Regional Centre for
Peace and Disarmament in Asia and renamed it the United Nations Regional Centre
for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific, with headquarters in Kathmandu
and with the mandate of providing, on request, substantive support for the initiatives
and other activities mutually agreed upon by the Member States of the Asia-Pacific
region for the implementation of measures for peace and disarmament, through
appropriate utilization of available resources,
Welcoming the relocation of the Regional Centre from New York to
Kathmandu in accordance with General Assembly resolution 62/52 of 5 December
2007,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 1 in which he expresses his
belief that in cementing its partnership with States in the Asia-Pacific region and
other stakeholders, the Centre will be the primary United Nations regional entity
advocating the disarmament and non-proliferation agenda,
0F

Expressing its appreciation to the Regional Centre for its important work in
promoting confidence-building measures through the organization of meetings,
conferences and workshops in the region, including conferences held in Sapporo,
Japan, from 27 to 29 August 2007 and in Seoul from 5 to 7 December 2007,
Concerned with the report of the Secretary-General, in which he indicates that
the Regional Centre urgently needs more core funding for its staffing and operations
to allow it to sustain its work and be in a position to respond to the requests for
technical assistance from countries of the region, 2
1F

Appreciating the timely execution by Nepal of its financial commitments for
the relocation of the Regional Centre,

_______________
1
2

08-47541

A/63/178.
Ibid., para. 25.

A/RES/63/77

1.
Welcomes the relocation of the Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific from New York to Kathmandu and its coming
into operation on 18 August 2008;
Expresses its gratitude to the Government of Nepal for its cooperation
2.
and financial support, which allowed the new office of the Regional Centre to be
opened in Kathmandu;
Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General and the Office for
3.
Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat for making the necessary preparations with a
view to ensuring the physical operation of the Regional Centre from Kathmandu to
enable the Centre to function effectively;
Appeals to Member States, in particular those within the Asia-Pacific
4.
region, as well as to international governmental and non-governmental
organizations and foundations, to make voluntary contributions, the only resources
of the Regional Centre, to strengthen the programme of activities of the Centre and
the implementation thereof;
Requests the Secretary-General to provide from the regular budget,
5.
starting in the biennium 2010–2011, the necessary support to ensure the
sustainability of the core activities and operations of the Regional Centre, in order
to enable it to carry out its programme of activities in accordance with its mandate;
Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the necessary
6.
support to the Regional Centre for greater achievements and results, within existing
resources, until the regular budget is approved;
Reaffirms its strong support for the role of the Regional Centre in the
7.
promotion of United Nations activities at the regional level to strengthen peace,
stability and security among its Member States;
Underlines the importance of the Kathmandu process for the
8.
development of the practice of region-wide security and disarmament dialogues;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session
the item entitled “United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in
Asia and the Pacific”.
61st plenary meeting
2 December 2008

2
