SRARY

UNITED NATIONS

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2209) . , , . . . , , . . . . , . . , . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . , , , . , , . . . , , . , . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . I . . . q. . . . . . . . . . . .
Complaint by Zambia against South Africa:
Letter dated 8 April 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13878) . . , , , *, , . *. . . . . . , ( (. . . . . . . . . . , , , . . . . . . . , , . . , . . . , . . , , . . . . .

1

S/PV .2209

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the Official Records qf the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of ResolAms
and
Decisions
~j’ the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2209th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 10 April 1980, at 4.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Porfirio

MUfiOZ

LED0

(Mexico).

from the representative of Zambia, which is contained
in a letter dated 8 April addressed to the President of
the Council and circulated in document S/ 13878.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh,
China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, PhilipPines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2209)

1.

Adoption

2.

Complaint by Zambia against South Africa:
Letter dated 8 April 1980 from the Permanent
Representative
of Zambia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13878)
The meeting

3. The first speaker is Mr. Reuben C. Kamanga,
member of the Central Committee of the United National Independence Party of the Republic of Zambia
and Chairman of the Political and Legal Committee of
the Central Committee. I cordially welcome him and
his delegation and invite him to make his statement.

of the agenda

4. Mr. KAMANGA
(Zambia): Mr. President, I thank
you and, through you, the other members of the
Council for welcoming me and my delegation. I am
aware of your outstanding qualities as a diplomat and
the seriousness with which you take the responsibilities
of the Council. My delegation is gratified that our
complaint about continued aggression against Zambia
by the racist rhgime of South Africa is being considered
by the Council under your presidency. Indeed, we are
grateful to you and to all the other members of the
Council for promptly responding to our request for this
meeting.

was called to order at 5.30 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

5. This month of April 1980 is of remarkable importance for our region of southern Africa. After many
years of immense sacrifice and heroic armed struggle,
the people of Zimbabwe have, at long last, attained
their long-denied inalienable rights and will accede
to genuine and legal independence in a few days.
We in Zambia, and in Africa as a whole, rejoice with
the people of Zimbabwe at this momentous event. The
United Nations, which was also steadfast in its support
of the struggle of the people of Zimbabwe for the
enjoyment of their inalienable rights, cannot but also
applaud the liberation of that country.

complaint
by Zambia against South Africa:
Letter dated 8 April 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia
to the United
Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13878)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives
of
Angola, Cuba, Liberia, Mauritius, Nigeria and Yugoslavia in which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

6. We have come to the Council to complain about
persistent and escalating South African aggression
against Zambia. Our complaint, at this time of festivity
in connexion with the independence of Zimbabwe, is
a sad but fitting reminder to the international
community, and in particular to the Council, that the
process of liberation
in southern Africa is not yet
complete. The Namibian people are still denied their
independence in spite of having bent over backwards
in co-operation with the United Nations to facilitate
and obtain the withdrawal of South Africa from their
country, which it is still illegally occupying. The vast
majority of the people of South Africa continue to
languish under the degrading, racist, oppressive and
repulsive system of apartheid.

Af the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola),
Mr.
Roa-Kouri
(Cuba),
Mr.
Tubman
(Liberia),
Mr. Ramphul (Mauritius),
Mr. Clark (Nigeria) and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia)
took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

2.
The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
The Council is meeting today in response to a request
1

13 September 1979, to the Secretary-General from our
Permanent Representative,
bringing to the attention
of the Secretary-General and of the international corn
munity a catalogue of South African acts of aggressi
against Zambia over a period of time ranging fron
January to September 1979.

7. The members of the Council are no doubt aware of
the unique position taken by Zambia in the many
turbulent years of the struggle for the liberation of
southern Africa. No less than four wars of liberation
have been fought in countries with which Zambia
shares common borders. Out of principle, we have
steadfastly supported the legitimate struggles of our
neighbours of Mozambique,
Angola, Zimbabwe and
Namibia
for freedom
and independence,
enemy
aggression notwithstanding.

12. I shall not tax the patience of the member:
of the Council by reciting the catalogue of acts of ag
gression already communicated.
Suffice it to say tha
South African aggression against my country not on11
has continued unabated, but also reflects a consisten1
pattern of such bestial acts as intimidation,
harass,
ment, torture and wanton destruction of Zambian life
and property. Zambians in the Western Province of the
country, who are the targets and victims of South
African terror tactics, live in a state of tension and
fear.

8. The liberation of Mozambique and Angola brought
in its train conditions of peace and good-neighbourliness between Zambia and those countries. Such now
will be the case with Zimbabwe as well: aggression
from there is now a thing of the past. We therefore
look forward to the independence of Namibia, to which
we are resolutely committed-an
event which will
ensure conditions of peace on our borders.

13. There is an urgent need for the Council to act
decisively and effectively. The presence of South
African troops on Zambian soil and their terror tactics
have led to a disruption of normal life in the area
concerned. Programmes
of economic and social
development
of the area have come to a virtual
stand-still because of the unfavourable conditions
obtaining, including the presence of land-mines. Even
the supply of such essentials as food and medicine in
the area has been adversely affected. It is therefore
imperative and urgent that the situation in the area
return to normal. Our people yearn for peace, to which
they are entitled.

9. The movement
for the liberation
of southern
Africa as a whole is an inevitable and irreversible
historical force. Yet, there is still no evidence that the
Pretoria rhgitne will learn a lesson even from the happy
development
in Zimbabwe and become realistic in
respect of the situation in Namibia and South Africa
itself. It seems that the rCgime is still deluding itself
into believing that the status quo in Namibia and South
Africa can withstand the tide of liberation of the entire
continent of Africa. Repeated and escalating South
African acts of aggression against Zambia and Angola
are a vain attempt to preserve the status quo of
white minority
and racist rule in southern Africa,
which certainly is bound to crumble. In the final
analysis, as we in Zambia have repeatedly pointed out,
it is the devilish system of apartheid and the existence
of white minority domination in southern Africa which
constitute a serious threat to international
peace and
security.

14. I should like at this juncture to inform the Council of specific South African acts of aggression committed against Zambia since January 1980.
IS. Between I2 and I4 January, South African troops
crossed over from Namibia into the Sesheke District,
in the Western Province, and fired at Zambian workers
at the Mulubesi sawmills. During the same period,
South African war-planes violated Zambian air space
in the Sesheke District. On 21 January, South African
troops crossed into Zambia from Namibia, between the
Kasanga river and Mabumbu, in the Sesheke District.

IO. Zambia has been a constant victim of South
African aggression launched from Namibia and, until
recently, from Southern Rhodesia. This indeed was
the case last November,
when the Council adopted
resolution 455 (1979), in which it strongly condemned
the then illegal rCgime in Southern Rhodesia, as well
as South Africa, for their acts of aggression against
Zambia. With the advent of the independence of Zimbabwe, South Africa has beefed up its military presence
in Namibia and concentrated all its acts of aggression
against Zambia and Angola on the utilization of that
Territory-which
it occupies illegally-as
a launching
pad. South Africa today maintains huge military bases
in Namibia for the purpose of repressing the people
of Namibia
and of committing
acts of aggression
against Zambia and Angola.

16. On 6 February, the following incidents occurred:
South African troops, numbering 50, established a
camp between Sitwala and Kandala villages in the
Sesheke District and harassed travellers; South African
troops mounted a road-block between Katima MuliIo
police post and Likanda,
in the Sesheke Dislrict,
and impounded a land-rover and a truck; South African
troops searched the house of Mr. Sikota Wina, in the
Mwandj area of Sesheke District, and later flew Off
in a helicopter;
South African warplanes violated
Zambian air space in the Sesheke District. On~_9.Feb.
ruary, South African warplanes bombed Mukrnga
village in the Sesheke District, killing two and injuring
four Zambians. In the same incident, five trucks
belonging to Zambian businessmen were destroyed.
On 11 February, South African warplanes bombed

II.
The records of the Security Council, and the
United Nations in general, are replete with details of
specific South African acts of aggression against my
country going back many years, I wish, in particular,
to refer to document S/13539, which is a letter dated
2

J

WARY

the home of a Zambian national, Mr. Samuel Chingila,
in the Sesheke District. Four people were injured.
On 12 February, South African troops established a
camp 20 kilometres west of Katima Mulilo on Zambian
soil. On 18 February, South African troops established
a camp at Ngambwe and another one east of Sesheke
Bama, in the Sesheke District.

for its policies of apurtheici by attracting the sympathy
and support of some Western countries which collude
with it in the exploitation
and plunder of the rich
mineral and other resources in the region.
20. Zambia does not share a common border with
South Africa. We share a common border with Namibia. We have no problem with the Namibian people,
whose quest for freedom and independence we understand and fully support. The Namibian people, under
the leadership of SWAPO, are waging a gallant struggle
for their freedom and independence
from within
Namibia itself, not from Zambia. South African acts
of aggression committed
against us are totaily
unjustified because the war for Namibian
independence is being fought and will continue to be fought
from within Namibia itself. In the end, the Namibian
people, like the people of Zimbabwe,
will be
victorious.

17. On 5 March, South African troops entered
Zambia in the Sesheke District, using three helicopters, which were escorted by two jets. On 22 March,
at 1800 hours, South African troops bombed the
Kalongola pontoon and abducted three civilians at a
causeway in Senanga District, also in the Western
Province of Zambia. On 24 March, South African
troops destroyed a causeway bridge at Nasilele. On
25 March, South African troops destroyed and sank
the Kalongola
pontoon. On the same date, South
African troops abducted four Zambians at the Kaanja
rural reconstruction
centre, again in the Senanga
District.
They also took away the beIongings of
Zambians
at the rural reconstruction
centre. In a
separate incident on the same date, South Africans
destroyed
the Kaunga-Lueti
bridge in the same
district. On 26 March, four houses in Likamba Village
in the Sesheke District were burned down by South
African troops. In the same incident, a boy was killed
and five others were injured. On 27 March, a Zambian,
Mr. Shalengi Lizilo, of Namunde Village, Chief MUlangu, in Senanga District, was killed by South African
troops. On 28 March, Kalenge Village in the Sesheke
District was burned down by villagers on the orders
of South African troops. In this incident, a man and a
boy were killed by the South African troops.

21. I need not stress here Zambia’s interest in the
United Nations efforts to resolve the problem of
Namibia. We have co-operated fully, together with
other front-line countries and SWAPO, in the search
for a solution on the basis of Security Council resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978). All the reports of
the Secretary-General
on this matter, including his
most recent one {S/13862 of 31 March 19801, attest
to this fact. In pursuing the objectives of the freedom
and independence of Namibia, we have been pragmatic.
Yet, the illegal occupation of Namibia persists.
South Africa continues to procrastinate and to prevaricate. South Africa also seeks to consolidate its
grip on Namibia
by imposing a so-called int.ernal
settlement on the Namibian
people. The Western
Five, the countries that initiated the proposal for a
settlement, have not demonstrated any willingness to
pressure South Africa in a meaningful way to cooperate in the implementation
of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council for Namibia’s independence. It is also in the nature of the Western Five
to be ambivalent
in their reaction to South Africa’s
acts of aggression against independent African States.
We know that, given the political will, they could
prevail on South Africa to co-operate in solving the
Namibian
problem
and in terminating
its acts of
aggression against us.
22.

18. That is a catalogue of some of the most recent
South African acts of aggression committed
against
Zambia which, of course, have prompted our request
for this meeting. Let me emphasize that, in addition
to the specific incidents just mentioned, South African
war-planes have violated Zambian airspace on a daily
basis in the Western Province of the country. AS of
this day, hundreds of South African troops are still
on Zambian soil in total violation of our territorial
integrity,
and we demand their immediate withdrawal.
19. My Government
has, as in the past, exercised
maximum
restraint in the face of repeated and un.provoked
South African violations of the sovereignty
and territorial
integrity of Zambia. South Africa is
under pressure from the Namibian people under the
leadership
of their national liberation movement, the
South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO),
which is supported by almost the entire international
community,
to terminate its illegal occupation of the
Territory
of Namibia. Against the background of that
pressure and South Africa’s stubborn determination
to
maintain
its stranglehold on Namibia, South African
strategy
would seem to be aimed at provoking an
international
conflict through acts of aggression
against Zambia and Angola. In this way it hopes to
obscure its illegal occupation of Namibia and buy time

23. Our people cannot continue to be subjected to
intimidation,
harassment, torture and cold-blooded
murders perpetrated by the trigger-happy and wanton
South African troops. We have come to the Council,
as in the past, because we are a peace-loving nation.
We still subscribe to the ideas that inspired the
founding fathers of the United Nations. We know that
the majority
of the members of the Council, and
indeed of the Member States, recognize, along with
us, the threat to international
peace and security
posed by the policies and practices of South Africa.
3

IllI

Africa in those actions. With the emergence of a free
and independent Zimbabwe, the illegal Government
there has been eliminated.

24. On behalf of my delegation, I therefore call
upon the Council to take the following course of
action against racist South Africa without delay: first,
it should strongly condemn the racist regime of South
Africa for its continued intensified and unprovoked
acts of aggression against the Republic of Zambia,
which constitute a flagrant violation of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Zambia; secondly, it should
demand that South Africa withdraw forthwith all its
military forces from the territory of the Republic of
Zambia, cease all violations of Zambia’s air space and
henceforth scrupulously respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Zambia; thirdly,
it should solemnly warn South Africa that, in the
event of any further acts of aggression against the
Republic of Zambia, the Council will meet to take
enforcement measures against it under Chapter VII of
the Charter.

31, From the statement that we have just heard from
my beloved African brother, Mr. Kamanga, it appears
that, in spite of the welcome change in the situation
in southern Africa, aggression against Zambia continues unabated. Its air space and territorial integrity
have been repeatedly violated; South African troops
have crossed into Zambia from Namibia, abducted a
number of people and established camps on Zambian
soil, although they were later forced to withdraw;
South African fighter aircraft have bombed Zambian
villages, killed civilians and destroyed private and
‘public property. There are clear indications that the
actions of the South African authorities are aimed at
destroying the economic infrastructure of Zambia. We
cannot find any other explanation for the destruction
of bridges and other communication
links which are so
vital for supplies, particularly food supplies, to Zambia.

25. In our opinion, that is the minimum
action
required of the Council in regard to the grave situation
caused by South Africa. Let no one in the Council
doubt the threat posed to international
peace and
security by the apartheid regime of South Africa.

32. Last November when the Council considered
the situation arising from the repeated acts of aggression launched against Zambia by the rebel forces in
Southern Rhodesia, it underlined
and condemned
South Africa’s collusion therein, From confirmed
reports that South African army units had been
stationed in Southern Rhodesia, it appears that the
extent of South Africa’s participation
in those aggressive actions might have been greater than we all
believed. In any event, there is no doubt about the
responsibility of the South African Government with
regard to the situation which now prevails in Zambia
and to which the Council has decided to address
itself. That situation cannot be considered in isolation
from the developments in southern Africa as a whole.
From the statement of the representative of Zambia
we know that South African troops which are responsible for the killings and the destruction we have
to deplore today have crossed into Zambia from
Namibia. In its resolution 455 (1979), adopted last’
November, the Council emphasized that the existence
of the minority regime in Southern Rhodesia constituted a threat to international
peace and security.
Now, with the elimination
of that regime and the
restoration of peace in Zimbabwe, the Council should
turn its attention to the other underlying causes of
instability in southern Africa, namely, South Africa’s
illegal presence in Namibia and the policies of the
South African authorities.

26. In conclusion, I would only repeat that the root
cause of the problems of southern Africa is the existence of white minority rule, thriving as it does on
the abominable
system of apartheid. The United
Nations-the
Security Council in particular-should
rededicate itself to the eradication of apartheid and
white minority rule in southern Africa.
27. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Sparzislz):
The next speaker is the representative of Mauritius,
who wishes to make a statement in his capacity as
Chairman of the African Group of States at the United
Nations for the month of April. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement,
28. Mr. RAMPHUL
(Mauritius):
I should like to
thank you, Mr. President, and through you the other
members of the Council for giving me the opportunity
to speak at this stage on behalf of the African Group.
Also, I should like to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month
of April. As current Chairman of the African Group
and in my own name, I pledge to you my full cooperation,
29. My congratulations
go also to my Caribbean
cousin, Ambassador Mills, who so ably presided over
the Council during the month of March.

33. South Africa recently increased its efforts to
disrupt SWAP0 in Namibia. Many SWAP0 officials
and sympathizers have been arrested and placed in
detention throughout the Territory.
Large areas of
control in northern Namibia
have been declared
“security zones”, and a large-scale build-up of South
African forces has been reported in many areas,
particularly in Ovamboland.

30. On many occasions last year, the Council considered the question of the aggressive actions of the
white minority
regimes in southern Africa against
neighbouring
States, particularly
Zambia.
Until
recentIy, Zambia had suffered from wanton acts of
aggression committed by the illegal regime in Southern
Rhodesia,
Whenever the Council looked into the
.situation it- found a pattern of collusion by South

34. We deplore the fact that, while discussions are
under way for the implementation
of the Security
4

Council’s settlement proposal for Namibia, South
Africa should find it necessary to strengthen its
military presence in the international Territory which
it occupies illegally, and, in addition, to extend its
military activities to neighbouring countries, It should
be recalled that SWAP0 has accepted not only the
settlement proposal but also the concept of the demilitarized zone, and is prepared to co-operate fully
with the United Nations. But until final agreement is
reached and the United Nations Transition Assistance
Group can proceed to the Territory, SWAP0 has no
choice but to continue the armed struggle and, in the
circumstances, the front-line States are in duty bound
to continue to assist in the liberation struggle.

Precisely the kind of situation in which the South
African Government has sought to place the African
States. South Africa would like to see African Governments appear ridiculous, to be considered a nuisance,
to be thought of as being given to exaggerations and
eager to bring matters before the Council at the drop of
a hat. If this has been an objective of South African
strategy, neither here in the Council nor anywhere
else in the United Nations has it succeeded, thanks to
the high degree of understanding of and sympathy
for African problems always shown by the international community, for which the OAU is grateful. Be
that as it may, the African States can never lose sight
of the danger that people may in fact become tired of
hearing our complaints and that they may be tempted
to turn, not against the aggressor, but against the
victims of aggression. That is why, although we are
always honoured and pleased to appear before the
Council, our appearance today is one we wish had not
been necessary.

35. Any attempt by South Africa to coerce Zambia
or any other front-line
State into abandoning its
support of SWAP0 should be condemned, The United
Nations has proclaimed the legitimacy of the liberation
struggle in southern Africa. Zambia and the other
front-line States are committed
to supporting the
liberation movements. The United Nations should not
tolerate acts of retaliation being committed against
them because of their support.

40. We feel a certain sense of unease in approaching
the Council at this time, because the international
situation has remained very charged and tense almost
without let-up since the end of last summer. Indeed,
in recent days there have been ominous signs that the
crisis situations which have been simmering in Asia
and which are pregnant with the danger of a violent
confrontation
between the super-Powers may be
heating up. In the Middle East the unsettled State of
affairs continues to make immense demands on the
time and resourcefulness of the Council-and
still it
remains unsolved. Even in Africa, we see fierce civil
strife flaring up again among our brothers in Chad,
where many have been killed and thousands more have
been forced to flee into neighbouring territory, thereby
further aggravating the refugee problem of Africa,
which is already of crisis proportions.

36. For its part, the African Group reaffirms its
solidarity with Zambia. It appeals to the international
community urgently to take the necessary measures
to put an end to South Africa’s continuing aggression
against the valiant people of Zambia. The Security
Council should demand that South Africa respect the
sovereignty and the territorial integrity of Zambia.
The aggressive actions of South Africa against Zambia
threaten peace and security in southern Africa.
It is for the Council to take all appropriate steps to
prevent any further deterioration of the situation.
37. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Liberia, who
wishes to make a statement in his capacity as the
representative of the current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity (OAU). I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.

41. At such a time as this, Africa would have preferred to concentrate its exertions on bringing international opinion to look with the appropriate degree
of urgency at, and assist in relieving, the massive
scale of human suffering being borne by the staggeringly large number of refugees on our continent,
who we sometimes feel, quite frankly and not without
reason, are the forgotten refugees of the world.

38. Mr. TUBMAN
(Liberia): It is always an honour
to address the Security Council. As I do so today,
representing the current Chairman of the OAU, my
first duty is to thank you, Mr. President, and the other
members of the Council for again showing the same
interest in African affairs that the Council has always
shown when States members of the OAU have been
the victims of aggression.

42. Besides problems of the type just mentioned,
there is the devastation being caused to the economies
of most of the African States today by the world-wide
recession, soaring energy costs and high inflation-all
concerns that will be exercising the minds of our
leaders when they convene in Lagos in a few days’
time for an economic summit.

39. The expression of thanks which I have just
uttered is no mere formality.
We in the OAU are
keenly aware of the fact that, because African States
are constantly compelled to raise complaints about
South African aggression before the Council, there is
a danger that people will get tired of having to listen
to our complaints and that they will treat those comPlaints with a lightness bordering on indifference. We
realize this danger; in fact, we believe that it is

43. The problems which afflict Africa at the present
time are many, but in spite of them Africa would
have wished to focus its attention at this time on the
approach of Zimbabwe to independence-an
event
for which so many sacrifices have been made by the
people of that country and by Africa as a whole.
5

important body, which is considering alternately the
depredations and crimes of the one and of the other.
While yesterday the Council was considering the evil
actions of the Zionist rigime of Israel, today it is
called upon to give urgent consideration
to the acts
of aggression committed by the racist rkgime of South
Africa against Zambia.

44. In this context it is not inappropriate to Point out
that no country in Africa feels greater joy at Zimbabwe’s impending independence than does Zambia,
a major front-line State which made immense contributions towards the liberation
struggle in that
country, But no self-respecting Government could
remain silent when, since the beginning of this year
alone, six of its citizens, including a Chief of one of
its districts, have been killed, 13 others injured and
three abducted as a result of naked aggression by
South Africa, In addition, considerable
property
damage has been inflicted by South African troops
during illegal incursions into Zambian territory.
Vehicles have been impounded or destroyed, villages
burnt or bombed, pontoons and bridges blown up and
Zambian air space violated on a daily basis by South
African military aircraft.

50. In both cases, which recur so often that they are
an almost endemic taunt for the international
community, the criminals are in cahoots in the commission
of criminal acts and are fed on the same imperialist
milk. At the same time, the victims of aggression
belong to the same family of peoples, united by their
desire for national independence, sovereignty and the
right freely to determine their own destiny. The Arab
people of Palestine, and now the people of Zambia,
are suffering under the claws of imperialist
and
colonialist aggression, just as in the past it has been
the Arab peoples and the African peoples of other
front-line States which have suffered.

45. Each and all of these despicable acts are wholly
in violation of international law and they must be
strongly condemned. But their mere recital here does
not begin to convey the climate of fear and uncertainty
in which many innocent civilians, including women
and children, in many parts of Zambia are forced to
live. These people cannot know when or why or where
or how large the next attack from South Africa will
be. This is an intolerable situation, and the Government
of Zambia rightly feels compelled to do everything
in its power to put an end to such brazen harassment. The Security Council bears responsibility under
the Charter for prevailing upon and indeed compelling
South Africa to desist from aggression against Zambia,
aggression which, unless stopped, could threaten
international peace.

51. One might say that the Security Council is constantly meeting to hear evidence of this tragic phenomenon of the global spread of counter-revolutionary
aggression. New and increasing evidence of this
process of exporting counter-revolutionary
aggression
is reaching us, and that is why the Council is being
convened more and more frequently.
52. This well-synchronized
onslaught by the forces
of imperialism,
colonialism,
neo-colonialism
and
racism, including Zionism and apartheid,
is no accident. If there is anything that can explain such a
counter-revolutionary
pattern, it is precisely the
upward surge of the peoples of the world towards
national liberation,
decolonization
and political and
economic emancipation,
a process that the United
Nations has rightly and consistently supported.

46. All the States of independent Africa view these
attacks upon Zambia with dismay and alarm, and that
is why the current Chairman of the OAU has directed
me to appear before the Council for the purpose of
making an urgent appeal to it to take all necessary
steps as quickly as possible to bring to an end these
wanton attacks by South Africa against the gallant
nation of Zambia and so many of its innocent and
defenceless citizens, We are confident that the plea of
Zambia and of Africa will not go unanswered by the
Council.

53. Today it is the courageous and devoted people
of Zambia who come before us to denounce a series
of repeated and savage acts of intimidation,
harassment, torture and open destruction of lives and property committed in their territory by the racist troops
of the white minority rkgime of Pretoria, In the first
quarter of 1980 alone, 21 acts of aggression by the
South African racists were committed against the lives
and property of peace-loving Zambian citizens.

47. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Cuba, who
wishes to make a sta.tement in his capacity as the
representative of the Chairman of the non-aligned
movement. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

54. Why this savage concentration of attacks, which
include the use of armoured forces, air forces and
troops, especially during the second half of the quarter?
We have no doubt that such a policy of force is
related to the glorious victory of the Patriotic Front of
Zimbabwe, which put an end to decades of ignominious
colonialism in the former British colony of Rhodesia
and which confirmed the historical trend that prevails.
in the African peoples’ struggle for liberation in the
southern part of the continent. There is no longer a
Smith, much less a local “Uncle Tom”, capable of
serving the many purposes of the monstrous policy

48.

Mr. ROA-KOURi
(Cuba) (interpretation
from
Mr. President, I wish to thank you and the
other members of the Council for giving me the opportunity to take part in this debate in my capacity as
representative of the Chairman of the non-aligned
movement.
Spanish):

49. The abhorrent behaviour of two international
criminals seems to be governing the meetings of this
6

of Pretoria. Now the people of Zimbabwe are truly
controlling
their own destiny, and this reality is difficult,
if not impossible, for the proud Afrikaners to
digest. The punitive means used seem to be systematic
harassment and aggression against Zambia and other
front-line States for the clear purpose of destabilizing
them, The fact that racist actions originate in the
occupied Territory of Namibia is no mere accident of
geography, While destabilizing the situation in Zambia,
they are doing everything they can to repress the
national liberation struggle of the Namibian people and
of the people of South Africa itself.

region in the past, it is imperative
for the Council,
and through it all Member States, to express its firm
condemnation of the racist aggressor and its unshakable solidarity with the Government
of Zambia.
a
respected member of the non-aligned movement.
59. Today, confronted by the difficulties experienced
by our brother country, Zambia, we must repeat what
we have been proclaiming with a single voice as nonaligned countries, namely, that the front-line
States
are not and will not be alone in their courageous
determination to resist the racist enemy and resolutely
contribute to its total defeat.

55. The persistence and the systematic repetition
of these acts of aggression place the peace of the world
in the most serious jeopardy, In such a delicate
situation, the non-aligned countries feel in duty bound
to repeat what has been recognized on previous occasions by the international community,
namely, that
if the odious fact of apartheid continues to exist, if
racist oppression is a lacerating reality in southern
*Africa, it is only because a monstrous regime continues to survive in South Africa. And if that South
African regime is there, in open defiance of resolutions adopted by the United Nations, it is because such
a creature can prosper and survive under the protective wing of the Government of the United States
and of other imperialist
Powers, whose political,
diplomatic,
economic, military,
nuclear and other
forms of co-operation with Pretoria are undeniable.

60. The revolutionary
Government
of Cuba, which
has consistently stood in solidarity with the struggle
of the peoples of southern Africa and with their
natural rearguard, the front-line States, takes this
opportunity
to affirm once again its unconditional
solidarity with its Zambian brothers. It also emphasizes the extreme importance of the recommendations of the Heads of State or Government
of nonaligned countries contained in paragraphs 94 and 95
of the Political Declaration of the Summit Conference,
held in Havana, which deal with the ways and means
of furnishing
political,
diplomatic,
financial
and
material support and military assistance to the frontline States.
61. We stand at a momentous cross-roads. International peace and security have been put to a test by
the enemies of the peoples and of their inalienable
right to true independence. This Council must adopt
effective measures to force Pretoria and its imperialist
protectors to stop brandishing its sword at the peoples,
national liberation movements and independent
States
of southern Africa. If we did not do so, we should
be legitimizing the philosophy of war and plunder.

56. Further, and as a corollary of the foregoing,
I wish to recall here that the Heads of State or Government of the non-aligned countries, meeting last September in Havana, agreed that:
“Freedom,
peace, security and progress cannot
be achieved in southern Africa unless the apartheid
system of institutionalized
racial discrimination,
exploitation
and oppression is crushed and is
replaced by a democratic State whose policy will
conform
to the principles of the OAU, the nonaligned movement and the United Nations. . . . the
problems of southern Africa could not be dealt with
piecemeal,
because they are inextricably interlinked
politically,
economically and militarily
and therefore have to be tackled together.“*

62. The PRESIDENT
(i/ztwpretation from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Angola, who
wishes to make a statement on behalf of the frontline States. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
63. Mr. de FIGUEIREDO
(Angola): Mr. President,
the Government of the People’s Republic
of Angola
hopes that you will accept its best wishes on Your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We should also like to pay a tribute to Your
predecessor, the representative of Jamaica. We of the
People’s Republic of Angola have the warmest fraternal relations with both Mexico and Jamaica.

57. In recalling in this chamber the problems faced
by the peoples of southern Africa, which threaten
and jeopardize
the security of the front-line States,
I wish to stress the extreme importance of Council
resolution
418 (1977) on the compulsory arms embargo against South Africa. At the same time, I would
urge that the formulation of that resolution be strength:ned so as to preclude the possibility of its continued
violation and improve the machinery and procedures
If the Council for ensuring strict compliance with the
urns embargo.

64. I am speaking today on behalf of all the frontline States, which are deeply involved in the liberation
struggle in southern Africa. While all progressive
forces support genuine freedom fighters everywhere,
the front-line States have a special responsibility,
recognized by the OAU and the non-aligned
movement, because of their geo-political
situation.

$8. With regard to Zambia, the victim of successive
,acist acts of aggression along with other States of the
7

against both Angola and Zambia. In fact, the lists
compiled by our Governments
show more clearly
than ever the complementarity
of the South African
attacks, If I refer to the attacks on the People’s
Republic of Angola, it is not to detract from the
seriousness or the importance of the attacks against
Zambia; rather it is to show that they form two prongs
of the same imperialist military plan, a plan based on
renewed South African minority
intransigence, an
intransigence based, in its turn, on the new militarist
doctrine being developed in some Western capitals to
quash national aspirations and progressive forces
wherever they may threaten Western imperialist
interests.

65. I speak today in the cause of African liberation
and that of the African fight against imperialism,
racism and apartheid. My own country and people
have been the victims of the racist imperialist policies
of the junta ruling in Pretoria. On countless occasions
we have brought our case before the Council, but the
Council’s
resolutions
have failed to deter South
Africa from its chosen path of imperialist aggression
against its southern African neighbours. Our brother,
the front-line State of Zambia has also seen repeated
attacks against its sovereignty and territorial integrity.
66. In fact the latest list compiled by the Government
of Zambia catalogues unceasing attacks mounted by
the racist minority rigime in Pretoria against the territory and people of Zambia between January and
March 1980. Zambia is the victim of South Africa’s
imperialist and racist policies. Zambia’s fault is that it is
situated in southern Africa; Zambia’s crime is that it
is a front-line State which has always given full support to all progressive forces in the area that fight for
the right to self-determination,
that struggle for justice
and that battle for survival and freedom.

72. Pretoria has taken its cue from some Western
imperialist capitals. Thus, if the war against racism
and apartheid is prolonged even further, if many more
lives are lost, if the increasingly tense situation in
southern Africa continues to escalate, then the reasons
are to be found as much in those Western capitals
as they are in Pretoria itself.
73. South Africa’s rulers boast openly about their
military might, their economic power and their gold
reserves. They talk about their need to define their
borders to protect themselves from the inevitable
onslaught of self-determination
and majority rule. We
‘state with even more pride our willingness to fight for
as long as is necessary to destroy racism and imperialism on our continent.

67. It is an historical fact that both the People’s
Republic of Angola and the Republic of Zambia are
being repeatedly punished by Pretoria for daring to
support the struggle against imperialism and apartheid
in southern Africa.
68. The minority regime in Pretoria is in a state of
panic. It has seen the writing on the wall and it is
trying desperately to out-manoeuvre the forces of
historical justice. For it is inherent in the situation
that majority rule must come to the people of Namibia,
led by SWAPO, its liberation movement, and to the
people of South Africa itself, just as it has come to the
victorious people of Zimbabwe.

74. Regarding the matter under immediate discussion, we, the front-line States, strongly condemn the
racist minority regime of Pretoria for its attacks against
Zambia. We demand the immediate withdrawal of the
racist troops from the territory of Zambia and the
immediate cessation of the killing and terrorization
of Zambian nationals and the destruction of Zambian
property.

69. The recent events in Zimbabwe appear to have
further contributed to the panic in Pretoria and have
possibly hardened the attitude of those who are more
determined
than ever to maintain their bastion of
minority privilege in southern Africa. The Pretoria
dgime wishes at all costs to avoid the repetition in
Namibia
of the genuine people’s victory which has
taken place in Zimbabwe. The fallacy of propping np
puppets was disproved by the people’s verdict, as
it will be in Namibia and in South Africa itself.

75. My own Government, in particular, offers to the
Government and people of Zambia its total support
in their quest for justice and redress. We also wish to
renew the call my Government has so often made in
this very chamber for the imposition
of mandatory
economic sanctions against South Africa, for we
believe that such sanctions and their proper implementation are required to introduce stability and peace
in southern Africa.

70. As part of its “constellation
strategy” and to
ensure the reduction of neighbouring sovereign States
to a position of satrapies and dependencies, Pretoria
has become increasingly militaristic
and aggressive in
its posture. It wishes to make a political statement
and to establish military fuits acconzplis by its unceasing invasions, raids, bombardments
and other
attacks against the People’s Republic of Angola and
the Republic of Zambia.

76. How much blood must be shed in Africa before
those Western imperialist
countries which support
South Africa and guarantee the survival of its apartheid system agree to the imposition of total sanctions
against Pretoria? The world is already in turmoil, and
the connection between political and economic affairs
needs no further elucidation.

71. In keeping with its posture of paramountcy in
southern Africa, South Africa mounted an offensive

77. We need action now: action that will contribute
to stability in our region, action that will safeguard
8

its
‘IY

an
L’S
he
1st
gs
3n
an

ist
to
es
ist
m
im
re
in
ns
tls
:ir
Ild
:ir
de
ire
br
s

b”,‘
1st
he
he
3n
an
he
)rt
to
in
ry
Ye
lece
re
,rt
vflS

Id
rs
te
rd

/

the sovereignty and territorial integrity of front-line
States under attack by South Africa, action that will
protect Zambia from future attack, and action that will
lead to majority rule in those areas of southern Africa
that are still denied it.
78, Our vision of the United Nations is predicated
on a vision of justice. And a vision of justice is necessary for a vision of peace. We, the front-line States,
make this demand for Zambia, for ourselves, for

southern Africa, for our African continent and for the
entire third world. A /MU ~ontinun.
The meeting I’OSP at 6.45 pm.

NOTE

I A/34/542,

annex,sect.I, para.78.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,
New

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
aup&
des ventes, New York ou Genbve.

DES NATIONS

sont en vente dans les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

et Ies agences
ii : Nations

dCpositaires
du
Unies, Section

RSABH)II(
OpraHrraaqrru
O~T~C~AH~HH~IS
Haquti
MOKHO
KY~WT~ B KHHMILIK
Mara3HHax
H areHTCmax
BO BC~X pakoHax
mupa.
H~BO~NT~
cnpaoKw
06 HBAaHUfiX
B
BauleM
KHHXHOM
MarawHe
wm ~HIIHP~
no anpecy:
Opranuaauufl
OWL~AHH~HH~IX
Ham%
Cewm
no npoAame
mAasuR,
HLWJ-Ffop~
wnu Xemsa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
estAn en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00300

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Secci6n
de Ventas,

83-61462--AuW~

19*&
