S/2021/152

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 February 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 18 February 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by
Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, as well as the
statements delivered by the representatives of China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland,
Kenya, Mexico, the Niger, Norway, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America and Viet Nam, in connection with the video-teleconference
on “The situation concerning Iraq” convened on Tuesday, 16 February 2021. A
statement was also delivered by the representative of Iraq.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
the briefing and these statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Barbara Woodward
President of the Security Council

21-02364 (E) 220221 180321

*2102364*

S/2021/152

Annex I
Briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq, Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert
Allow me to begin by condemning last night’s deadly rocket attack on Erbil.
Such reckless attempts to inflame tensions pose grave threats to Iraq’s stability.
Close collaboration between Baghdad and Erbil in order to bring the culprits to
justice is now of the greatest importance.
With regard to the ongoing impact of the pandemic, we have welcomed a new
year in which Iraqis hope to turn the page on a number of fronts: recovery from the
pandemic, elections, economic reform, strengthening the rule of law and delivering
a more secure environment for all. While 2021 presents many opportunities for
profound, positive change in those and other areas, much work remains to be done.
As I pointed out in my most recent briefing to the Security Council (S/2020/1144,
annex I), the impact of the multiple, interlinked crises afflicting Iraq will be lasting.
Decisive and concerted action is therefore all the more urgent.
Regarding the economy, Iraq continues to experience acute financial and
economic difficulties, as reflected by the exceptional devaluation of the Iraqi dinar
by more than 20 per cent in late December. Nevertheless, a nearly 40 per cent increase
in oil revenues since November 2020 has eased the liquidity crisis, providing some
breathing room for the Government. The projected continued increase in oil prices
is expected to allow the Government to move forward on pressing matters, such as
public service delivery and civil servant salaries.
However, unfortunately, very little progress has been made on the
implementation of much-needed reform measures, as described in last year’s
economic white paper. It therefore bears repeating that Iraq can afford neither
continued dependence on resource extraction nor the excessive burden of an outsized
public sector. As always, the fight against economic and political corruption, the
promotion of robust governance, transparency and accountability must all be the
watchwords accompanying such reform.
As I have consistently pointed out in the past, numerous opportunities for
meaningful and necessary reforms have been wasted since 2003. It is past time to
prioritize sustainable economic diversification as well as the development of a valueadding, employment-generating private sector. I repeat: a dependence on volatile
commodity prices is no strategy at all and, ultimately, it can only backfire.
On the budget and relations between Baghdad and Erbil, agreement on the
2021 budget law requires reconciliation and compromise between Baghdad and
Erbil. In that context, I regret to again report that a final, durable agreement on
budgetary and larger issues remains elusive. The harsh reality is that constructive
negotiations between Baghdad and Erbil continue to be hampered by laws missing
since 2005, for instance on oil and revenue sharing. Other areas of contention also
include the disputed territories.
To date, no agenda or timetable has been set to address those outstanding issues.
Those who followed the recent budgetary negotiations closely will have realized that
the negotiations were not just centred on technical questions, such as barrels per
day. They were also inherently political — about deeper misgivings and mistrust.
Given the abundant lessons that Iraq’s history offers, many consider the current state
of affairs particularly disappointing. Let me again emphasize that a positive, stable
relationship between federal Iraq and the Kurdistan region is absolutely essential
to the stability of the whole country. And, of course, enhancing and strengthening
Iraq’s federal system require concessions on both sides and practising what one
preaches. It requires the responsible use of moderate language by all.
2/35

21-02364

S/2021/152

Turning to the electoral calendar, the Council of Ministers, in consultation
with the Independent High Electoral Commission, decided on a new date for
Iraq’s elections — 10 October 2021 — four months later than originally planned.
Meanwhile, Parliament passed the legislation necessary to finance the elections, and
the countrywide registration of candidates and alliances, as well as voter registration
updates, are under way. However, Parliament has not yet finalized the outstanding
Federal Supreme Court law. As the Court certifies election results, further delays
cannot be accepted. I would like to urge all parties to proceed immediately; failure
to do so will not be understood.
For credible elections to take place, it is imperative that parties and candidates
operate in a free and safe environment. The same goes for members of the media. In
that regard, the recent incidents are highly troubling, to say the least.
With that in mind, I call on all parties, stakeholders and authorities to come
together, agree on a code of conduct and allow all Iraqi candidates to operate freely,
irrespective of ethnicity, gender, language, religion, belief or background. Any Iraqi
who wishes to participate in the elections as a candidate or a campaigner must be
able to do so without fear of intimidation, attack, abduction or assassination. It goes
without saying that voters must feel entirely free to choose their preferred candidates.
A request from the Government of Iraq for electoral observation is currently
before the Security Council. I understand that a decision has not yet been made, but I
would like to take this opportunity to emphasize the importance of obtaining clarity.
As I address the Council, I would also like to underline that, no matter what the
Council’s response is, the elections will be Iraqi-led and Iraqi-owned at all times. I
sincerely hope that all of Iraq’s political leadership truly takes that to heart. Equally
important, yet not always fully understood, is the fact that the United Nations does
not take sides. Our independence and impartiality define us.
I have come to realize that facts do not always prevail. On the contrary,
sometimes facts are easily overtaken by perceptions, which, in turn, can morph into
false, even dangerous, but accepted realities. As I said last time, misinformation and
conspiracies are poisonous. Credible elections require collective, concerted, timely
and transparent efforts, with all parties, authorities and stakeholders assuming their
respective responsibilities in the service of the Iraqi people.
I must say that, after weeks of confusing declarations, I am encouraged by
the very recent statements made by some senior Iraqi political leaders, clearly
emphasizing the importance of credible elections and calling for the unity of the
State and the nation, with an inclusive national identity.
Turning to politics and domestic and social issues, on the pressing need for
greater transparency, justice and accountability, let me clearly state that repression,
violations of fundamental freedoms, including the freedoms of expression and
peaceful assembly, enforced disappearances and targeted killings, have no place
in a democracy. Unfortunately, transparency, justice and accountability continue to
remain largely absent throughout Iraq, including in the Kurdistan region, particularly
when it comes to the repression of public protests. If that does not change, sooner or
later public anger will erupt yet again.
With regard to armed groups, spoilers and the security and penal environment,
although Iraqis marked the third anniversary of the territorial defeat of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) this past December, the heinous suicide attacks
on a market in Baghdad, which killed at least 30 people and injured more than 100,
painfully demonstrated that violent extremism has not been vanquished. They were
a callous act of cowardice and a stark reminder that Iraq cannot rest on its laurels.
Of course, strengthening safety and security is as much about addressing the root
21-023643/35

S/2021/152

causes of extremism as it is about the immediate ability to respond to threats on
the ground.
Despite operating in a uniquely complex geopolitical context, Iraqi leaders
continue to maintain open relations in the service of a foreign policy that emphasizes
the sovereignty of Iraq. As Council members have heard me underline before, the
centrality of Iraq to regional stability cannot be overstated. Iraq must build its
domestic resilience and be shielded from rivalries. That responsibility, of course, is
shared first and foremost by the Iraqis themselves, but also by regional stakeholders
and the international community as a whole. Once again, reckless attempts to
inflame tensions, such as last night’s rocket attack on Erbil, pose grave threats to
Iraq’s stability.
Turning now to the humanitarian situation, when I last briefed the Security
Council the Iraqi Government had recently renewed its efforts to close camps for
internally displaced Iraqis, many of them women and children. Camp closures
have been ongoing for the past three months, and the possibility of further closures
is imminent.
In November, members heard me affirm our understanding of the Iraqi
interest in ending displacement, but I also emphasized that such closures should not
lead to unwanted outcomes, such as secondary displacement, or people returning
to areas without sufficient shelter or basic services. However, as we speak, that is
unfortunately happening.
Today I can only repeat myself: the haste and the opacity surrounding camp
closure decisions are of great concern to many. Once again, I would like to warn
against decisions that could easily precipitate another crisis. To cut a long story
short, closing camps cannot be an objective in and of itself. Instead, the focus must
be on safe and dignified measures to solve displacement. We accordingly urge the
Iraqi authorities to rapidly adopt and roll out their national plan for durable solutions.
On a separate but related note, I would also like to remind the authorities of
the approximately 30,000 Iraqis residing in the Al-Hol camp, in Syria, including a
number of non-ISIL-affiliated Iraqi humanitarian cases. As we all know, the Al-Hol
camp continues to be a ticking time bomb. If it goes off, the impact will be immense.
Like any nation, Iraq has a responsibility to take back its citizens, starting with the
humanitarian cases. Many promises have been made, and it is truly time to live up
to them. Again, non-ISIL-affiliated humanitarian cases must urgently be tackled,
without excuses.
With regard to Sinjar, as I have said before, signing off on the October
agreement was just a very first step. Visiting Sinjar last month, I again had an
opportunity to engage with Sinjari representatives and officials. One thing is clear:
much work lies ahead. Spoilers, domestic and external, continue to confuse the
scene. I would therefore yet again like to stress the importance of establishing stable
security structures without further delay, followed by a unified administration.
There is undoubtedly a pressing need to do more, in unity and at a faster pace.
I will now turn to the issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals
and missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives. Despite the
continued restrictions on movement, the Tripartite Commission and the Technical
Subcommittee successfully held semi-remote meetings. The Commission confirmed
the formal closure of case files for 20 Kuwaiti missing persons. That is significant
progress 16 years after the last identification. I extend my deepest condolences to the
families of the victims, who waited three decades for that conclusion.
4/35

21-02364

S/2021/152

The sustained investigative work of the Iraqi Defence Ministry exemplifies
Iraq’s commitment to that file. The long-standing cooperation between Iraq and
Kuwait, with strong support from the Tripartite Commission and the International
Committee of the Red Cross, is clearly bearing fruit. I call on all partners to seize the
momentum of the recent progress to further advance the search for missing persons.
In conclusion, allow me to reassert that credible elections require the collective
effort and commitment of all Iraqis. For the elections to be trusted, unfounded
theories must be disproved, baseless accusations refuted and intimidation replaced
with accountability. Transparency must rule, and loyalties cannot be for sale. In this
all-important election year, I am hopeful that Iraqis can continue to count on the
Council’s steadfast support and solidarity.

21-023645/35

S/2021/152

Annex II
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
[Original: English and Chinese]
I thank the Special Representative for her briefing, and I welcome the
Permanent Representative of Iraq to this meeting.
Currently, the political process in Iraq is at a critical stage, coupled with a
complex security environment and a severe economic and humanitarian situation.
The international community should fully respect the wishes of the Iraqi people and
support the Iraqi Government in properly tackling the various internal and external
challenges, safeguarding national security and stability and achieving economic and
social development. In that regard, I would like to reiterate our appreciation and
support to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and to the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq for their work. In connection with the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2021/120) and the briefing by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, I would like to make the following observations.
First, the international community should create a favourable atmosphere
for Iraq’s political process and national reconciliation. Holding early elections
is Iraq’s most important political agenda this year. It is also an important step in
Iraq’s transition. We commend Iraq’s finalization of the relevant legislation and its
active advancement of electoral preparations. We hope that the elections will be
held smoothly so as to achieve the vision of the Iraqi people. As a token of support,
China donated remote video-conferencing systems and office computers to the
Independent High Electoral Commission of Iraq at the beginning of this month to
support the preparations for the elections.
Recently, Iraq once again wrote to the President of the Security Council
with regard to election assistance (see S/2021/135, annex). In the light of the United
Nations practice on electoral assistance, members of the Council should consider
political, security, legal and budgetary factors, among others, and carefully study
and discuss Iraq’s request.
Enhancing unity and solidarity among the parties in Iraq, achieving
inclusiveness and reconciliation and accelerating integration and development are
not only in the fundamental interests of the Iraqi people, but also conducive to
regional peace and stability. We support the further improvement of the relationship
between the federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government, which
should continue their communication and dialogue on revenue sharing and budget
allocation in the joint pursuit of sustainable solutions. China condemns the rocket
attack that occurred near Erbil International Airport yesterday, and we oppose any
actions that aggravate tensions in Iraq.
Secondly, the international community should support Iraq in consolidating its
counter-terrorism achievements and safeguarding national security. China resolutely
opposes all forms of terrorism and strongly condemns the suicide-bombing attack
in Baghdad on 21 January. The international community should continue to support
Iraq in dealing with the threat of terrorism and crack down on the remnants of such
terrorist organizations as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. It should assist
Iraq in solving the problem of foreign terrorist fighters and consolidating the hardwon achievements in countering terrorism. It is essential to actively support Iraq
in holding terrorists accountable, fully respect Iraqi judicial sovereignty and avoid
double standards on counter-terrorism issues.
6/35

21-02364

S/2021/152

China commends the development of mutually beneficial and friendly relations
between Iraq and countries of the region. We agree with Secretary-General Guterres
in his report that all the parties concerned should adhere to the principle of goodneighbourliness and friendship, jointly tackle cross-border challenges and effectively
respect the territorial sovereignty of the countries concerned. Any military action
on Iraqi territory must obtain the consent of the Iraqi Government. China welcomes
the close cooperation between Iraq and Kuwait on the issue of missing persons and
property and hopes that progress will continue to be made in relevant efforts.
Thirdly, the international community should help Iraq fight the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, develop the country’s economy and improve people’s
livelihoods. For a while now, low oil prices and the spread of the pandemic have
posed daunting challenges to the reconstruction and development of Iraq. We have
noticed that the Iraqi Government is making efforts to strengthen the prevention and
control of the pandemic and is taking multiple measures to stabilize the economy.
The international community should actively fulfil its commitments, continue to
provide assistance to Iraq, support the reconstruction of key infrastructure, promote
economic diversification, enhance public-service capacity and improve the situation
of vulnerable groups, including internally displaced persons.
Over the years, China has provided vigorous support for Iraq’s reconstruction
and development through pragmatic cooperation in various forms. Since the outbreak
of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have stood firmly with the people and the Government
of Iraq. We immediately dispatched a team of experts to train medical professionals
for the country, built a testing laboratory and donated epidemic-prevention supplies.
In January of this year, humanitarian aid supplies such as ambulances and generators
were delivered to Iraq. Some 50,000 doses of COVID-19 vaccine will be donated to
Iraq in the near future. China will continue to work with the international community
to help the people and the Government of Iraq cope with difficulties and challenges
and achieve peace, stability and development at an early date.

21-023647/35

S/2021/152

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I would like to thank Special Representative Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for
her briefing and for the excellent work she is doing.
We express our solidarity with and support for the Iraqi Government, which
is facing political, economic and security challenges, as well as the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
It is essential that all Iraqi stakeholders contribute to improving the environment
for holding credible, transparent and inclusive parliamentary elections, which are
crucial for restoring trust in Iraq’s political system. We welcome the finalization of
electoral legislation and call for continued technical preparations for the elections
in close cooperation with the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).
Iraq’s request for UNAMI to play a role in observing the elections has been
noted. The Security Council must seriously consider the options for responding to
Iraq’s request.
We fully support the steps the Government of Iraq is taking towards making
urgently needed reforms. We call upon the Government to implement the economic
reforms proposed in its White Paper, to take additional measures to improve
governance and the rule of law and to bring all armed forces under State control.
The ongoing terrorist attacks in Iraq, including against diplomatic missions
and convoys, are deeply concerning. We strongly condemn yesterday’s deadly rocket
attack in Erbil. In the context of the recent terror attack in Baghdad, we reiterate our
continued support for Iraq’s security and the fight against Da’esh. We also reiterate
the need for all actors to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq and
refrain from any military action that would threaten the stability of the country.
We welcome the appointment of the third female member of the Iraqi Cabinet
and support the call of the President of Iraq to develop programmes to support women’s
economic, social and political empowerment. With regard to the Government’s
efforts to combat COVID-19, more attention must be paid to the impact of the crisis
on women and children, who continue to be affected the most.
We are concerned about the ongoing violence against protesters, civil society
activists and journalists. We urge the Government of Iraq to take further steps to
ensure accountability for all violations and protect the freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly. We welcome the engagement of the Government of Iraq with
the Committee on Enforced Disappearances and urge the Government to adopt
legislation on protection from enforced disappearance.
On the issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, we welcome
the identification of 20 Kuwaiti missing persons recovered in Iraq. Hopefully
this breakthrough will give impetus to further developments in this important
humanitarian cooperation between the Governments of the two States.

8/35

21-02364

S/2021/152

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for her briefing. I
would like to assure her of France’s full support in the conduct of her mission.
We are at a turning point in the future of Iraq. The population has expressed
legitimate aspirations to make the country more democratic, more just and more
sovereign. It is the duty of the international community to accompany Iraq on this
path. This means, first of all, that we need to make sure the elections in October take
place. The Iraqi Government has expressed its sovereign desire to see the United
Nations involved in observing the upcoming elections. It is the responsibility of the
Security Council to provide a response that lives up to Iraq’s expectations, bearing in
mind the strategic stakes that those elections represent for the future of the country
and for the stability of the region. France will participate in this discussion, as it
has done in Brussels, to defend the idea of a European contribution to observing the
elections. This is a matter of urgency. We must act.
Assisting Iraq also means standing with it to ensure that its security,
sovereignty and territorial integrity are preserved. The 21 January attack in Baghdad
demonstrates that the Da’esh threat continues to exist and has even gotten worse, with
the Iraqi population as the primary victim. Preserving the international coalition’s
ability to act alongside the Iraqi security forces is essential if the progress made in
recent years is not to be jeopardized.
France condemns in the strongest possible terms the rocket fire that hit Erbil
last night, which killed one person and wounded several. We express our solidarity
with the Iraqi Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government. The Iraqi
Government should also have our full support in its efforts to put an end to the
destabilizing activities of certain armed groups, which, notably, have in recent
months attacked diplomatic targets.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/120) also notes continued incursions
into the north of the country, which is a worrisome situation. The Iraqi Government’s
diplomacy of balance and good neighbourliness has our full support. Iraq’s neighbours
must accept the country’s outstretched hand.
Assisting Iraq means speaking the truth about what remains to be done.
Specifically, I am thinking of the fight against economic and political corruption,
which are paralysing the country. I am also thinking of the fight against impunity
for crimes committed against protesters. Nine months after the announcement
of the establishment of a fact-finding body, it is time for that body to finally be
made operational.
I also have in mind the situation of displaced persons. It is essential that their
return be voluntary and that it be carried out in safety and dignity. It is essential
that they be allowed to continue to receive assistance after they leave the camps,
including health-care assistance, which is all the more crucial in the context of the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
It is the responsibility of the international community to contribute to helping
stabilize and rebuild the regions liberated from Da’esh. France is playing its part to
that end with a hospital project in Sinjar, whose cornerstone was laid on 24 November.
Finally, the dialogue between Baghdad and Erbil needs to make much more
rapid progress. It is urgent that an agreement be found on budget transfers.
21-023649/35

S/2021/152

Before I conclude, I would like to say a word on the repatriation of the remains
of Kuwaiti nationals who disappeared in Iraq. France welcomes the cooperation
between Iraq and Kuwait, which has allowed for the identification of 20 Kuwaiti
nationals. We hope that process will continue.
Despite the many challenges, France is determined to support Iraq. We hope
that, when the time comes, all of Iraq’s friends will be able to express their political
and material support for the sovereignty of this country.

10/35

21-02364

S/2021/152

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, T. S. Tirumurti
I thank Special Representative Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her
comprehensive briefing. We appreciate the close cooperation of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) with the Government of Iraq in providing the
assistance needed to tackle the multiple challenges it is facing.
Let me begin by expressing my deep condolences to the Government and the
people of Iraq and the families of those who were killed in the terrorist attacks in
Baghdad on 21 January. We strongly condemn those attacks on innocent civilians
and express our solidarity with the Government and the people of the country.
I also wish a speedy recovery to those who were grievously injured in those
despicable attacks.
The attacks are a stark reminder that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) continues to pose a significant challenge to peace and stability in Iraq and the
region. Terrorism remains the gravest threat to humankind and endangers its very
foundation. It is important for the international community to continue its support
for the Iraqi security forces and the Government so that they can credibly address the
menace of terrorism and provide an environment free of terror and fear.
The report (see S/2021/68) of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities,
mentions that the threat posed by ISIL to international peace and security is again
on the rise and that the majority of the active 10,000 ISIL fighters in the region
are in Iraq. This is deeply concerning. The focus of the Security Council should
be on eliminating every threat posed by ISIL and other terrorist groups, in Iraq
and elsewhere in the world. In order to ensure effective action, a holistic approach
in the global fight against terrorism needs to be adopted. In that context, my
Minister for External Affairs proposed an eight-point action plan for effectively
countering terrorism at the Security Council’s ministerial meeting last month
(see S/2021/48, annex 5).
The upcoming parliamentary elections in Iraq, scheduled for October 2021,
will be a valuable opportunity to strengthen the roots of democracy in the country.
A transparent, free, fair and inclusive election, conducted in a violence-free
environment and with high voter turnout, will empower the new Government to
implement reforms, improve accountability, meet the genuine aspirations of Iraqi
people, especially women and youth, and promote inclusiveness and reconciliation.
International assistance to the Independent High Electoral Commission of Iraq and
observation of the electoral process by the United Nations would also enhance the
credibility of the elections and build confidence about the integrity of the results
among the Iraqi people.
In that regard, India fully supports the Government of Iraq’s request for United
Nations observation of the upcoming elections in the country. We will support any
process that respects the country’s sovereignty, strengthens the democratic exercise
and makes it credible, and therefore acceptable to the people of Iraq. In line with
our strong democratic traditions, India has contributed to democratic and electoral
processes in Iraq by training Independent High Electoral Commission officials and
sending election observers.
21-0236411/35

S/2021/152

We are pleased to note the positive progress made in preparation for the
upcoming elections. The passage of the electoral law and allocation of funds to the
Independent High Electoral Commission are significant steps in that regard. It is
important that the remaining conditions for smooth elections, such as the completion
of biometric voter registration and agreement on the members of the Federal Supreme
Court, are also fulfilled in a timely manner. We acknowledge the valuable support
provided by UNAMI in the electoral process.
We commend the concerted efforts of the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan
Regional Government to resolve all outstanding issues. We encourage both sides
to continue constructive dialogue so as to reach a mutually satisfactory long-term
sustainable agreement on these issues, including on revenue-sharing and budget
allocations. We are also pleased to see the commencement of the implementation of
the Sinjar agreement.
The continued attacks on diplomatic establishments and convoys by nonState armed groups, including yesterday’s attack in Erbil, are a serious challenge to
maintaining the fragile peace that prevails in the country. We appreciate the efforts
by the Government of Iraq to provide protection to all diplomatic missions. We hope
that a long-term solution can be found to this issue.
We applaud the Government of Iraq’s determined efforts to maintain friendly
and cordial ties with its neighbours and other countries of the region. The stability
of the country should be of paramount importance to the region, and Iraq should not
become a theatre for regional or global conflicts. I reaffirm India’s steadfast support
for Iraq’s sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
We welcome the cooperation between the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait
in finding an amicable solution on the issue of missing Kuwaiti persons and
third-country nationals, as well as the return of Kuwaiti property. The recent
identification of Kuwaiti nationals from the remains sent by Iraqi authorities last
year resulted in solace for the families of the deceased. Besides being important
from the humanitarian perspective, this has furthered reconciliation between the
two countries. We recognize the significant support provided by the International
Committee of the Red Cross to facilitate progress in this matter.
India’s friendship with Iraq is steeped in history. India has always been
supportive of a democratic, pluralistic, federal, unified and prosperous Iraq
fulfilling the aspirations of its citizens. Our people-to-people ties and trade relations
are very strong. We have always responded to the urgent needs of Iraq for relief
and reconstruction and contributed $30 million. That includes supporting the
International Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq, a contribution through the World
Food Programme and capacity-building under our Indian Technical and Economic
Cooperation programme.
India is the preferred destination for medical treatment for many Iraqi friends,
who visit every year. That cooperation has continued even during the coronavirus
disease pandemic. I am also happy to note that under the Air Bubble Arrangement
between the countries, more than 10,000 Iraqi nationals have travelled to India
during the last four months alone for medical treatment.
The Government of Iraq is taking encouraging steps to achieve stability,
reconciliation, peace and development in the country. As a reliable and longstanding
friend, India will remain a willing partner of Iraq in its nation-building endeavours
to deliver prosperity to its people.

12/35

21-02364

S/2021/152

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
I want to say a special thank you to Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert
for her really excellent briefing this morning. Ireland strongly supports the important
work that she and her team are doing, so I thank her again.
Before I begin my statement, I also wanted to recognize the dedicated service
of Ms. Walpole as Deputy Special Representative and to congratulate her successor,
Ms. Gísladóttir. We wish her all the best in her new role at a critical juncture for
Iraq. I have to say that it is a very welcome development to see the continuation of an
all-female leadership at the team at the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI).
I want to begin by strongly condemning the terrorist attack carried out at a
Baghdad market on 21 January, as well as the continued attacks by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) across the country. Our condolences and sympathies
are with the families of the victims and all those affected by this senseless violence.
Just last week, the Council heard that the threat posed by ISIL has increased
during the pandemic and that Iraq, along with Syria, remains the primary focus of
ISIL objectives.
Of course, we also condemn in the strongest possible terms the rocket attack
carried out overnight in Erbil. That has tragically, as we heard, resulted in loss of
life. We encourage cooperation between the Federal Government and the Kurdistan
Regional Government towards a swift investigation into that attack in order to hold
perpetrators to account.
Ireland firmly rejects any attempt to destabilize Iraq on its pathway to a more
peaceful future. The Council is united in its support for Iraq’s security and territorial
integrity. We are also united in the fight against terrorism, which the international
community remains committed to countering in accordance with international law,
including international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law.
As Iraq’s Yazidi community gathered just last week to bury their loved ones,
let me echo Nadia Murad’s clarion call for the Council to ensure that the perpetrators
of horrific crimes against that community are brought to account.
While accountability is essential, the manner in which we pursue justice
is also important. Ireland remains opposed to the use of the death penalty in all
circumstances, and we regret the recent executions in Iraq.
Ireland fully supports Iraq’s democratic processes. We welcome Prime
Minister Al-Kadhimi’s commitment to important political reforms and to holding
early elections, and we take note of the decision to postpone those elections
until October.
Important work clearly remains to be done to ensure that the Iraqi people are
empowered to vote freely and safely, and all actors in Iraq have a responsibility to
ensure that. The recent finalization of electoral legislation is very welcome, and the
international community, too, now must play its part.
I would like to acknowledge the letter received last week from Foreign
Minister Hussein regarding electoral observation. We are carefully considering this
important issue and look forward to further discussion on this matter.
I want to underline today that the political process must be inclusive if it is
be successful. Women, young people and minority communities should be included
21-0236413/35

S/2021/152

at every stage of the electoral process. We are pleased to see that the Government
of Iraq has paid particular attention to promoting the inclusivity of elections in this
preparatory phase, and we urge the Government to continue to prioritize this as the
process continues.
Civil society and freedom of assembly are crucial to the democratic process.
Just like the Special Representative has said to us now, Ireland is concerned by the
continued targeting of protesters, activists, human rights defenders and journalists
in Iraq. Those who perpetrate violence against people exercising their rights of
freedom of expression and peaceful assembly must be held to account. We call upon
the Federal and Regional Governments to end impunity and ensure the realization of
those fundamental human rights for all.
We encourage the Iraqi authorities to continue engaging with UNAMI on a
strategy to create durable solutions for the safe, voluntary and dignified return of
internally displaced persons. While for many Iraqis the idea of returning home is a
cherished prospect, there are also considerable challenges and obstacles to overcome.
As the Secretary-General said in paragraph 82 of his report (S/2021/120), “a new
crisis in the form of secondary displacement should be avoided at all costs”.
Finally, I want to end by welcoming the positive news of a significant
breakthrough in recent weeks with the identification of 20 Kuwaiti missing persons by
Kuwaiti authorities following the successful transfer of remains by the Government
of Iraq in recent years. That is testament to the commitment of the Governments of
both Iraq and Kuwait to resolve outstanding issues and address the tragic legacy of
the past. We commend the tireless work of the International Committee of the Red
Cross and UNAMI to support them. We hope that the recent developments will bring
some closure to the families and loved ones of those who lost their lives.

14/35

21-02364

S/2021/152

Annex VII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Michael Kiboino
I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jeanine HennisPlasschaert for her insightful briefing. We also take note with appreciation of the
Secretary-General’s report on the progress made towards fulfilling the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) (S/2021/120).
On the political situation, Kenya commends the Iraqi authorities on the
preparations for free and fair elections later in the year. Those elections should
provide an opportunity for trust-building and the demonstration of inclusivity
and transparency.
We encourage the Government and all the stakeholders to work together to
maintain conditions conducive to the elections and voters. In that regard, Kenya’s
delegation supports the request of the Iraqi Government for a strengthened role of
the United Nations in the electoral process in a manner that the Iraqi Government
deems viable and within the capability of the United Nations.
The imperative for durable solutions aimed at social cohesion for all
vulnerable persons and groups, including displaced persons and returnees,
cannot be overemphasized. Kenya welcomes President Barham Salih’s statement
at the end of 2020 affirming the need to take all measures necessary to end
violence and discrimination against women and for the development of effective
programmes, plans and mechanisms that support women’s economic, social, and
political empowerment. We encourage the Government to continue undertaking
structural reforms that strengthen institutional capacity for the achievement of social
cohesion and inclusivity.
We welcome the recent achievements in the identification of the remains of 20
Kuwaitis and third-party nationals and the subsequent closure of those files.
Kenya is encouraged by the Government’s reforms aimed at turning the
economy around. Although many economies globally are going through lean periods
because of the coronavirus disease pandemic, the situation in Iraq is compounded by
several security dilemmas, including the overspill of foreign tensions and terrorist
activities by the Islamic State and other terrorist networks.
Indeed, 10 December 2020 marked the third anniversary of the military
defeat of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). However, ISIL remains
an existential threat whose unrelenting depredations and other forms of inhuman
violence continue to ravage innocent civilians in Iraq. Kenya condemns in the
strongest terms those heinous acts, including the 21 January killing of 32 people in
Baghdad, as well as yesterday’s rocket attack at the airport in Erbil. We convey our
sincere condolences to the affected.
Kenya urges the international community and the Council in particular to
maintain the highest levels of vigilance against ISIL- and Al-Qaida-inspired terrorism
not only in Iraq but also everywhere else around the world. We must redouble efforts
to support Iraq to become a net exporter of peace.
We are also greatly concerned by the attacks on diplomatic missions and
convoys in Iraq. In that regard, it is essential to pay heed to the Secretary-General’s
call for further concerted efforts by the Government, working with all relevant
actors, to ensure the protection of all diplomatic missions and personnel in Iraq.
21-0236415/35

S/2021/152

In conclusion, Kenya calls upon all actors to uphold the political independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Iraq and emphasizes that all actions
should be motivated by the interests of the Iraqi people.
I reiterate Kenya’s support for the continued work of UNAMI in its contribution
to the Government and the people of Iraq in their quest for sustainable peace
and security.

16/35

21-02364

S/2021/152

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramirez
[Original: Spanish]
I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, for her detailed presentation on the situation in Iraq. I also
take this opportunity to reiterate our support for the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and to welcome the representative of Iraq to
this meeting of the Security Council.
Mexico condemns in the strongest terms any act of violence, and here we
would recall the press release issued by the Council on 22 January (SC/14421), on
the cowardly attack on a Baghdad market. We also condemn the most recent attack
in Erbil and extend our deepest condolences to the families of the victims.
We have taken note of the latest report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2522 (2020) (S/2021/120). In that regard, Mexico
reiterates its concern about the abuse of invocations of Article 51 of the Charter of
the United Nations in the context of the fight against terrorism. That practice runs
the risk of de facto broadening the exceptions to the general prohibition of the use of
force, as contained in Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter. It is an irregularity that
in our opinion should not be accepted.
On the other hand, we welcome Iraq’s call to hold parliamentary elections
next October. We note that, despite the challenges posed by the coronavirus disease
pandemic, progress has been made in organizing the electoral process. We would
highlight the approval of the electoral law, the demarcation of electoral districts and
the biometric registration of voters. We also applaud the fact that 25 per cent of seats
in the next parliament have been reserved for women and that, in addition, seats have
been reserved for minority representatives.
My delegation acknowledges the financial contributions made by Germany,
the United States, France, Norway, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom and the
European Union towards Iraq’s electoral processes. We urge the Iraqi Government
to continue to strengthen its institutional capacities and to promote the development
of human resources in the electoral field.
Mexico also welcomes the commitment of the Iraqi Government to promoting
the empowerment of women through their greater participation in the political,
economic and social life of the country. In that regard, we would highlight the recent
appointment of a new Minister of State as the third female Cabinet member in Iraq.
My delegation has also taken note of the negotiations between the central
Government of Baghdad and the Erbil Kurdistan Regional Government aimed at
resolving issues related to Government revenue and budget transfers to the Iraqi
Kurdistan region. We urge that those talks continue with a view to reaching a solution.
We have noted with concern the repression of public demonstrations and the
closing of media outlets. We call on the Iraqi Government to guarantee the exercise
of civil liberties, including freedom of demonstration and freedom of expression.
We call on the Iraqi authorities to release the detained protesters and to provide
information on the whereabouts of those still missing.
On 16 November, 21 people were executed for terrorist acts. Mexico
categorically rejects the application of the death penalty under any circumstances.
Capital punishment constitutes a violation of human rights; it is cruel, inhuman
and degrading treatment, with unalterable consequences that make it impossible to
21-0236417/35

S/2021/152

reverse potential judicial errors. Mexico calls on the Iraqi Government to promote
actions aimed at a moratorium on the application of the death penalty and its
eventual abolition.
Finally, Mexico commends the efforts of the Government of Iraq to strengthen
cooperation with regional partners such as Turkey, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, and
thereby promote stability in the region. In particular, we acknowledge the progress
made in the repatriation of the remains of Kuwaiti and third-country citizens,
thanks to the mediation of UNAMI and the International Committee of the Red
Cross. That step represents an important measure for re-establishing trust between
neighbouring countries.
Finally, Mexico includes the recent request of the Iraqi Government to extend
the mandate of UNAMI in view of the elections set to take place next October. We
will work closely and in coordination with the members of the Council in considering
such a request.

18/35

21-02364

S/2021/152

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: English and French]
I would like to thank Mrs. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her intervention
and congratulate her on the excellent work that she and her team are doing in a
particularly difficult environment.
I would also like to welcome the representative of Iraq to this meeting.
Iraq, as we well know, has come a long way and is trying to rebuild itself after
years of conflict. The Government’s efforts to address the multiple crises that the
country is facing and to steer it in a new direction are, to say the least, commendable.
Equally commendable are the efforts of the Iraqi authorities to develop friendly
and peaceful relations with neighbouring countries and expand their partnership
at the regional and global level. Those relations are indeed important to help Iraq
in its reconstruction efforts, particularly in the economic sector, but also in terms
of security.
With regard to the protection of human rights, my delegation deplores the
killings and attacks against human rights activists and defenders by unidentified
armed assailants. That remains a real source of concern for the Niger, and we
encourage the Government to take all the measures required by the situation to
honour its commitments to operationalize the body responsible for investigating the
killings of human rights activists and other defenders and bring the perpetrators
to justice.
My delegation remains equally concerned about the challenges faced by Iraqis
trying to exercise their rights to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly. As
the Secretary-General states in his report, “Respect for fundamental freedoms is
integral to the strengthening of public trust in State institutions.” (S/2021/120, para.
79) In that regard, we reiterate our call to the Government of Iraq to seek appropriate
solutions to protect all peaceful demonstrators, civil society activists and human
rights defenders in the exercise of their rights.
We also call on the Government of Iraq to take the necessary measures to
overcome the existing administrative and security difficulties in order to put an
end to the violations against children, as reflected in the Secretary-General’s latest
report on children and armed conflict in Iraq (S/2019/984).
With regard to the electoral process, we commend the efforts of the Iraqi
Government and the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for the
continuous support of the Independent High Electoral Commission in preparing for
the upcoming elections to ensure free, fair, inclusive and credible elections.
To that end, the Niger remains convinced that a sustainable process must
include Iraqi women and youth, particularly the Women’s Advisory Group. It is
also important to support women who play the role of informal leaders in their
communities during conflicts to transform that dynamism into a positive political
contribution. Therefore, we welcome the step taken to increase the diversity of
senior positions in the Iraqi Government, especially with the confirmation of the
third woman Cabinet member.
While the process of normalizing the situation in Iraq is in a crucial phase,
the Security Council and the international community should support the Iraqi
authorities in their legitimate quest for more democracy, peace and progress.
21-0236419/35

S/2021/152

On the issue of missing persons, property and archives from Kuwait and third
countries, my delegation welcomes the continued cooperation between Iraq and
Kuwait, despite the restrictions imposed by the coronavirus disease pandemic. We
also commend the determination of UNAMI, the Tripartite Commission and the
International Committee of the Red Cross for their efforts to move the issue forward.
In conclusion, it is highly regrettable that the transnational threat of terrorism
remains present in the country, with the recent terrorist attacks in Baghdad and
Erbil, claimed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). I would like to
reiterate that, as Iraq is trying to recover from the deep crisis it has been going
through in recent years, we must not lose sight of the fact that the victory over ISIL
is not synonymous with its total eradication in the country. Hence we call on the
Iraqi authorities and the international counter-ISIL coalition to remain vigilant and
continue the fight against terrorism in order to thwart its reconstruction ambitions.

20/35

21-02364

S/2021/152

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
First, I thank you, Special Representative of the Secretary-General HennisPlasschaert, for your briefing. We highly appreciate the work of United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and your support for the preparation of
national elections in October. Norway also fully supports Prime Minister AlKadhimi’s efforts in preparing for the elections. Free, fair and transparent elections
and an inclusive political process that ensures the participation of women are vital
for the integrity of, and public trust in, the electoral process.
We take note of the Iraqi request for election observation and look forward to
the Security Council’s discussion on how to best meet that request. We call on all
Iraqi stakeholders to ensure that all electoral and legal requirements are in place,
including the adoption of a Federal Supreme Court law.
The security situation in Iraq continues to be of grave concern, with continued
attacks against diplomatic missions and convoys. Norway condemns last night’s
rocket attacks on Erbil, which killed one civilian contractor and injured several
members of the Global Coalition to Counter Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant.
All efforts must be made to investigate and hold the responsible accountable. The
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), too, remains a serious threat, and our
condolences go to the victims and the families of the appalling suicide attacks
on 21 January.
Norway is committed to the Global Coalition to Counter ISIL, through which
we continue to support Iraq in its efforts to combat ISIL. Continued international
support to Iraq’s democratic process and its efforts to rebuild after the territorial
defeat of ISIL is vital. That includes significant stabilization and humanitarian
support. Iraqi ownership and commitment remain key to success.
Long-term stability cannot be achieved without addressing underlying causes
of conflict and instability. Those range from economic, social and political aspects to
water security issues and climate change. Although the coronavirus disease pandemic
is making the work to address those issues harder, we welcome the Government’s
efforts, including their plans for much-needed economic reform.
National dialogue and reconciliation remain vital for the stability of Iraq. We
call upon the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government to reach
an agreement on federal budget allocations and oil revenues. The Sinjar agreement
is a positive step towards peace and stability after much suffering, especially by the
Yazidi population. It is critical that the agreement be implemented through dialogue
with the affected parties and lead to rebuilding and the provision of basic services.
Continued focus on, and commitment to, the fight against sexual and gender-based
violence also remains important, both nationally and globally.
Allow me to also echo the concerns of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General about the humanitarian consequences of the hasty closing of
internally displaced persons camps. All returns must be safe, voluntary, dignified
and sustainable. We urge the Government to coordinate with the United Nations
and humanitarian organizations to that end. Furthermore, we remain concerned
by the reported abduction, torture and targeted killing of protesters and activists.
Perpetrators must be held accountable, and the right to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly must be ensured.
Norway welcomes the recent announcements regarding the identification
of human remains of 20 Kuwaiti and third-country nationals. We commend Iraq’s
commitment to cooperate with Kuwait and bring this humanitarian file to a close.
21-0236421/35

S/2021/152

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
We thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jeanine HennisPlasschaert for her briefing.
We support the efforts of the Government of Iraq to stabilize the difficult
situation, for a number of objective reasons. We understand that the problems facing
the Iraqi authorities cannot be resolved quickly. Measures are being taken to improve
the socioeconomic situation, but protests in the country continue. The situation has
been exacerbated by the sharp decline in Government revenues owing to falling oil
prices, as well as the spread of the coronavirus disease.
The fight against terrorism remains a pressing issue. Despite the successes
achieved by Iraqis in countering terrorism, the security situation in the country
remains fragile, in particular because of increasing insurgent activity. A sad example
of this is the recent dual attack in the centre of Baghdad, which claimed the lives
of 32 civilians, and yesterday’s attack in Erbil. We strongly condemn those terrorist
acts. At the same time, we are proceeding from the assumption that all those involved
in the fight against terrorism in Iraq must respect the sovereignty of the Iraqi State
and coordinate their actions with Baghdad.
There have also been attacks on civilian and military facilities on Iraqi
territory by the Global Coalition to Counter the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant.
The American Embassy and the motorcade of the British diplomatic mission were
attacked in Baghdad. We stand against such provocations.
We are convinced that inclusive dialogue can help resolve the remaining
internal problems. For our part, in our contacts with all political actors in Iraq, we
encourage them to seek compromise solutions. That said, we call on all external
stakeholders interested in stabilizing the domestic situation in Iraq to refrain from
steps that could negatively impact that process.
One of the priorities of Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi’s Cabinet is to prepare
for early parliamentary elections, which were recently postponed from June to
October. We continue to look into ways to engage the United Nations in the process
of organizing and holding the elections and are ready to discuss this issue with other
Security Council members.
We believe that further improvement in relations between Baghdad and Erbil
will help Iraq to strengthen security and effectively harness its economic potential
for the benefit of all its people.
We support the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq,
which can support reconciliation processes while respecting the sovereignty of the
country. The commitment of Baghdad and Kuwait City to a speedy resolution of all
problematic issues in the Iraq-Kuwait file is worthy of special support.
We reaffirm our consistent approach, according to which Iraq must not become
a platform for regional confrontation. We appreciate Baghdad’s principled position
in favour of building good-neighbourly relations. We also note Baghdad’s diplomatic
potential for promoting de-escalation in the region. We call on the international
community to engage in constructive cooperation to promote peace and stability
throughout the Middle East region, including on the basis of resolution 598 (1987)
and Russia’s collective security concept.
22/35

21-02364

S/2021/152

Annex XII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines to the United Nations, Halimah DeShong
We welcome the briefing by Special Representative Jeanine HennisPlasschaert and extend our gratitude to her and her team.
We begin by welcoming the positive milestones highlighted in the SecretaryGeneral’s most recent report (S/2021/120), particularly the Government’s efforts
towards the creation of a stable, secure and prosperous Iraq. This includes the steps
taken to increase diversity in senior positions within the Government and efforts to
strengthen relations with international partners, as well as countries in the region.
The Government of Iraq has continued its efforts towards the holding of
free, fair and credible elections, such as the finalization of the electoral legislation
to facilitate continued preparation for elections. We also welcome the critical role
played by the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in line with its
mandate, including electoral assistance. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines expresses
its support for the United Nations continued cooperation with the Iraqi Government
in that regard. We support, in so far as is feasible, the strengthening of the United
Nations engagement to assist the Government with the elections, thereby ensuring
the credibility and integrity of the electoral process. Notwithstanding this support,
however, we underscore that the upcoming elections are Iraqi-led and Iraqi-owned.
The path to reconstruction and peace is not without its challenges. While Iraq
was able to celebrate, on 10 December, the anniversary of the military defeat of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, security threats persist. It is disheartening
that insecurity and violence continue to impact civilians, including women and
children. It is also concerning that attacks against diplomatic missions and convoys
in Iraq have continued. These unjustifiable and reckless acts undermine all goodfaith efforts towards stability, and we call for the perpetrators to be identified and
held accountable. We call on the international community to lend support to the
Iraqi Government to strengthen its capacity, and on all actors within Iraq to work
with the Government to strengthen State control. Also critical to bolstering domestic
resilience is the need to collectively address the ongoing economic crisis, and we call
on international partners to support the Government’s efforts in this regard.
We welcome the progress made towards the identification of missing Kuwaiti
and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property. Furthermore, we
recognize the role of the Tripartite Commission, the International Committee of the
Red Cross and UNAMI in advancing this issue.
In conclusion, we affirm our support to UNAMI. We further emphasize
our solidarity with the Government of Iraq and its people as they endeavour to
consolidate peace, and recall the need to ensure the preservation of Iraq’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity.

21-0236423/35

S/2021/152

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Tunisia to the
United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), for her valuable briefing, and reiterate my
country’s support for that Mission. I welcome the participation of the representative
of Iraq, Ambassador Mohammed Bahr Aluloom.
Tunisia has been closely following the Iraqi Government’s efforts over the
recent period to consolidate political, economic and social reforms in response to the
aspirations of the Iraqi people.
As part of this approach to reform, we welcome the financial and economic
measures adopted to reform fiscal and monetary policy and advance profound
economic reforms. We also appreciate the bold decisions to combat corruption and
mismanagement, improve management performance and upgrade basic services,
thereby consolidating a vision for the future to build a developed and prosperous
Iraqi economy.
Meanwhile, the upcoming elections will mark an important milestone in
the process of consolidating political stability and national unity and reinforcing
the foundations of security and stability. While we welcome the progress made in
preparing for the elections, as noted in the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2522 (2020), we support the request by the Republic of
Iraq to strengthen the role of UNAMI to provide more guidance, support, technical
assistance and election observation.
We also note the meeting of the three Iraqi leaders with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. That meeting attested to the will and
readiness of Iraq to ensure the success of this important milestone by completing
voter registration and all technical operations and verifying legal and constitutional
references, in order to make it possible to hold transparent, fair and credible elections.
We also reaffirm our full solidarity with the Republic of Iraq in combating
the remnants of terrorist groups and thwarting their plots to undermine security
and stability.
In addition, Tunisia welcomes the Government’s efforts to strengthen the role
of Iraqi women and support their representation and active participation in decisionmaking. It also supports the Government’s continued efforts to take all necessary
measures, including by establishing effective programmes, plans and mechanisms
to eliminate violence and discrimination against women, thereby consolidating the
foundations of peace and stability.
With regard to relations between the Federal Government and the Kurdistan
Regional Government, we call on both parties to continue to cooperate and intensify
efforts to reach a sustainable and long-term agreement on issues of common concern.
Tunisia reaffirms its commitment to the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq, in line with the Charter of the United Nations, and calls
for dialogue and cooperation to resolve border issues.
With regard to Iraqi-Kuwaiti relations, we express our satisfaction with the
significant progress made on the humanitarian front with the identification of the
remains of 20 Kuwaiti and third-country nationals. In that context, we value the
24/35

21-02364

S/2021/152

cooperation between the two States and their tireless efforts to consolidate it further,
as well as the efforts by Iraq to uphold its obligations and continue the search for
missing persons and the Kuwaiti archives.

21-0236425/35

S/2021/152

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Barbara Woodward
The United Kingdom welcomes the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and the work of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Hennis-Plasschaert, and thanks Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Walpole for her service.
Iraq is at a critical juncture. It is essential that the elections in October be
free, fair and credible. Our commitment to the democratic process in Iraq remains
steadfast, and we look forward to further discussions on how the United Nations can
support the elections following Iraq’s request for United Nations observation.
Iraq faces an economic crisis, increased unemployment, poverty and food
insecurity. The Government of Iraq’s proposals for economic reform are welcome.
We now call on all parties to put aside their differences and agree a sustainable
budget that allows Iraq to build back better from the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Last month’s devastating attack in Baghdad demonstrates the importance of
the ongoing work of the Global Coalition to Defeat Da’esh, in close partnership with
the Iraqi security forces. We also condemn last night’s attack on coalition forces and
civilians in Erbil.
We are deeply troubled by the short notice and uncoordinated closure of camps
for internally displaced persons. We urge the Government of Iraq to coordinate with
the United Nations to ensure that all returns are safe, dignified and voluntary.
We welcome the Government of Iraq’s continued efforts to strengthen relations
with regional neighbours. We continue to reiterate the importance of dialogue and
cooperation between Iraq and Turkey to combat terrorism, ensure regional security
and protect civilians. We commend the shared commitment of the Iraqi and Kuwaiti
Governments to make progress on the file of missing Kuwaiti persons and property,
pursuant to resolution 2107 (2013).
The United Kingdom continues to support the Government of Iraq as it seeks
to deliver free, fair and inclusive elections, to combat terrorism and to implement
crucial economic reform.

26/35

21-02364

S/2021/152

Annex XV
Statement by the Acting Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations, Richard Mills
I thank you, Madam President, and thanks to the Special Representative
for her informative report. I also want to thank her and her staff for their ongoing
diligent efforts, even as the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the uncertainty of
the security situation complicate their mission.
Since this is the first time the Biden Administration addresses the issue of
Iraq in the Security Council, let me begin with laying out our goals for Iraq.
The Biden Administration supports a strategic partnership with a stable,
democratic Iraq. The Administration will be a steady, reliable partner that
supports Iraq’s anti-corruption and economic reform efforts, strengthens regional
relationships, holds accountable human rights violators and those who abuse
human rights, provides humanitarian assistance, backs efforts to control militias
and to control Iran’s destabilizing activities and advises and assists Iraq’s
counter-terrorism forces.
Among its top priorities, the United States will seek to help Iraq assert its
sovereignty in the face of enemies, at home and abroad, by preventing a resurgence
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams (ISIS) and working towards Iraq’s stability.
For the United States, this means supporting Iraq’s efforts to hold credible,
inclusive and peaceful elections. The Iraqi Government is taking firm steps towards
this goal, we believe. In late 2019, when Iraqis took to the streets demanding political
and economic reforms, the Iraqi Government responded, in part by planning early
elections, now scheduled for October 2021. These scheduled elections will be critical
in establishing a responsive and representative Government.
The United States welcomes the recent letter submitted to the Council by
the Government of Iraq requesting the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) to provide election observers for its October elections. We support
international observation of Iraqi elections to ensure that the elections are free, fair
and credible, and look forward to working with Iraq, the Council, fellow members
and the United Nations to determine the most feasible form such an effort can take.
UNAMI has already been providing, we believe, excellent technical
assistance to the Iraqi Government to ensure that the elections scheduled for October
are free and fair, and working with the Government to increase public trust in the
electoral process.
The United States recognizes and supports the critical role that UNAMI
plays in assisting the Government’s election preparations, which is why we are
providing a $9.7 million grant to support UNAMI in its efforts. We thank the other
countries that have supported UNAMI as well, but we also want to encourage all
international donors to contribute to UNAMI to help it and Iraq prepare for these
important elections.
The report we have just heard on elections preparations, however, again
highlighted the complicated situation in Iraq. It is essential to create a conducive
environment for elections so that they are credible, peaceful and inclusive. One of
the highest barriers to a conducive environment, however, is the presence of armed
militias, violent extremists and spoilers. Iraq’s electoral administration and key
security personnel should work closely to plan for and coordinate around securing
the elections, and this work must begin immediately alongside other preparations for
the electoral process.
21-0236427/35

S/2021/152

A conducive environment means that we must address Iran-backed militias
and Iran’s destabilizing activities in Iraq, as well as the remaining ISIS elements.
These groups undermine the public’s trust in the Government and in the October
2021 elections. They are killing Iraqi citizens and depriving Iraq of much-needed
economic relief and foreign investment. No one is immune. They also have
attacked United Nations convoys and targeted both diplomatic personnel and nongovernmental organizations seeking to assist Iraq and Iraqis. Just yesterday, as we
heard, an attack claimed one civilian contractor and injured several members of the
coalition, including one United States service member.
As Secretary Blinken said yesterday, the United States is outraged by the
rocket attack in the Iraqi Kurdistan region. We express our condolences to the loved
ones of the civilian contractor killed in this attack, to the others who were injured
and to the innocent Iraqi people and their families who are suffering from these acts
of violence. The United States pledges our support for all efforts to investigate and
hold accountable those responsible for these heinous actions.
We appreciate UNAMI’s ongoing documentation of humanitarian abuses and
human rights violations, as well as its accountability efforts, including supporting a
strengthened judiciary and addressing enforced disappearances.
The United States remains committed to Iraq’s economic development. Low
oil prices, COVID-19 and the security situation have each contributed to Iraq’s
current, unsustainable economic position. The United States has provided Iraq more
than $706 million since the beginning of fiscal year 2019, and more than $2.4 billion
in both humanitarian and development assistance since 2014. This assistance helps
provide critical shelter, essential health care, emergency food assistance and water,
sanitation and hygiene services across Iraq, and has supported the safe, voluntary
and dignified return of displaced persons, including members of ethnic and religious
minority groups.
Real recovery, however, means real reforms to end corruption. Economic
reform efforts will only be strengthened by concrete steps, including the establishment
last year of a permanent committee to investigate corruption. Endemic corruption
undermines economic progress — as well as trust in political bodies — and the
permanent committee demonstrates, we believe, the Government’s political will to
fight endemic corruption in Iraq. We commend the Iraqi Government for its efforts
and encourage committed action, in accord with Iraq’s constitutional protections for
human rights and due process, to ensure the independence, impartiality and adequate
resourcing of the committee.
Let me end by saying that the United States will remain a steady, reliable
partner for Iraq and for the Iraqi people, today and in future.

28/35

21-02364

S/2021/152

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI), for her valuable briefing. I also thank all United Nations personnel
and aid workers operating on the ground at this difficult time. I welcome Ambassador
Mohammed Hussein Bahr Aluloom, Permanent Representative of Iraq, to our
meeting today.
Viet Nam reaffirms its support for the tremendous efforts undertaken by the
Iraqi Government and people towards the long-term stability of the country. In that
regard, we commend the Iraqi Government’s preparation for the elections scheduled
for this coming October.
While considering that the support from the United Nations and the international
community is very important, we continue to emphasize that Iraq’s elections must
be led by Iraq. They must be held in a free, fair and inclusive manner, with the broad
participation of all components of society, especially youth and women.
We welcome the passage of the election law that reserves 25 percent of the
seats in the Parliament for women.
Given the multiple challenges that Iraq is facing, Viet Nam also encourages the
Iraqi Government to implement the necessary reforms to deal with these challenges,
especially those brought about by the economic situation and the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
We also support a stronger relationship between the federal Government and
the Kurdistan Regional Government to address outstanding issues.
Viet Nam remains concerned about the security situation in Iraq. Recalling
the attacks on civilians and diplomatic missions and the rocket attack yesterday in
Erbil, we reiterate our condemnation of all acts of terrorism and extremist violence.
Perpetrators must be brought to justice.
We encourage the strengthening of the relations between Iraq and countries of
the region in dealing with common challenges, including security concerns. At the
same time, we continue to call for full respect of Iraq’s independence and territorial
integrity by all regional and international actors.
Regarding the issue of internally displaced persons (IDPs), we continue
to support the efforts by the Government of Iraq and international organizations
towards the return of the displaced to their homes. However, there are concerns
about the possibility of a new crisis. The Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/120)
shows that 28 percent of arriving households had not returned to their locations of
origin and were considered to be secondarily displaced. The whereabouts of at least
11,000 individuals remain unknown after the camp closures in late 2020. We join the
international community in calling for the safe, voluntary, dignified and sustainable
return and settlement of IDPs. We also call for more efforts by all parties to avoid a
secondary displacement crisis.
In this context, the support of the international community, including
the United Nations agencies, notably UNAMI, is essential. Viet Nam welcomes
the efforts of UNAMI and United Nations agencies to assist Iraq in the quest for
national stability and security and to provide humanitarian assistance to a large
number of people affected by conflict, poverty and the ongoing pandemic. We
also call upon international donors to continue their assistance to Iraq through
United Nations agencies.
21-0236429/35

S/2021/152

Before concluding, we would like to reiterate our support for the continued
cooperation between the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait in the search for missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and the return of Kuwaiti property. We welcome
the recent DNA identification of Kuwaiti missing nationals. We commend the Iraqi
Government’s efforts to fulfil its obligations in accordance with resolution 2107
(2013) as well as other relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

30/35

21-02364

S/2021/152

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Iraq to the
United Nations, Mohammed Hussein Bahr Aluloom
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, allow me to congratulate Her Excellency Ms. Barbara Woodward,
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council this month. I also extend my sincere thanks to His Excellency Mr.
Tarek Ladeb, Permanent Representative of Tunisia, for his outstanding management
of the Council’s meetings last month.
I express my gratitude to Her Excellency Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), for her briefing.
Since the last Council meeting on the situation in Iraq in November 2020
(see S/2020/1144), there has been no real change in the situation or the magnitude
of the major and interrelated economic, security, health and social challenges facing
my country, Iraq. The Iraqi Government is expeditiously working to the best of
its ability and at the highest levels, as promised, to meet the people’s demands by
maintaining peace and security, providing services, countering the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, fighting terrorism and instituting political and
economic reforms.
The economic situation remains a source of concern for the Iraqi Government
because of plummeting and fluctuating oil prices on the one hand, and the exorbitant
costs borne by Iraq in combating terrorism, rebuilding liberated cities and clearing
them of remnants of war and landmines on the other. In that regard, as part of efforts
to address the economic and financial crisis, on 13 November 2020 the Government
presented the House of Representatives with a white paper for economic and
financial reform to reduce dependence on oil revenues and boost investment, and
recommended urgent measures to address the financial situation, particularly
the lack of liquidity. The recommendations covered three main areas: increasing
revenues and reducing expenditures; reforming fiscal and monetary policy; and
carrying out general economic reform. On 21 December 2020, the Government also
sent a draft budget to the House of Representatives, where it is still being considered.
The situation caused by the COVID-19 pandemic is critical. Despite the
actions taken by the competent authorities, the number of cases is alarmingly high.
The COVID-19 pandemic remains a challenge for Iraq, despite a high recovery rate
of 88 per cent and a low mortality rate of 2.2 per cent. The COVID-19 pandemic
continues to pose a threat to the health care system, with more than 23,000 health
care workers infected as of early December, and resources depleted as a result of
the high number of cases. The health crisis has also continued to affect the social
and economic situation of the most vulnerable groups in Iraq; having to allocate
resources to address the pandemic has affected the country’s other commitments.
In that regard, Iraq expresses its sincere gratitude to the World Health
Organization and friendly countries for their generous health assistance in support
of the Iraqi effort to tackle the pandemic. It looks forward to support from the
international community for providing vaccines to all in order to ensure that no one
is left behind.
Since its formation, the current Government has made it a top priority to fulfil
the commitment it made to the people to respond to the demonstrators’ demands. In
that regard, the Government has sought to gain the people’s confidence, especially
21-0236431/35

S/2021/152

that of young people, by listening to their voices and respecting the constitutional
right to demonstrate peacefully and express oneself freely.
The Government has also promised to protect demonstrators from human rights
violations. The competent authorities have made significant efforts to prevent extralegal groups from targeting demonstrators and to minimize the number of incidents
by giving all State security organs and forces strict instructions to refrain from
using force or carrying weapons at demonstration sites. The Government formed
a law enforcement command to provide protection at major social events, uphold
the law, promote freedom of peaceful demonstration and protect demonstrators and
their right to express their views peacefully in all Governorates. The Government
then restructured that command to bring it under a unit formed by the Ministry of
the Interior and referred those accused of violations for investigation. In addition,
directives were issued requiring all members of those forces to take human rights
training and education courses. The Iraqi Government has also set up specialized
investigative commissions to locate abducted protesters and journalists, gather
information on the perpetrators of the crimes and bring them to justice so that they
receive their just punishment. As part of steps taken by the Government to uphold
its obligation to protect demonstrators, reinforce measures to ensure that justice is
served and prevent impunity, members of groups responsible for killing activists
will be arrested. My Government has also made efforts to compensate the victims
and their families by, inter alia, providing compensation to demonstrators who were
attacked and to their families and forming a commission in the Office of the Prime
Minister to follow up and communicate with demonstrators in order to attend to their
needs. It has also worked to hold those responsible for committing violations fully
accountable by forming a fact-finding team to investigate the bloody events and the
acts of violence that have led to demonstrators being killed or injured, with a view to
preventing such violations from recurring in the future. Appropriate legal action was
taken, in accordance with the relevant domestic law, against members of the security
services found to be involved in targeting demonstrators.
In its programme, the Iraqi Government has pledged to enforce the rule of law,
restrict possession of weapons to the State and promote security reform efforts in
government institutions in order to strengthen human rights procedures as part of its
effort to enforce the rule of law.
In this area, terrorism is the most formidable threat as well as the one most
likely to hinder Iraqi efforts to develop and rebuild the country, help displaced
citizens return to their homes and deliver humanitarian assistance. Recently,
Baghdad witnessed a terrorist attack targeting innocent civilians in a popular
market in January A terrorist operation carried out just today in the city of Erbil
killed dozens and injured hundreds. In that same month, there were clashes between
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) terrorist gangs and a number of military
units in different regions. In that regard, Iraq reiterates its commitment to continue
to cooperate with the international community to combat terrorism and to continue
to mobilize the capabilities of the competent national entities.
Our national strategy commits us to implementing all relevant United Nations
resolutions to achieve our national objectives and priorities, namely, preventing all
forms of terrorism and violent extremism, preventing the financing of terrorism,
preventing recruitment and crippling terrorist movements, combating terrorist and
extremist rhetoric, preventing the establishment of ties to organized crime and
confronting biological and chemical threats.
Iraq appreciates the press statement issued by the Security Council (SC/14421).
In it, the Council affirms continued international support for Iraq in its fight against
terrorism and solidarity with the Government and people of Iraq in the light of the
32/35

21-02364

S/2021/152

recent cowardly terrorist attack on Baghdad. International support is a key pillar for
Iraq in strengthening its efforts and capabilities in the fight against terrorism. It is
doing so by building its capacity, exchanging information and logistical assistance,
implementing special programmes on countering violent extremism and on the link
between terrorism and organized crime, and rebuilding liberated cities, which will
make it possible for all displaced persons to return home. It is stepping up efforts
to repatriate family members of foreign terrorist fighters and help to establish a
national counter-terrorism centre.
My Government is fully committed to protecting the accredited diplomatic
and consular missions and mission personnel in Iraq. In that connection, it is making
every effort to prevent the recurrence of rocket attacks carried out by outlaw groups.
In perpetrating such attacks, those groups seek to destabilize Iraq and adversely
affect cooperation between the Government and the international community in the
fight against terrorism.
The return of internally displaced persons to their areas of origin is a top
priority for the Iraqi Government, and my Government has made a significant
effort to facilitate their safe return through a range of actions and measures. Those
measures include providing documents that enable them to return voluntarily and
taking several steps, in coordination with UNAMI, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, other relevant international organizations and the
Iraqi Red Crescent Society and the competent national authorities, to alleviate their
suffering and enable them to return home safely. On 12 January, the Iraqi Ministry
of Displacement and Migration announced that it had achieved some success on the
internal displacement issue. Some 47 camps had closed over the previous six months,
and 66,000 families had returned to their areas once suitable conditions had been put
in place, in cooperation with local governments and security agencies, in line with the
Government’s programme to end displacement. The Ministry stressed that several
camps, including Salamiyah camp and Amiriyat al-Fallujah camp in Anbar, would be
closing soon, explaining that it was cooperating with the International Organization
for Migration (IOM) on closing Jad‘ah camp in Ninawa. The Government also drew
up a plan with IOM to rebuild the destroyed homes of the displaced, and that plan
is currently being implemented. The internal displacement crisis is also linked to
national humanitarian needs. According to the relevant United Nations reports, the
2020 Humanitarian Response Plan for Iraq provided for 128 activities, with total
financial requirements of $662.2 million, including $397.4 million unrelated to the
pandemic and $264.8 million for pandemic response to cover humanitarian needs in
various humanitarian areas such as health, education, hygiene, awareness-raising,
food security and the management of camps for internally displaced persons. My
Government has facilitated the delivery of international humanitarian assistance to
its destination by taking a series of measures. It has provided displaced persons
with an emergency grant, food assistance and income-generating projects, in
addition to allocating a new amount to the reconstruction fund for areas affected by
terrorist operations to rebuild those areas. The emergency plan or the national plan
to be launched will include substantial amounts, in cooperation with international
organizations, to prepare homes for their return. The Government has coordinated
and consulted with international organizations, the relevant ministries and local
governments to ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches its intended destination,
according to need and without exception or discrimination. Regular consultation
meetings were held by the bureaux of international organizations and the relevant
international institutions to discuss obstacles to humanitarian access, find sustainable
solutions and address any urgent problems. In that connection, my Government
emphasizes that it remains necessary for the relevant specialized agencies to meet
national humanitarian needs, particularly given that the threat of COVID-19 persists.
21-0236433/35

S/2021/152

It appreciates the valuable assistance provided by donor countries, notably, the
United States of America, Germany, Canada, Japan and the European Commission,
to meet the costly amount of need.
I am also pleased to highlight the recent developments in the electoral process,
the most important of which is the postponement of the early elections to 10 October.
On 17 December 2020, the House of Representatives enacted a law on funding early
elections, allocating 329 billion Iraqi dinars and dividing Iraq into 83 electoral
districts. The Independent High Electoral Commission has announced that, as of 11
January 2021, 433 parties had registered to participate in the upcoming elections.
In an important development, the Commission announced that it had completed the
process of securing electronic voting machines within the timetable established in
agreement with a foreign company, noting that there are an estimated 58,915 polling
stations within Iraq and abroad. The Commission has therefore completed the
process of securing electronic voting machines within the operational timetable for
the electoral process, with more than 14 million voters registered biometrically, out
of a total of 26 million voters, yielding a registration rate of 56 per cent.
The Iraqi Government is working very carefully to create a climate conducive
to promoting dialogue with the local government of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq,
particularly with regard to the upcoming budget, control over border crossing points
and the management of oil resources. In that connection, I would like to inform
you that the meetings are intensive and on-going and that their aim is to reach a
sustainable agreement on the budget, with two delegations from the region visiting
Baghdad. The agreement of 9 October between the federal and the Kurdistan
Regional Governments on administrative, service and security arrangements in Sinjar, Ninawa Governorate, entered into force on 21 November. The Joint Operations
Command confirmed the start of the implementation of the agreement’s security
provisions on 1 December 2020.
Iraq continues to strive to strengthen relations and build partnerships with its
regional neighbours and international partners. For example, in the area of economic
development, the fourth meeting of the Iraqi-Saudi Coordination Council was held
in Baghdad on 8 November 2020 at the level of Ministers for Foreign Affairs. The
two sides reaffirmed their determination to strengthen bilateral relations in order to
coordinate their positions on oil issues, cooperate in countering terrorism, support
regional stability and strengthen trade relations.
Since November 2020, my Government has been eager to launch cooperative
and strategic dialogues with many countries, resulting in a number of highlevel official visits, with the Prime Minister visiting Ankara and Amman. The
Minister for Foreign Affairs has also con-ducted official visits, including to
Moscow, with a view to strengthening bilateral ties, including economic ties, with
international partners.
During the reporting period, the Government of Iraq welcomed delegations
from the United Kingdom led by Minister of State for the Middle East and North
Africa James Cleverly, the State of Palestine, Norway and the United States. Issues
discussed during these meetings included the promotion of bilateral relations;
national, regional and security developments; continued cooperation to counter
ISIL; and reconstruction efforts in Iraq.
The Iraqi policy of regional and international interaction aims to strengthen
the country’s regional role in order to consolidate stability and security to move
towards a better and prosperous future for the region.
My country, Iraq, places the idea of cooperation at the centre of its relations
with Kuwait and complies with the obligations set forth in paragraph 4 of resolution
34/35

21-02364

S/2021/152

2107 (2013), including searching for the remains of missing Kuwaitis and Kuwaiti
property and continuing to cover compensation instalments in a timely manner.
Iraq continues to demonstrate that it is fully committed to paying compensation
in a timely manner. Its most recent payment was $270 million on 26 January. Iraq
is also working to uphold its commitment to returning Kuwaiti property, including
the national archives. In that connection, Iraq has handed over 362,000 items to the
Kuwaiti authorities since 2018, along with another set of properties and archives.
It continues the painstaking effort to locate another collection of Kuwaiti archives
that were supposed to have been delivered by the Iraqi Ministry of Foreign Affairs
in April 2020. That delivery was postponed owing to circumstances related to the
COVID-19 pandemic.
With regard to the question of missing persons, Iraq welcomes the
announcement by the Kuwaiti authorities that the remains of 20 of the 69 missing
persons whose remains were handed over in two instalments since August 2019
have been identified. Meanwhile, Iraq calls on the Tripartite Commission and
the State of Kuwait to accelerate the process of announcing the results of DNA
tests of the remains of the other 49 persons and to make the announcement at the
earliest opportunity.
The upcoming early elections are an essential component of the reform agenda
to which the Iraqi Government is committed. In view of their vital importance, my
Government addressed a letter dated 18 November 2020 to the President of the
Security Council requesting United Nations support with electoral observation.
Building and strengthening citizen confidence in the electoral process is a key
factor in ensuring the success of the most important pillar of democracy, namely,
elections. The Government and people of Iraq are confident that the neutrality
of the United Nations and the professionalism of its staff will establish integrity
and transparency standards for the electoral process. This confidence is what my
Government wishes to take advantage of to strengthen and rebuild the confidence
of voters in the entire process, which will encourage them to participate actively, so
that the will of the people is expressed in the election results. Those results, in turn,
will be reflected in the formation of a Government that draws its strength from broad
popular support and that is capable of meeting various challenges, consolidating
stability and combating terrorism.
My Government understands that the new date for the elections gives the
United Nations time to address the Iraqi request more effectively while respecting
the country’s sovereignty and cooperating with the relevant national authorities.
The Iraqi Government is in contact with the President of the Security Council
regarding its request that the United Nations help to ensure the success of the electoral
process in Iraq. In that connection, two letters have been addressed to the President
of the Security Council concerning the provision of support and electoral observers.
In conclusion, allow me, Madam President, to point out that the time remaining
before the upcoming elections is precious. We hope that Council members will
make optimal use of it by responding affirmatively to the request by Iraq for United
Nations observers.

21-0236435/35
