Reeolutioos adopted on the report8 of the Second Comnúttee

Recognizing the extremely adverse impact of the
drought on the national resources of Ethiopia and on
that country's economic and social development,
T aking note of the measures introduced by the Government of Ethiopia to alleviate the effects of the
drought,
Recalling its resolution 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974,
particularly section X thereof,
Further recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1833 (LVI) of 8 May 1974, by which the Council called upon the Secretary-General to take the necessary action to respond to the request of the Government
of Ethiopia with regard to the immediate, medium-term
and long-term needs of the drought-stricken regions,
resolution 1876 (LVII) of 16 July 1974, by which the
Council invited all Member States, international organizations and voluntary agencies to continue to give their
fullest support and assistance to the endeavours in
mobilizing emergency relief assistance, and Council
resolution 1971 (LIX) of 30 July 1975,
Noting with appreciation the assistance given to the
drought-stricken regions of Ethiopia by Governments
and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, as well as the efforts made so far by the Office
of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and
other organizations of the United Nations system towards the implementation of the provisions of Economic
and Social Council resolutions 1833 (LVI) and 1876
(LVII),
l. Urges the United Nations and the specialized
agencies to continue to implement vigorously fue provisions of Economic and Social Council resolutions
1833 (LVI), 1876 (LVII) and 1971 (LIX);
2. Appeals to the Governments of all Member States
and to intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to intensify their assistance to the droughtstricken regions of Ethiopia;
3. Invites the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator to report to the
Economic and Social Council at its sixtieth session and
to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session on
the progress made in the implementation of all relevant
resolutions regarding this matter.
2432nd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

3442 (XXX).

Economic co-operation among
developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3177 (XXVIII) of 17 December 1973 and 3241 (XXIX) of 29 November 1974
on economic co-operation among developing countries,
Recalling also its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New Intemational Economic Order,
Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and intemational economic co-operation,
Noting the Action Programme for Economic Cooperation among Non-Aligned and Other Developing
Countries, adopted by the Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Georgetown
from 8 to 12 Augi1st 1972, and reaffirmed at the Fourth
Conference of Heads of State or Govemment of Non-

57

Aligned Countries, held at Algiers from 5 to 9 September 1973,41>
Taking account of the relevant decisions of the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Lima from 25 to 30 August 1975,
on the subject of economic co-operation among developing countries, including resolution X dealing with the
establishment of a Solidarity Fund for Economic and
Social Development in the Non-Aligned Countries, 46
Recognizing the increasing importance of programmes of economic co-operation among developing
countries as a strategy of development based on the
principie of·collective self-reliance,
Minaful of the determination of the developing countries to strengthen their unity and capacity far collective action with a view to ensuring their complete
sovereignty,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;47
·
2. Endorses Trade and Development Board resolution 128 (S-VI) of 21 March 1975 on co-operation
among developing countries; 48
3. Urges the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in
carrying out his responsibilities under the provisions of
Trade and Development Board resolution 128 (S-VI),
to take account of relevant work being done elsewhere
on economic co-operation among developing countries
and in particular under the Action Programme for Economic Co-operation among Non-Aligned and Other
Developing Countries;
4. Urges also the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system to provide,
in accordance with paragraph 4 of General Assembly
resolution 3177 (XXVIII) and the provisions of the
present resolution, continuing support to the promotion
of economic co-operation among developing countries,
including, ínter alia:
(a) Co-operation in the utilization of know-how,
skills, natural resources, technology and funds available within the developing countries for the promotion
of investments in industry, agriculture, transport and
communications;
(b) Trade liberalization measures, including payments and clearing arrangements covering prirnary
commodities, manufactured goods and services such
as banking, shipping, insurance and reinsurance;
(e) Transfer of technology;
5. Urges further that increased emphasis be placed
on programmes of economic co-operation among developing countries, not only at the regional and sui.regional level but also at the interregional level;
·,
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the ef.,.
ficient co-ordination of activities within the United
Nations system designed to promote economic cooperation among developing countries by, inter alía:
{a) Including in the medium-term plan and programme budget of the United Nations an intersectoral
presentation of the totality of actions and activities
planned and programmed for implementing the relevant resolutions pertaining to economic co-operation
among developing countries;
45 See A/9330 and Corr.l.

46SeeA/10217 and Corr.1, annex l.

47 A/ 10094 and Add.1.
48

•
Official Records of the Gene,-al Assembly, Thirtieth Suswn, Supplement No. 15 (A/10015/Rev.1) part one, annex L

General Aa■embI,--Tbirtieth Se■■ion

58

(b) Tamg-- the necessary steps, in co-operation
with the organizations of the United Nations system,
to provide the same kind of intersectoral presentation
on a system-wide basis;
7. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
examine the implementation of the relevant resolutions
pertaining to economic co-operation among developing countries in order to improve the co-ordination of
efforts by the United Nations system and with a view
to making such examination coincide with the review
and appraisal of the International Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution.
2432niplenary meeting
9 December 1975

3459 (XXX). Report of th.e Trade and
Development Board49
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1995 (XIX) of 30 December 1964,

•"

Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New lnternational Economic Order, and 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
Recalling also Trade and Development Board decision 113 (XIV) of 13 September 1974, by which it
decided to convene the fourth session of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development at Nairobi,110
Recalling further its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 197 5 on developmemt and international
economic co-operation, in which Member States agreed
that an important aim of the fo111rth session of the
, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
in addition to work in progress elsewhere, should be to
reach decisions on specific issues, in particular on the
improvement of market structures in the field of raw
materials and commodities of export interest to the developing countties,
Afjirming the importance of the fourth session of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in the negotiation and the implementation of
concrete proposals, particularly on the questions relating to trade in commodities and manufactures, monetary and financial issues and the transfer of technology
emerging from the sixth and seventh special sessions
of the General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3216 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974, whereby it accepted with appreciation the
invitation of the Government of Kenya to hold the
fourth session of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development at Nairobi from 3 to 28 May
1976,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the reports of
the Trade and Development Board on its sixth special
session, on the second part of its fourteenth session
and on its fifteenth session;51
G See also p. 142, ítem 55.

110 See Offecial Records of the General .Assembly, Twenty-

ninth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/9615/Rev.1), annex l.
111 Jbid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/10015/
Rev.1).

2. Endorses the consensus of the Trade and Development Board on the provisional agenda for the fourth
session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, 112 as well as the arrangements for the
organization of the work of the session;
3. Decides, in addition to the arrangements mentioned in paragraph 2 above, that the languages of the
fourth session of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development shall be those used in the
General Assembly and its Main Committees;
4. Urges ali Member States to take appropriate
steps with a view to ensuring satisfactory results from
the fourth session of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development through adequate preparation at the national, regional and interregional levels
and through the full utilization of the permanent machinery of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, which should facilitate negotiations
on the agenda items of the fourth session;
.
5. Urges ali Member States to ensure that such negotiations are action-oriented, so that the decisions
arrived at by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development at its fourth session can be promptly
and effectively implemented.
2436th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
1

3460 (XXX). United Nations Speclal Fund
The General Assembly,
Recalling section X of its resolution 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974 containing the Programme of Action
on the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order,
Recognizing that the present economic situation of
a large number of developing countries, in particular
the most seriously affected among them, requires even
greater efforts on the part of the international community to help them overcome the effects of the economic crisis that had called for the establishment of
the United Nations Special Fund,
Recalling its resolution 3356 (XXIX) of 18 December 1974, in particular paragraph 1, article I, thereof,
Bearing in mind that a number of countries have
expressed their willingness to contribute to 'the United
Nations Special Fund provided that it generates adequate funding,
Considering that, with the agreement reached unanimously at its seventh special session whereby developed
countries, and developing countries in a position to do
so, were urged to make adequate contributions to the
United Nations Special Fund with a view to an early
implementation of a programme of lending, preferably
in 1976, the prospects for the beginning of the operations of the Fund have been significantly improved,
1. Takes note of the report of the Board of Governors of the United Nations Special Fund on the work
of its :first session ;118
2. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
President of the Board of Governors114 on his contacts
with various potential contributors to the United Nations
Special Fund and with economic groupings and requests
him to continue these efforts;
112 Jbid., part four, annex 11.

118Jbid., Supplement No. 21 (A/10021).
Thirtieth Session, Second Committee, 1665th meeting, paras. 1-8.
54 lbid.,
