S/2020/239

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 March 2020
Original: English

United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2487
(2019), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, and Council resolution 2366 (2017), in which it requested the
Secretary-General to report on the implementation of the mandate of the Mission every
90 days. The report covers the period from 27 December 2019 to 26 March 2020.

II. Major contextual developments
2.
Efforts by newly inaugurated regional and local administrations to incorporate
peace implementation into their governing agendas were a key feature of the reporting
period. On 1 January 2020, all 32 new governors, of whom two are women, over 1,100
new mayors, of whom 131 are women, and departmental assemblies and municipal
councils took office throughout Colombia, following the October 2019 departmental and
local elections, the first since the signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. Governors and mayors have begun the process
of crafting their departmental and local development plans, which will guide their
priorities for the next four years. The Government has been working with them to
encourage local and regional ownership of peace-related programmes. In several
regions, former members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército
del Pueblo (FARC-EP) have been taking part in these participatory processes for the
formulation of regional and local development plans. Through visits by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Colombia to departmental capitals and
conflict-affected regions, and the permanent efforts of the Mission’s offices in the field,
the Mission has also engaged proactively with the new authorities and offered its support
on matters related to reintegration and security guarantees.
3.
In February 2020, the Office of the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and
Consolidation hosted a meeting, attended by over 170 mayors and 21 governors, to discuss
the Government’s implementation of programmes derived from the peace agreement.
During an assembly convened by the National Federation of Departments, all 32 governors
welcomed the Government’s proposal to create a peace office within each departmental
government, responsible for coordinating and leading peace-related policy in the
territories. On 20 February, the Mayor of Bogotá, who is the first woman elected to the
position, co-organized a meeting with civil society movements that brought together
governors and mayors from different regions to launch the National Network of Local
Authorities for Peace, in support of the implementation of the peace agreement.

20-04257 (E)

300320

*2004257*

S/2020/239

4.
On 12 February, the Government and the National Strike Committee, constituted
during the protests of November 2019, met for the seventh time but did not reach an
agreement on the way forward regarding the list of demands made by the Committee
on matters including guarantees for the exercise of the right to social protest, social,
political, economic and human rights, anti-corruption efforts and peace, as well as the
implementation of previous agreements signed with social movements. Some protests
continued to take place during the reporting period. The Co mmittee had called for
protests on 25 March, but they were suspended owing to the COVID -19 outbreak.
5.
The national conversation launched in November 2019 by President Duque in
response to the protests has continued, with a focus on six issues: inclusive growth,
transparency and the efforts to combat corruption, education, the “Peace with
Legality” government strategy, the environment and young people. The Mission was
invited to participate in all four meetings on “Peace with Legality”, during which
various actors voiced their concerns and made proposals on topics related to the
implementation of the peace agreement, including the reintegration of former
combatants, security guarantees for social leaders and communities, comprehensive
rural reform, transitional justice and victims.
6.
On 30 January 2020, Francisco Barbosa, who was serving as Presidential
Counsellor for Human Rights, was appointed Attorney General. He defined his
priorities as strengthening investigations into attacks against social leaders, human
rights defenders and former combatants; fighting criminal structures, drug trafficking
and corruption; and enhancing the territorial presence of the Office of the Attorney
General. He also provided assurances that he would respect the autonomy of th e
Special Jurisdiction for Peace, and on 3 February he met with its President, Patricia
Linares, who presented him with a proposal for joint work. On 17 February, Martha
Mancera, the Director of the Special Investigation Unit, which is in charge of
investigating attacks against social leaders and former FARC-EP combatants, was
designated Deputy Attorney General.
7.
In March, the Government of Colombia intensified preventive measures in
response to the COVID-19 outbreak, including declaring a state of emergency, closing
the borders and ordering a countrywide quarantine from 24 March to 13 April.
President Duque also announced that the Government would allocate additional
resources for the public health system and social welfare programmes. As at
22 March, the Ministry of Health had confirmed 277 cases of COVID-19 across the
country, with two deaths. On 17 March, the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization
and Consolidation stated that the Government would be taking the necessary
measures to ensure that the implementation of peace-related programmes could
continue, despite the challenges resulting from the outbreak.
Resolution of disputes regarding the implementation of the peace agreement
8.
Despite the areas of practical cooperation referred to in the present report,
during the reporting period the parties continued to publicly voice strong differences
regarding compliance by the other with its obligations under the peace agreement.
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC) has been especially critical of
the adequacy of measures to protect former combatants and the scope of the
Government’s “Peace with Legality” strategy, which it considers to be a narrow
interpretation of the peace agreement; the Government has defended its efforts and
emphasized that the implementation of the peace agreement is a long -term process,
and has in turn raised questions about the commitment of FARC in some areas. While
the parties aired such differences in public and at times sharply, the primary body
established to allow for high-level dialogue and the resolution of differences between
the parties, the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement, met only once during the reporting period.
2/17

20-04257

S/2020/239

The Mission, along with the guarantor countries that serve as observers to the
Commission, continued to encourage greater use of that forum.
9.
On 12 February, the Government issued a decree establishing 31 July 20 20 as
the deadline for FARC to hand over all assets included in the inventory that was
submitted in August 2017 by the former FARC-EP to the Government. The FARC
party has expressed its disagreement with the decree, arguing that the former
FARC-EP lost its capacity to keep custody of those assets after the laying down of
weapons, that third parties have taken ownership of some of the assets, and that the
Government has failed to take effective and timely custody of the assets.
Nevertheless, since the issuance of the decree, FARC and the Special Assets
Administration have been meeting and have established a schedule for complying
with their obligations related to the handover of the assets. At the request of the
parties, the Mission participated in a site visit to examine the situation of several
properties in a rural area of Bogotá district included in the inventory.
Comprehensive rural reform
10. Regarding the development programmes with a territorial focus for 170 conflict affected municipalities, one of several components of the comprehensive rural reform
set out in section 1 of the peace agreement, the Government reports that 862
infrastructure works have been completed and delivered, 323 are being carried out
and 7 are in the planning stages. The Government has made available various funding
sources for the development programmes, including royalties from the exploitation
of hydrocarbons and minerals and the “works for taxes” programme involving the
private sector. Notably, 162 municipalities and 15 departments have adopted legal
measures to include the development programmes in their territorial planning
instruments. Communities that participated in the formulation of the development
programmes have voiced their expectation that they will be directly inv olved in their
implementation. In February, President Duque visited El Paujil (Caquetá Department)
to monitor progress in the implementation of works related to the development
programme covering the 16 municipalities in that Department.
11. In January, the Government presented the road map for stabilization for the
Catatumbo region, a pilot for a long-term strategy provided for in the National
Development Plan that aims to coordinate the actions of the stakeholders involved in
the implementation of the development programmes. The Government has committed
to producing road maps for the remaining development programmes by the end of 2020.
Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition
12. The seven cases launched by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace continue to
advance. The tribunal reports having received testimonies from 291 former FARC -EP
members, 232 members of the public security forces and 7 non-combatant State
agents and third parties.
13. Approximately 265,000 victims have been accredited in all seven cases. Victims
are participating increasingly in the proceedings of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
and have insisted that all individuals appearing before the Special Jurisdiction
contribute fully to the truth and acknowledge their respective responsibilities. In
February, victims of case 003, on extrajudicial killings presented as casualties of
combat by State agents (known as “false positives”), requested that a former army
general be excluded from the tribunal’s jurisdiction for failing to acknowledge his
responsibility in the context of the case. In March, the Special Jurisdiction reported
that it had received 272 individual and group observations from victims of case 001
on kidnappings by the former FARC-EP, including their concerns that the version

20-04257

3/17

S/2020/239

presented by the former FARC-EP fell short of victims’ expectations for truth and
acknowledgement of their suffering.
14. On 17 February, in the framework of case 003, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
handed over the body of an individual who had been missing for 18 years to his
family. Another 54 bodies of potential victims were found by the Special Jurisdiction
as part of a series of exhumation proceedings in Dabeiba (Antioquia De partment), in
coordination with the Special Unit for the Search for Persons Deemed as Missing and
the Colombian Institute for Forensic Medicine, which were prompted by the
testimony of a member of the military. To date, 1,860 members of the public security
forces have received judicial benefits from the Special Jurisdiction and the ordinary
justice system in exchange for their contribution to the truth.
15. The Special Jurisdiction has continued reviewing 941 petitions by
non-combatant State agents and civilian third parties to come under its jurisdiction,
of which it has accepted 13 and rejected 258, considering that their crimes were not
related to the armed conflict. In February, the Constitutional Court issued a ruling
reaffirming the Special Jurisdiction’s competence over non-combatant State agents
and civilian third parties over crimes committed during the conflict, beyond financing
or collaborating with organized armed groups.
16. FARC has raised concerns that the Independent System for Advice and Def ence
lacks the necessary staffing and resources. The System was provided for in the peace
agreement to ensure the rights of victims and due process for all those appearing
before the Special Jurisdiction.
17. In February, five national organizations representing women and lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and intersex people requested the Special Jurisdiction to open
a case on sexual violence committed during the conflict.
18. The Special Unit for the Search for Persons Deemed as Missing has to date
identified 599 persons (including 15 women) deemed missing who were not in any
other database, and has received information from 80 individuals belonging to the
public security forces and the former FARC-EP on the possible locations of 34
missing persons (including 8 women).
19. To date, the Commission on Truth, Coexistence and Non-Repetition has held
11,700 collective and individual interviews, including with victims, former
combatants and other actors. In February, the Commission held its first private
interview with FARC party leaders to hear their version of key issues, including their
responsibility in the conflict. In March, the Commission held the first in a series of
64 planned “spaces for listening” events, to hear testimonies from participants from
all sectors of society regarding events related to the conflict. The event was focused
on violence against former combatants since the signing of the peace agreement.
Substitution of illicit crops
20. Communities across Colombia continue to be affected by the violence stemming
from illegal economic activities. Thousands of families have placed their hopes in the
effective implementation of the National Comprehensive Programme for the
Substitution of Illicit Crops, established under section 4 of the peace ag reement, and are
committed to transitioning towards legal productive activities. According to the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), of the 60,087 ha of coca registered by
99,097 families participating in the Programme, an estimated 41,370 ha have been
eradicated since August 2017. UNODC also reports that 96 per cent of families are
complying with their voluntary eradication commitments. A total of 46,611 families have
received their full year of interim payments, 61,183 families have received technical
assistance and 58,846 families have received support for food security projects.
4/17

20-04257

S/2020/239

21. In March, in Vichada Department, the first 251 families completed their
participation in the National Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of Illicit
Crops, and received machinery and tools to support their transition to cacao
production. To maintain these results, it is essential to achieve progress in alternative
productive projects that will allow families to move away from coca cultivation.
Developments related to the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
22. Between 14 and 17 February, the Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN) carried
out a national “armed strike”, during which civilians were told not to leave their
homes or workplaces and to avoid any means of transportation. During the strike,
incidents of violence were reported in several departments, including attacks on the
public security forces, resulting in the death of one soldier. While the scope of the
strike was concentrated in the traditional areas of operation of ELN (including the
Departments of Norte de Santander and Arauca), other departments saw a spike in the
group’s activities, including Cauca, Valle del Cauca, Nariño, Cesar, La Guajira and
Magdalena. The strike was widely rejected by Colombian society. Civil society
organizations, along with the Catholic Church, renewed calls for dialogue between
the Government and ELN. The Government condemned the actions of ELN and
reiterated its conditions for resuming talks, namely the cessation of all criminal
activities and the release of kidnapped persons.

III. Mission tasks
A.

Reintegration
Transition and consolidation of former territorial areas for training
and reintegration
23. In January, the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization reconvened the
tripartite working group on the transition and consolidation of former territorial areas
for training and reintegration, to follow up on the process initiated after the expiration
of the legal status of the territorial areas in August 2019. The working group agreed
on a calendar of joint visits to hold dialogues with residents of former territorial areas,
surrounding communities and local authorities regarding, among other issues,
ongoing efforts to identify and purchase plots of land, provide access to housing, and
formally include those areas in municipal administrative and planning arrangements.
A strategy regarding the consolidation of the territorial areas is being prepared by the
Agency for Reintegration and Normalization and has yet to be considered by the
National Reintegration Council. The inclusion of clear timelines and adequate
resources should help to allay concerns among residents of the former territorial areas,
whose participation in this process is fundamental.
24. Four joint visits took place during the reporting period, including to Ituango
(Antioquia Department) and Buenos Aires (Cauca Department), where security concerns
have led some residents of the former territorial areas to request a transfer to a different
location. During the visits, former combatants expressed concerns about delays in access
to land. Further visits have been postponed owing to the COVID-19 outbreak.
25. The Government, in particular the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization
and the National Land Agency, is continuing to work to overcome the legal, technical
and administrative obstacles delaying the purchase of plots of land for former
territorial areas. No plots have been allocated to da te.

20-04257

5/17

S/2020/239

Collective reintegration outside former territorial areas for training
and reintegration
26. A total of 9,412 former combatants currently reside outside former territorial
areas, where providing them with the full scope of the benefits established in the
peace agreement remains a key challenge, as noted in previous reports. Most of these
new reintegration areas where collective processes are taking place still have limited
access to land, housing, education, productive opportunities, health care and security.
27. So far, 22 out of 49 approved collective productive projects benefit former
combatants outside former territorial areas. Support for collective reintegration in
these new areas, from both the Government and FARC, is key to ensuring that former
combatants outside the former territorial areas continue participating actively in the
reintegration process.
Economic and social reintegration
28. On 27 December 2019, the Government adopted a resolution establishing the
reintegration road map, which was agreed between the parties and sets out the long term framework for the socioeconomic reintegration process. Maintaining a spirit of
dialogue and joint efforts will be key to implementing and raising awareness of the road
map. In the coming months, medium- to long-term reintegration plans, both individual
and collective, will be jointly defined by the parties through a participatory process.
29. The National Reintegration Council met only once during the reporting period
and approved two new collective productive projects, benefiting 26 former
combatants. This brings the number of approved collective projects to 49, benefiting
2,156 former combatants (including 695 women). Additionally, funding was
disbursed for 19 projects, bringing the number of projects that have received funds to
43, benefiting 2,148 former combatants (including 607 women). The number of
individual projects approved and for which funds were disbursed increased from 705
to 1,225, benefiting 1,440 former combatants (including 301 women). Approximately
27 per cent of accredited former combatants have received economic support for
productive projects through these mechanisms.
30. The Agency for Reintegration and Normalization and FARC have agreed to
include, as part of productive projects, criteria for their sustainability, including
access to land and markets, technical assistance and strengthening productive
organizations. The Agency for Reintegration and Normalization, the International
Organization for Migration and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
are providing technical assistance to 40 collective projects. Approxi mately one third
of individual projects have received technical assistance through various mechanisms,
including 233 projects supported by iNNpulsa, a government entity that promotes
entrepreneurship and innovation.
31. Partnerships with the private sector and other public entities have been
instrumental to ensuring support for productive projects. In February, the
Inter-institutional Working Group on Tourism facilitated the participation of nine
projects led by former combatants and community members in the National Tourism
Fair. The Office of the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation and
the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization, with support from UNDP and the
Mission, continue to engage with the private sector, including restaur ant and
supermarket chains, and business associations to purchase former combatants’ products.
32. Over two thirds of productive projects are still being carried out on rented land,
and there has been no progress in granting land for this purpose.

6/17

20-04257

S/2020/239

33. Former combatants have legally constituted 139 cooperatives and other
productive organizations; 18 are led by women and 9 are exclusively composed of
women. These economic organizations are a key factor in the sustainability of
collective productive projects. Many of them require technical assistance and support,
including on legal, administrative and marketing matters. To date, only one third have
received technical assistance.
34. The Technical Working Group on Gender of the National Reintegration Council
has continued to issue gender-related recommendations for productive projects, but
the lack of resources and dedicated technical capacity at the local level remains a
challenge. Similarly, while the High-level Forum on Gender and the Technical
Working Group on Gender have made efforts to advance the gender actions of the
national reintegration policy (CONPES 3931), insufficient resources have hindered
the implementation of the actions.
35. Efforts to provide housing for former combatants are ongoing and are cl osely
tied to access to land. On 31 December 2019, the Ministry of Agriculture issued two
resolutions granting subsidies for rural housing to 501 former combatants living in
former territorial areas, but those subsidies will only materialize once land is
purchased for those areas. The Agency for Reintegration and Normalization has
adopted the guidelines allowing former combatants to use the one-time economic
support for productive projects stipulated in the peace agreement for housing projects.
36. The Technical Working Group on Health of the National Reintegration Council –
composed of FARC, the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization, the Ministry of
Health and the Mission – is meeting regularly to coordinate prevention measures in the
light of the COVID-19 outbreak. On 18 March, the authorities and FARC issued a joint
statement to raise awareness of prevention measures, including advising former
combatants to remain inside the former territorial areas and other collective reintegration
areas. Importantly, the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization has stated that the
outbreak will not affect the monthly allowance for former combatants.
37. Some 98 per cent of former combatants have been enrolled in the national health
system. The Government, FARC and the Mission have all been monitoring the
implementation of temporary health services in the former territorial areas. The
Technical Working Group on Health is conducting a survey to identify people’s needs
and the obstacles to accessing health care outside the former territorial areas. Former
combatants with disabilities, the elderly and those with chronic illnesses continue to face
difficulties accessing specialized services. Female former combatants remain concerned
about the limited provision of reproductive health-care services and preventive care.
38. Currently, 5,224 former combatants (25 per cent of whom are women) are
enrolled in educational programmes, from the primary level to high school. Former
combatants are also increasingly looking for opportunities in higher education. A total
of 1,768 former combatants (29 per cent of whom are women) have accessed
vocational training through the National Training Service and measures have been
taken to link vocational training with formal employment. The en rolment of women
in educational and training programmes continues to be affected by the limited
provision of childcare and the lack of targeted support for accessing employment.
Role of communities and departmental and local actors
39. Ensuring that communities benefit from the reintegration process is essential to
promoting local development and reconciliation. Some progress has been made with
regard to the inclusion of a community-based approach in the reintegration process, as
stipulated in the peace agreement. The Working Group on Community Reintegration
of the National Reintegration Council has developed a joint strategy for the Agency
for Reintegration and Normalization and FARC aimed at strengthening the social
20-04257

7/17

S/2020/239

fabric and preventing stigmatization. With this goal in mind, the Agency is
implementing 62 initiatives to bring together communities and former combatants. The
Agency for Reintegration and Normalization is also working alongside the Agency for
Territorial Renewal to integrate its community-based reintegration strategy in the
implementation of the development programmes with a territorial focus.
40. Local authorities and communities have expressed the view that the
establishment of former territorial areas in conflict-affected areas has brought
productive projects, improved security and enhanced the presence of the State. In
places where the transfer of former territorial areas is being considered, the same
authorities and communities are concerned about the negative effect that could have
on security and the provision of basic services.
41. The Agency for Reintegration and Normalization is actively engaging with the
new local authorities to promote the inclusion of reintegration policies in local
development plans. Departmental and local authorities have an increasingly important
role to play in the reintegration process, particularly following the transition of the
former territorial areas.
Political reintegration
42. The 12 former combatants and FARC party candidates elected in the 2019 local
elections, including those endorsed by other parties or coalitions, took office in
January 2020. Moreover, seven former combatants, including four women, have been
appointed to positions in local and departmental administrations.
43. In accordance with the Statute of the Opposition, which was approved by
Congress as part of the implementation of section 2 of the peace agreement, the three
municipal council members elected under the FARC party announced their stance vis à-vis the new mayors: one as pro-government (Dabeiba, Antioquia Department), one
as independent (Palmar, Santander Department) and one in opposition (Icononzo,
Tolima Department). As provided for by the Statute, parties that declare themselves
to be in opposition or independent are entitled to special rights and guarantees.

B.

Security guarantees
Security guarantees for former FARC-EP members
44. During the reporting period, the Mission verified 16 killings of former FARC -EP
members (including one woman), bringing the total to 190 (including three women)
since the signing of the peace agreement. The Mission has also verified 39 attempted
killings (including three women) and 13 disappearances since the signing of the peace
agreement. The Mission is closely following up on the investigations by the Office of
the Attorney General and the Special Investigation Unit into the failed attack of
January 2020 against the President of the FARC party, Rodrigo Londoño, and into the
violent deaths of two former combatants who the authorities have linked to the attack.
45. According to the Office of the Attorney General, the majority of attacks against
former combatants continue to be linked to illegal armed groups and criminal
organizations. Approximately 73 per cent of killings of former comb atants have
occurred in rural areas characterized by a limited State presence, poverty, illicit
economies and the proliferation of criminal organizations. Attacks continue to be
concentrated in the Departments of Cauca (36), Nariño (25), Antioquia (22),
Caquetá (20), Norte de Santander (16), Meta (13), Putumayo (13) and Valle del
Cauca (12), which also have the highest number of early warnings issued by the
Office of the Ombudsman. In these areas, former combatants also face a heightened
risk of recruitment by illegal armed groups.

8/17

20-04257

S/2020/239

46. Only two of the killings took place in former territorial areas, which
demonstrates the importance of extending protection measures to former combatants
living outside those areas, including in new areas of collective reinteg ration. The
Tripartite Protection and Security Mechanism is expanding its visits to areas outside
the former territorial areas to raise awareness among local authorities about the
security needs of former combatants, including those living outside the form er
territorial areas.
47. The Office of the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation
continues to coordinate the implementation of the measures announced in June 2019
to strengthen protection for former combatants and support the entitie s responsible
for investigating attacks against them. The Inter-institutional Coordination
Mechanism for Security and Protection, led by the Presidential Counsellor for
Stabilization and Consolidation, held four meetings at the regional level, including in
the areas of heaviest violence against former FARC-EP members. FARC has
complained that the party’s representatives to the Technical Committee on Security
and Protection, which was established by the peace agreement, were not invited to
those meetings.
48. In February, former combatants in the former territorial area in Ituango
(Antioquia Department), the municipality with the most attacks against former
combatants (the Mission was able to confirm 11 killings, 2 attempted killings and
1 disappearance), demanded to be relocated following a further deterioration in the
security situation. In response, on 19 February the Presidential Counsellor for
Stabilization and Consolidation chaired a meeting in Ituango of the Inter-institutional
Coordination Mechanism for Security and Protection. The Government and former
combatants agreed on the need to relocate the territorial area, and the Government is
currently considering a number of possible plots of land. Four days after the meeting,
a massive displacement of 872 persons took place from rural communities in Ituango
to its urban centre. Former combatants in the former territorial area in Buenos Aires
(Cauca Department) have also asked to be relocated owing to the security situation in
that municipality.
49. During the reporting period, 78 new bodyguards, including 22 women, joined
the Specialized Subdirectorate for Security and Protection of the National Protection
Unit, bringing the total up to 1,200, the number set out in Decree No. 299 (2017).
They include 1,193 bodyguards assigned for protection schemes for former FARC-EP
members. That figure includes 767 former combatants, of whom 146 are women.
There are a total of 164 women bodyguards. Nonetheless, according to the
Subdirectorate, a further 183 bodyguards are needed for 45 newly approved and
54 incomplete protection schemes. Women former combatants continue to report that
their requests for the use of collective protection schemes are not adequately
prioritized, resulting in increased risks for them.
50. Over 400 requests for protection schemes are currently pending, owing to
staffing shortages in the Subdirectorate, which is affecting the security guarantees of
former FARC-EP members. Three former combatants were killed while waiting for
the implementation of protection measures and seven more were killed while their
protection measures were under evaluation by the Subdirectorate.
51. The Special Investigation Unit made progress on investigations into several
killings of former FARC-EP members. As a result of the Unit’s investigations, a judge
ordered the precautionary detention of a colonel and three soldiers of the Colombian
army for the April 2019 homicide of a former combatant, Dimar Torres. With regard
to the October 2019 homicide of a former FARC-EP commander, Alexander Parra,
inside the former territorial area in Mesetas (Meta Department), six people have been
arrested, including a former combatant. The Unit’s efforts have led to a total of 24
20-04257

9/17

S/2020/239

convictions (3 during the reporting period) and 16 cases at the trial stage (3 more
during the reporting period), out of 214 investigated attacks against former
combatants, including 175 homicides, 26 attempted homicides and 13 disappearances.
52. In February, the Office of the Attorney-General and the police arrested José
Alberto Arrigui, also known as “Contador”, the leader of the illegal armed group
“Guerrillas Unidas del Pacífico”, which has a presence in Nariño Department. He is
accused of various crimes against social leaders and former combatants, including
ordering the homicide of a former FARC-EP member in December 2018. Efforts to
identify and prosecute the intellectual authors of such attacks are essential to fighting
impunity.
53. The public security forces have an important role to play in supporting the work
of the Unit, including by guaranteeing its immediate access to crime scenes and by
accelerating arrests of suspects, both material and intellectual. They also have an
important role to play within the Integrated Information Centre, which was
established as part of the measures announced by the Government in June 2019 and
is led by the Ministry of Defence. The Centre is tasked with supporting the Unit’s
investigations into attacks against former combatants.
54. In February, the Office of the Inspector General issued a directive ordering State
institutions to coordinate protection measures to prevent risks for former FARC -EP
combatants. That same month, the Senate Peace Commission created a high -level
mechanism to follow up on attacks and monitor prevention measures.
55. Despite its important role, the joint working group on the investigation of
attacks against former FARC-EP members, which is composed of the Office of the
Attorney General, FARC and the Mission, was not convened during the repor ting
period.
Security guarantees for communities, human rights defenders and social leaders
56. Rural communities continue to bear the brunt of the violence resulting from the
actions of illegal armed groups and criminal organizations and confrontation s among
them and with the public security forces. Communities in Chocó and Cauca
Departments continue to suffer as a result of the actions of these groups, particularly
over control of illicit economies. The situation in rural areas of Antioquia Department ,
including the municipality of Ituango (see paragraphs 24 and 48), where multiple
killings, massacres and massive displacements have been linked to disputes among
illegal armed groups, is of grave concern. In the Catatumbo region of Norte de
Santander Department, illegal armed groups continue to victimize long-suffering
communities. On 20 January, the Mayor of Tumaco (Nariño Department) declared a
state of humanitarian and social emergency in the municipality after activities by
illegal armed groups resulted in a series of forced displacements of several
communities that drove more than 3,000 people, mainly of Afro -Colombian origin,
from rural areas to the municipal urban centre. In Putumayo Department, two leaders
of crop substitution programmes, including one woman, were killed during the
reporting period.
57. The Office of the Ombudsman issued 20 early warnings of numerous risks to
civilian populations, including forced displacements, confinements, attacks against
human rights defenders and recruitment by illegal armed groups. Six of those early
warnings were of imminent character, for municipalities in the Departments of Cesar,
Cauca, Valle del Cauca, Antioquia, Nariño and Córdoba. Several of the early warnings
included risks of sexual violence and forced recruitment.
58. In its latest annual report, released on 26 February, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) highlighted the persistence
10/17

20-04257

S/2020/239

of high levels of violence against human rights defenders and social leaders in 2019,
including 108 verified homicides (including 15 women and 2 members of the lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex community). Between 1 January and 24 March
2020, OHCHR received 56 complaints regarding killings of social leaders and human
rights defenders, 6 of which have been verified, including the killing of two women.
59. Section 3.4 of the peace agreement sets out a series of mechanisms to address
the protection needs of communities, leaders and human rights defenders and calls
for the development of a public policy on the dismantling of the criminal
organizations behind most of the violence. One of these, the National Commission on
Security Guarantees, met on 9 January, under the chairmanship of President Duque,
with the objective of advancing the development of such a policy, which is the
Commission’s principal mandate. Achieving meaningful progress, taking into account
the inputs of civil society representatives, is imperative to tackling violence in the
territories. On 23 January, a technical session was held to analyse the proposals of
civil society and establish a road map for the elaboration of the policy.
60. The peace agreement provided for the establishment of a comprehensive
security and protection programme for communities and o rganizations in the
territories, which includes such measures as a special protocol for the protection of
rural communities affected by the conflict, support for human rights reporting by
organizations in the territories, and a programme of “community peac e and
coexistence promoters” to support peaceful conflict resolution mechanisms at the
local level. Decree No. 660 of April 2018 created and regulates the comprehensive
security and protection programme. Substantial progress in operationalizing the
programme would have a positive impact on the dire security situation of
communities in rural areas of the country.
61. On 12 February, the Ministry of the Interior launched the action plan of the
Comprehensive Programme of Safeguards for Women Leaders and Human Rights
Defenders, following joint work between the Government and civil society
representatives. The plan has three main areas of action: prevention, protection and
non-repetition. Adequate resources will be required to ensure the Programme’s full
implementation. Since the launch, the National Protection Unit has made progress in
implementing a protocol to strengthen risk assessments for women leaders and human
rights defenders.
62. On 3 March, at a “Round table for Life” event in Puerto Asís (Putumayo
Department), a road map for the effective protection of social leaders, with a
departmental focus, was launched as a joint initiative of civil society, departmental
governors and the Inspector General. The road map promotes the adoption by
departmental governments of measures to protect leaders, in line with the peace
agreement. The measures include prioritizing the implementation of Decree No. 660
on the comprehensive security and protection programme for communities and
organizations in the territories; coordination with the National Commission on
Security Guarantees; and facilitating regional spaces for dialogue, to feed into the
formulation of the public policy on the dismantling of criminal organizations and their
support networks.

C.

Legal guarantees
63. The Office of the High Commissioner for Peace, FARC and the Mission have
continued to meet regularly and in a tripartite manner to address the remaining
challenges regarding the accreditation of former FARC-EP members. The
Government confirmed that 269 former FARC-EP members were accredited, bringing
the total number of accredited former combatants to 13,104 (10,129 men and 2,975

20-04257

11/17

S/2020/239

women). Furthermore, 66 of the recently accredited individuals were notified by the
Government, bringing the total number of notified individuals to 12,891.
64. There are still individuals on the list submitted by FARC to the Government on
15 August 2017 who are awaiting definition of their situation. The Government
initiated the evaluation of 417 individuals on the list. In add ition, the cases of
approximately 190 individuals who passed an initial screening (165 of whom are in
prison) remain under review by the Government. The Government has announced that
it will open a dialogue with FARC under a mechanism within the Commission for the
Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement
to review those cases. While this mechanism was specifically agreed upon in the
peace agreement, it is the first time the parties are officially making use of it.
65. It is concerning that there are still 150 accredited individuals who remain in
prison and whose legal situation is pending definition by the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace.

D.

Cross-cutting issues
Gender
66. Some progress has been made in the implementation of the peace agreement’s
gender provisions related to reintegration and security guarantees. Women former
combatants play a key role in promoting reconciliation efforts and community -based
reintegration. The FARC National Commission on Women, Gender and Diversity
continued to implement a series of activities to promote women’s participation and
collaboration with women’s organizations around the implementation of local
development plans in the Departments of Córdoba, La Guajira and Cauca. Pro moting
the leadership roles and organizational capacity of women former combatants, and
their effective inclusion in decision-making processes, remains a challenge.
67. On 20 February, the mandate of the Special Forum on Gender was renewed by
the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation
of the Final Agreement; notably, it was agreed to permanently include women former
FARC-EP combatants as observers in the Forum. The Special Forum has noted the
importance of maintaining high-level dialogue with the Government and has observed
that it needs adequate resources in order to continue monitoring the gender aspects of
the peace agreement.
68. In January, women who participated as candidates in the October 2019 local
elections from various parties, including FARC, exchanged experiences and received
leadership training during a multiparty political dialogue co-organized by the
non-governmental organization Electoral Observation Mission, the Netherlands
Institute for Multiparty Democracy and the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia.
69. Women former combatants and members of local communities participated in
events throughout the country to commemorate International Women’s Day, including
more than 15 organized with support from the United Nations system.
Ethnic affairs
70. Tailored support for former combatants from ethnic communities remains
limited. There are two specific collective productive projects approved by the
National Reintegration Council: one in Cauca Department that benefits indigenous
former combatants and one in Chocó Department that benefits Afro -Colombian
former combatants. The few other initiatives and productive projects that exist are

12/17

20-04257

S/2020/239

mostly the result of the efforts of former combatants themselves, with support from
traditional authorities and communities.
71. Indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities continue to be affected by
pervasive violence, including attacks, mass displacements, confinement and
recruitment of children, in several departments, in particular Cauca, Chocó, Nariño
and Antioquia.
72. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace collectively accredited 11,762 indigenous
people from 69 communities in the Departments of Chocó and Antioquia and more
than 100,000 victims from 31 indigenous communities in Cauca Department, as part
of its cases focused on violence in those departments.
Children
73. The Agency for Reintegration and Normalization has continued to implement
the “A different path of life” programme for 123 young adults formerly ass ociated
with FARC-EP when they were children (70 women and 53 men). The Mission and
the Agency are following up on a case of domestic violence against a female member
of the programme; a specific protocol for such situations may be required. There has
been no progress regarding the 218 young people identified by FARC in October 2018
who could be included in the programme.
74. The situation of more than 2,200 children of former combatants remains of
concern. Approximately 900 of those children live in former territorial areas. For
those living outside the former territorial areas, their situation is even more
precarious. Recently, the Mission has observed some progress with the creation of
child-friendly spaces in four former territorial areas (two in Guaviar e Department and
one each in Tolima and Cesar Departments).
75. Recent cases of recruitment and use of children by illegal armed groups have
been reported in the Departments of Chocó, Norte de Santander, Guaviare, Nariño
and Putumayo, continuing a grave trend highlighted in my report on children and
armed conflict in Colombia. 1 Children are also being affected by forced displacement,
sexual violence, the presence of landmines and unexploded ordnance, and the
interruption of education services owing to the actions of illegal armed groups and
clashes between armed actors, particularly in the Departments of Antioquia, Chocó,
Meta and Tolima.
Youth and peace and security
76. In February, the Working Group on Youth of the National Reintegration Council
met to discuss a reintegration strategy tailored to young former combatants that
focused on their specific needs and their role as peacebuilders. Participants noted the
risks facing young former combatants in terms of stigmatization and recruitment
efforts by illegal armed groups, and the importance of including them in productive
projects and decision-making spaces. According to the National Reintegration
Registry, young people aged between 18 and 28 represent around 20 per cent of
former combatants in the process of reintegration (864 women and 1,669 men). Of
those, 602 belong to ethnic minorities and 134 have disabilities.
77. Three sessions of the national conversation, with a focus on young people, were
held. At the sessions, young leaders presented proposals on issues including peacerelated matters.

__________________
1

20-04257

S/2019/1017.
13/17

S/2020/239

Coordination with the United Nations country team
78. The United Nations country team continues to deliver programmes that support
the implementation of the peace agreement, including comprehensive rural reform,
protection of human rights defenders and community leaders, and the gender and
ethnic bodies and priorities provided for in the peace agreement.
79. The United Nations multi-partner trust fund for sustaining peace in Colombia,
which in 2019 invested US$ 29 million to support peace-related programming, has
defined its priorities for the coming months as supporting reconciliation and
reintegration, preventing the stigmatization of former combatants and supporting the
implementation of development programmes with a territorial focus.
80. On 19 March, the Government of Colombia and the United Nations system
signed a new United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework for
2020–2023, focusing on peace and stabilization, support for the country’s efforts to
address the influx of migrants and refugees, and the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals.
81. Also in March, the Government and UNDP signed an agreement through which
the Mine Action Service will monitor the activities of a humanitarian demining
organization, Humanicemos DH, that currently employs 87 former FARC -EP
combatants, including 15 women. The agreement will allow Humanicemos DH to
begin demining operations, becoming the third largest civilian humanit arian demining
organization in the country.

IV. Mission structures
A.

Mission support
82. In the light of the evolving geography of the reintegration process and the need
to verify security guarantees for communities, the Mission will close its camps in
Charras (Guaviare Department) and Filipinas (Arauca Department) by 31 March and
is beginning preparations to move its office in Valle del Cauca Department from
Buenaventura to Cali.
83. As at 29 February 2020, women represented 49 per cent of civilian personnel,
58 per cent of United Nations Volunteers and 36 per cent of international observers.
84. With regard to the COVID-19 outbreak, the Mission has made multifaceted
efforts in line with guidance from Headquarters and host country measures, and in
close coordination with the United Nations country team, covering such critical areas
as business continuity and contingency planning, supply chains, the acquisition and
requisition of additional medical supplies, and specialist support. The Mission has
established a task force and started implementing alternative work arrangements in
all its offices. All non-essential travel has been cancelled or postponed, and travel
within the mission area is limited based on criticality.

B.

Safety and security
85. The Department of Safety and Security closely monitored the security impact
of the ELN “armed strike”, as well as the actions of illegal armed groups in
Catatumbo. No effects were reported on United Nations staff or premises. The
residual risk level after the implementation of the security risk management measures
remains medium to low.

14/17

20-04257

S/2020/239

C.

Conduct and discipline
86. The Mission has continued to conduct training activities aimed at preventing
misconduct, discrimination and harassment (including sexual harassment and abuse
of authority). The Mission has established two fact-finding panels to investigate two
cases of alleged misconduct ; a further two cases have been closed due to insufficient
evidence. A new allegation referred to the Mission is under investigation. As at
23 March, no allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse had been reported durin g
the reporting period.

V. Observations
87. I warmly welcome the multiple expressions of support for and commitment to
the implementation of the peace agreement issued by the recently inaugurated mayors
and governors from the various political parties and regions across Colombia. The
steps they are taking to include elements of the peace agreement in their four -year
development plans, including working with the Government to implement the
development programmes with a territorial focus, are encouraging. The recent launch
of the road map for the effective protection of social leaders from the departments is
a welcome sign that governors are committed to tackling violence against
communities, social leaders and human rights defenders. I h ope that all governors
will move forward with the Government’s proposal for all departmental
administrations to have a peace office, and I urge mayors to adopt similar measures
and have dedicated staff and resources for peace implementation. Mayors and
governors, as well as municipal councils and departmental assemblies, have a
fundamental role to play in peacebuilding. They can continue to rely on the United
Nations system as a partner.
88. Looking at the year ahead, there are several key issues that shoul d be prioritized
in the agenda for comprehensive implementation of the peace agreement. Foremost
among these is taking all necessary measures to put a stop to the tragic killings of
social leaders, human rights defenders and former combatants. No efforts m ust be
spared in granting protection and security to those facing specific risks as a result of
their roles in the promotion of human rights, the implementation of the peace
agreement and the defence of their communities’ interests, and to those who laid d own
their weapons and remain committed to the peace process. The peace agreement
provided for the establishment of several mechanisms to ensure protection and
security for those individuals and their communities. Although those organs exist,
they must be strengthened to be able to fulfil their mandates effectively and have a
real impact on the reduction of violence.
89. I reiterate my call for the National Commission on Security Guarantees to be
convened on a regular basis and to make progress in the adoption of a public policy
to dismantle criminal organizations effectively, taking into account the proposals
made by civil society organizations. The Comprehensive Security System for the
Exercise of Politics, established in the peace agreement, is another mec hanism whose
reconvening could help to coordinate improved protection measures for members of
all political parties. The National Protection Unit urgently requires resources and
personnel to be able to fully staff all close protection schemes and respond t o over
400 pending requests. While I welcome the progress made by the Special
Investigation Unit in its investigations into attacks against former combatants and
social leaders, I urge all relevant actors to fully support the Unit’s critical work to
bring the perpetrators of such attacks, including intellectual authors, to justice.

20-04257

15/17

S/2020/239

90. A second priority should be strengthening the foundations for the longer-term
reintegration process and ensuring that the benefits of reintegration reach all former
combatants. With the early stages now complete, the focus must shift towards
ensuring the sustainability and comprehensive nature of that process. To ensure that
the transition of the former territorial areas for training and reintegration can be
successfully completed, it is essential that the views and interests of former
combatants and surrounding communities be fully taken into account. The
cooperation of local authorities will be key to incorporate the former territorial areas
into municipal administrative and planning arrangements. The longstanding issue of
access to land, both for the former territorial areas and for productive projects, is a
fundamental building block for former combatants and their families to develop their
life projects alongside local communities. The reintegration road map aims to
establish a framework for the long-term reintegration process; I encourage the parties
to continue to work jointly, in a spirit of constructive dialogue, during its
implementation.
91. With over two-thirds of former combatants living outside the former territorial
areas, it is imperative that all actors – including FARC, the Government, local
authorities and the international community – adapt to that reality and fully take into
account the concerns and circumstances of that population in their plans and actions.
Those men and women and their families are struggling to access basic services and
pursue economic opportunities in areas with limited institutional presence, and are
more exposed to attacks and to the threat of recruitment by illegal armed actors. The
reintegration process will only succeed if every single former combatant who remains
committed to the peace process receives opportunities, protection and security,
regardless of where he or she lives.
92. The long-term success of the peace agreement will ultimately be determined by
how much communities that suffered from decades of violence can enjoy the benefits
of peace. A third priority for 2020 should therefore be to ensure that communities,
especially victims, are at the centre of all peacebuilding efforts. That includes
fulfilling the actions set out in section 3.4 of the peace agreement on security
guarantees for communities, and operationalizing the comprehensive security and
protection programme for communities and organizations in the territories. Continued
progress in the comprehensive rural reform, including the development programmes
with a territorial focus, will also be essential, as will the effective coordination of the
development programmes with other programmes. Adequate measures should be
taken to support communities around former territorial areas that are relocated to
other regions. Should former territorial areas be relocated owing to security reasons,
I trust that this will not result in a reduction of the State’s presence, but rather in its
strengthening, in order to ensure the protection of the communities in those areas. The
sustained and integrated presence of State institutions is necessary and remains the
most effective means of ensuring peace and stability in the territories.
93. Throughout those three priority areas, it is essential to pay special attention to
the specific needs of women, children, ethnic communities and young people. I urge
FARC leaders at all levels to redouble their efforts to increase the participation of
women former combatants in decision-making spaces. Female social leaders and
human rights defenders continue to face threats that inhibit their leadership. The
launch of the action plan of the Comprehensive Programme of Safeguards for Women
Leaders and Human Rights Defenders is a welcome step and I look forward to its
prompt and full implementation. Greater technical and financial resources continue
to be required, particularly at the regional and local levels. Former combatants from
ethnic communities and indigenous and Afro-Colombian leaders are also under grave
threat and require specific protection measures. Increased attention should be paid to
providing early childhood education, services and childcare spac es for the thousands
16/17

20-04257

S/2020/239

of children of former combatants. Lastly, I encourage all actors to listen to the voices
of young people, whose creativity, energy and commitment to peace is a source of
inspiration.
94. The voices of victims must also continue to be at the centre of the peace process.
Colombian society and especially victims have placed tremendous hope and
expectations on the work of the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation
and Non-Repetition to bring about healing, truth, justice and reconciliation. I reiterate
my support for the three components of the System – the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace, the Special Unit for the Search for Persons Deemed as Missing and the Truth
Commission – as they try to meet those expectations. I call upon all actors to
contribute fully to their work, including by being forthcoming with their contributions
to truth and empathetic in their acknowledgement of the suffering of victims.
95. The COVID-19 outbreak will pose many challenges for Colombia over the
coming months. I welcome the Government’s commitment to ensuring continued
implementation of peace-related programmes in this challenging context. I also
welcome the swift and collaborative manner in which FARC and the Government
have taken preventive actions for the former territorial areas in the framework of the
National Reintegration Council’s Technical Working Group on Health.
96. I am confident that, despite the challenging circumstances, 2020 can bring
encouraging developments for Colombia through the co mprehensive implementation
of the peace agreement. The increased participation of many actors, including the
private sector, young people, victims, religious leaders and local and departmental
authorities, is one of many signs that the Colombian people are committed to building
peace together and to sowing and nurturing seeds of reconciliation. They can be
assured of the full support of the United Nations.

20-04257

17/17
