UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL

259sd

MEETING:

17 JUNE

1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2593)

Adoption

of the agenda

The situation

1

.,.,....,...,,,...I..................

1

,......*.......................................*

in Namibia:

(a)

Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17213);

(b)

Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17222);

(c)

Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/17242)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*....*..........................

WPV.2593

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2593rd MEETING
Held in New York

President: Mr. Errol MAHABIR

on Monday,

17 June 1985, at 10.30 a.m.
2. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite the Acting President of
the United Nations, Council for Namibia and the other
members of the delegation to take a place at the Council
table.

(Trinidad and Tobago).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ouyahia, Acting
President, and the other members of the delegation of the
United Nations Council for Namibia took a place at the
Council table.

agenda (S/Agenda/2593)

of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite Mr. Nujoma to take a
place at the Council table.

2. The situation in Namibia:
(rr> Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17213);
(b) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Mozambique to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17222);
(c) Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of Namibia (S/17242)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nujoma took a place
at the Council table.
4. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with decisions taken
at previous meetings on this item [2583rd to 2587th, 2589th,
2590th and 259&d meetings], I invite the representatives of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bangladesh, Barbados, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada, the Congo, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia,
Democratic Yemen, Ethiopia, the German Democratic
Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany, Ghana, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Indonesia, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya,
Kuwait, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho,
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Panama, Poland, Seychelles, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey,
Uganda, the United Arab Emirates, the United Republic of
Tanzania, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zambia and Zimbabwe
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

The meeting was called to order at 11.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
(4 Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Reprr+
sentative of India to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/17213);
(6) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Repro
sentative of Mozambique to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17222);
(4 Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 435
(1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/17242)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zarr(Afghanistan).
Mr. Bessaieh (Algeria), Mr. Van-Dunem (Angola), Mr. Muiiiz
(Argentina), Mr. Choudhury (Bangladesh), Mr. Moseley (Barbados), Mr. Tshering (Bhutan), Mrs. Carrasco (Bolivia), Mr.
Legwaila (Botswana), Mr. MacieI(Brazil), Mr. Tsvetkov(Bulgaria), Mr. Engo (Cameroon), Mr. Lewis (Canada), Mr.
Gayama (Congo), Mr. Malmierca (Cuba), Mr, Moushoutas
(CypruQ Mr. &ar (Czechoslovakia), Mr. AI-Ashtal(Democratic Yemen), Mr. Dinka (Ethiopia), Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic), Mr. Lautenschlager (Federal Republic of
Germany), Mr. Asamoah (Ghana), Mr. Sinclair (Guyana),
Mr. Charles (Haiti), Mr. Foideak (Hungary), Mr. Kusumaatmadja (Indonesia), Mr. Shearer (Jamaica), Mr. Kuroda
(Japan), Mr. Kiilu (Kenya), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait), Mr.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite the representative of
Liberia to take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kofa (Liberia) took
a place at the Council table.
1

pendence of the Namibian
advances.

Vongsay (Lao People’s Democratic RepubIic), Mr. Makeka
(Lesotho), Mr. Azzarouk (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr.
Zain (Malaysia), Mr. Gauci (Malta), Mr. Muiioz Ledo (Mexico), Mr. Nyamdoo (Mongolia), Mr. Alaoui (Morocco), Mr.
Murargy (Mozambique), Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann (Nicaragua), Mr. Gambari (Nigeria), Mr. Shah Nawaz (Pakistan),
Mr. Cabrera Jovane (Panama), Mr. Nowak (Poland). Ms.
Gonthier (Seychelles), Mr. van Schirnding (South Africa),
Mr. Wijewardane (Sri Lanka), Mr. Birido (Sudan), Mr. AlAtassi (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Tiirkmen (Turkey), Mr.
Odaka (Uganda), Mr. Al-Ma@, (United Arab Emiyates),
Mr. Mkapa (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Le Kim
Chung (Viet Nam), Mr, Golob (Yugoslavia), Mr. Goma
(Zambia) and Mr. Mudenge (Zimbabwe) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

people will

make further

g. I should like also to congratulate the repreSentatiVe
of
Thailand on the excellent manner in which he presided over
the affairs ofthe Council last month. We acknowledge with
gratitude and appreciation the steadfast support of his
Government and his people for the cause of the right of the
Namibian people to self-determination and independence.
10. The importance and urgency attached to the situation
in Namibia are clearly demonstrated by the active participation in these Council meetings of a number of ministers and
other high officials from all regions of the world. Indeed, the
current series of meetings of the Council constitute an
unequivocal demonstration of the serious concern shared
by members of the Group of African States, the NonAligned Movement and, indeed, the international community as a whole about the current turn of events with regard
to the Territory, and underscore our determination to see
that all effective measures open to the United Nations are
taken to eliminate a situation which constitutes a serious
threat to international peace and security.

5. The PRESIDENT: I should like to draw the attention
of members of the Council to document S/17272, which
contains the text of a letter dated 13 June 1985 from the
representative of Venezuela to the Secretary-General.
6. The first speaker is the Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, Mr. Abdul G. Koroma. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

11. South Africa’s open defiance of the will of the international community in respect ofNamibia and South Africa is
a damaging affront to the Organization, and must not be
permitted to continue any further, as it seriously undermines the very principles on the basis of which it was
founded.

7. Mr. KOROMA (Chairman of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples): Since its inception, and in the
discharge of the mandate entrusted to it, namely, to ensure
that peoples of dependent Territories exercise their legitimate right to self-determination and independence, the Special Committee has considered the question of Namibia’s
independence to be of supreme importance. This year, as it
commemorates the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adop
tion of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, the Special Committee’s
commitment to and determination to work towards Namibia’s freedom and independence have become even more
resolute. It is for this reason that we have requested the
Council’s permission to speak to make known the Special
Committee’s latest position on this all-important matter.

12. As members of the Council are aware, South Africa’s
continued illegal occupation of Namibia and its denial of
the right to self-determination of the Namibian people constitute serious breaches of its international obligations,
which renders it criminally reprehensible. Accordingly, the
international community, as institutionalized by the Council, is under the obligation to continue to deny recognition
to the illegal situation created by South Africa, to deny aid
or assistance to South Africa in maintaining that situation,
and to terminate its illegal presence in Namibia forthwith.
13. As members of the Council are also aware, thespecial
Committee held at Tunis from 13 to 17 May 1985 an
extraordinary session in observance of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. Following extensive deliberations on the theme of the twentyfifth anniversary of the Declaration, the main focus of
which was on Namibia, the Special Committee, guided by
its mandate to ensure that the peoples of colonial Territories
and countries are enabled to exercise their right to selfdetermination and independence, adopted unanimouslyI repeat: unanimously-a
decision on the question of Namibia.’

8. Before proceeding further, however, I wish, on behalf
of the Special Committee and on my own personal behalf,
to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency for this
month. It is with considerable interest and hope that the
Special Committee views the assumption of the presidency
by Trinidad and Tobago, the country which you so ably
represent in this body, on this important occasion, for your
country is a firm believer in the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and a courageous defender ofthe principles of the Non-Aligned Movement, Furthermore, the commitment of the people and the Government ofTrinidad and
Tobago to the cause of colonial peoples and their outstanding contribution to the work of the United Nations in the
field of decolonization, in particular as an exemplary
member of the Special Committee, give us hope that, under
your stewardship, the just cause of the freedom and inde-

14. In that consensus decision, the Special Committee,
among other things, holds the apartheid regime of South
Africa accountable for creating a situation which seriously
threatens international peace and security, as a result of its
persistent non-compliance with and violations of United
Nations resolutions and decisions, its ruthless resort to
2

repression of and violence against the Namibian people, its
repeated acts of aggression, subversion and destabilization
against neighbouring States, its continued manoeuvres to
subvert the implementation of Council
reSOlI.ItiOrI
435
(1978), and its sinister attempts to impose on the people of
Namibia an internal settlement.
15. The Special Committee categorically rejects and
denounces all manoeuvres by South Africa to bring about a
sham independence in Namibia through fraudulent constitutional and political schemes designed to perpetuate its
colonial domination, including the latest attempts by the
Pretoria regime to impose an internal settlement through
the so-called Multi-Party Conference, and to establish an
interim government.
16. The Special Committee is convinced that any political
solution to the Namibian situation must be based on the
immediate and unconditional termination of South Africa’s
illegal occupation of the Territory, the withdrawal of its
armed forces and the free and unfettered exercise by the
Namibian people of their right to self-determination and
independence, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960. Thus, the Special
Committee calls for the immediate implementation of
Council resolution 435 (1978), the only acceptable basis for
a peaceful settlement of the Namibian question, without
modification, qualification or pre-conditions.

20. As representative of Sierra Leone, I should like to say
in this context that my Government has learned with indignation of South Africa’s latest lawless behaviour in carrying
out a wanton act of armed aggression against Botswana,
which resulted in the death of innocent men and women,
and at least one six-year-old child. The Government of
Sierra Leone strongly condemns that wanton use of force
and that act of brigandage by South Africa against a
Member State. This latest attempt to intimidate an independent African State, or to cow it into submission and to make
it accept a so-called treaty of non-aggression with ignominious conditions, is bound to fail. South Africa is deluding
itself if it believes that apartheid and internal peace are
compatible or can coexist. Moreover, South Africa’s acts of
aggression and destabilization against independent African
States constitute a serious threat to the peace and security of
that region.
21. The Government of Sierra Leone therefore calls upon
the Council to ensure that South Africa desist from its
illegal and aggressive behaviour. In this connection, Sierra
Leone welcomes the condemnation of the raid by the international community, and in particular by the United States
and the United Kingdom Governments. South Africa
should be left in no doubt that it can find sympathy in no
quarter for its illegal use of force. South Africa’s latest
action against an independent and peaceful Botswana is
further demonstration that it cannot be trusted and that it
cannot be regarded as a respectable member of the international community. Furthermore, it demonstrates that
South Africa is not interested in a peaceful solution to the
problems of apartheid that it has itself created.

17. In condemning the continued military, nuclear and
intelligence collaboration between South Africa and certain countries as constituting a violation of the arms embargo imposed by the Council against South Africa in its
resolution 418 (1977), the Special Committee urges that
the Security Council adopt further measures to widen the
scope of the embargo in order to make it more effective
and comprehensive.

22. The time is therefore overdue for the Council to act
positively by imposing on South Africa a comprehensive
programme of economic sanctions. At the same time, measures must be adopted without delay to extend all possible
assistance to the struggling people of Namibia under the
leadership of the South West Africa People’s Organization
(SWAPO). That is the very least we should expect if we are
not to see the present armed struggle degenerate into a
full-scale war with all its dire consequences.

18. Furthermore,
the Special Committee recommends
that the Council act, and act decisively, against any dilatory
manoeuvres and fraudulent schemes of the illegal occupation regime aimed at frustrating the legitimate struggle of
the Namibian people. Aware that the Council has been
prevented from discharging effectively its responsibilities
for the maintenance of international peace and security in
the region owing to the opposition of certain of its permanent members, the Special Committee recommends that the
Council respond, and respond positively, to the overwhelming demand of the international community by imposing
forthwith
comprehensive mandatory sanctions against
South Africa under the terms of Chapter VII of the Charter.

23. Before concluding, may I be permitted to express my
deep appreciation to States members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries for having taken this important
initiative to call for this series of Council meetings on the
situation in Namibia, With the full co-operation of the
members of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), I
have no doubt whatsoever that thedecisions adopted by the
Council during these meetings will prove to be a decisive
factor in restoring to the people of Namibia their longdenied human dignity and freedom. Delay is the worst form
of denial.

19. These and other equally important recommendations
are embodied in the decision adopted unanimously by the
Special Committee at its extraordinary session. On behalf of
the Special Committee, I commend them to the serious
attention of members of the Council. The repeated attempts
to bring about an independent, stable, self-governing and
democratic Namibia, by the exercise of reason and through
negotiations at an international level, have been ignored
and, worse yet, ridiculed by the racist regime, as has been
amply demonstrated by its recent act of aggression against
Botswana.

24. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation for
this opportunity to address the Council in connection with
its consideration of the critical situation which prevails in
the Territory of Namibia at this moment in time.
25. I should also like to pay a particular tribute to our
Secretary-General for his tireless endeavours in the search
3

for a satisfactory solution to the problem of Namibia and
his personal commitment to the cause of the people of
Namibia.
26. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Zimbabwe. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
27. Mr. MUDENGE
(Zimbabwe): Let me begin, Sir, by
congratulating you most sincerely on your assumption of
the presidency for the month of June. My delegation is
confident that your wisdom, experience and vast diplomatic
skills will enable you successfully to guide the deliberations
of the Council.
28. I also wish to join the many others who have spoken
before me in extending appreciation to your predecessor,
the representative of Thailand, for the competent and outstanding manner in which he presided over the affairs of the
Council during the month of May.
29. And, finally, I am grateful to you and your colleagues
in the Council for allowing my delegation to participate in
the debate on the question of Namibia.
30. Before I make my statement on Namibia, I wish to
draw the attention of the members of the Council to a
statement issued by my Government on the bloody events
in Gaborone last week [S/17278, annex].
31. The Council meetsat a sombremoment for the Namibian people. For yearsnow they have seentheir hopes
raised, only to be dashedto the ground time and again.
They have heard of near breakthroughs,effusively described, but which came to naught; they have heard of
hushed airborne diplomatic forays in the African night
skies, but which led to nowhere. They have seen their
leadersand alliespressuredto make concessions
and compromisesin the so-calledproximity talks, pre-implementation talks, shuttle consultations,talksabout talks, but these
have turned out to be talks about nothing; they have also
heardabout detente,constructiveengagement,
linkagesand
parallelisms,but all this plethora of diplomatic mumbojumbo and geometry hasyielded nothing. They are still an
oppressedand brutalized nation, Namibia is still an occupied territory.
32. It isnow nearly 70 yearssinceNamibiawastaken over
in 1915from Germany by South Africa, on behalf of the
British Empire; and it is 25 yearssincethe Declaration on
the Granting of Independenceto Colonial Countries and
Peopleswas adopted. All the former German coloniesare
now free and independent.Yet the peopleof Namibia have
remained under the yoke of colonialism and racist
oppression.
33. I recall theseevents in order to underline the moral
and legal obligation of the world community, and in particular that of some of the Powersallied during the First
World War, to the Namibian people.There are members
in this Council who by their actions and inactions, both
presentand past, bear a heavy moral responsibilityfor the

tragedy that is Namibia. As so many other speakershave
underlined, the Mandate given to South Africa by the
League of Nations to hold the Territory of Namibia in
“trust” on behalf of mankind was subsequentlyrevoked
by the General Assembly in resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27
October 1966, by the Security Council in numerous
resolutions-in particular resolution 269 (1969)-and by
the International Court of Justice in its advisory opinion
handed down on 21 June 1971.’
34. The presenceof Pretoria in Namibia is therefore
devoid of both legaland moral validity. It is basedon the
power of a bandit holding hostages.Hence it is in the light
of these facts that we should judge the installation of a
so-calledinterim administration in Namibia. This administration is a creature of illegitimateparentageand by definition is itself illegitimate. From illegality only the illegalcan
result. The Council in its resolution 439 (1978), inter da,
reiteratedthe view that any transfer of power, in contravention of the United Nations resolutions,including resolution
439(1978)is null and void. It was thereforeonly appropriate that the Council, in a note by the President of 3 May
1985[S/17151], rejectedthe so-calledinterim administration as null and void. In the samespirit, the Co-ordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries, at its Extraordinary
Ministerial Meeting on the question of Namibia, held at
New Delhi from 19 to 21 April 1985, condemned and
rejected Pretoria’s recent manoeuvre as being fraudulent
and without validity in law whatsoever[seeS/17184 and
Corr.1, annex]. We hope therefore that on this point there
will be no equivocation by any memberof the Council.
35. The events taking place in Windhoek today are a
desperateand futile attempt to hijack the Namibian independenceplan. The Council must unreservedly condemn
this strategem by the racist Pretoria regime.
36. South Africa’s conduct in the Namibia independence
negotiationshaslacked candour and integrity. It is a story
of duplicity, deviousness,insincerity, arrogance,obstinacy
and obstructionism.Its behaviour in the negotiationsleading to Security Council resolution 435 (1978) and since
then is a vivid demonstrationof this. During the so-called
proximity talks or “shuttle consultations”, held in New
York in 1978, South Africa stormed out of the negotiations claiming that the gap was too wide to justify further
talks. It then went on to enact the notorious Proclamation
A.G, 26 of 1978,under which it incarceratedhundredsof
leadersof SWAPO. From there it proceededto send its
troops into Angola, where they massacredhundreds of
unarmed Namibian refugeesin the camp at Cuamato. It
resorted to all those machinationsin a desperateattempt
to sabotagethe negotiations,
37. But SWAP0 remained resoluteand steadfastin the
face of all that calculatedprovocation. Methodically it dismantled all.South Africa’s objectionsuntil Pretoria could
find no moreground on which to denyNamibia its independence.Consequently,South Africa wasforced to acceptthe
United Nations plan for Namibia’sindependenceembodied
in resolution435(1978).But no soonerhad it acceptedthat
resolution.than it proceededto undermineit by conducting

its unilateral and sham “elections” in Namibia in 1978.
Then the wriggling, twisting and turning started again, until
by 1980 the international community thought it had virtually struck a deal with the apartheid regime for it to get out
of Namibia. Thus the United Nations called for a preimplementation conference at Geneva in 1981 togo over the
details of the modalities and instrumentalities of the Namibia independence plan as embodied in resolution 435
(1978).

elevated and given a global dimension. South Africa now
hides its colonial racist objectives behind American global
concerns. It is as if the United States has now become a toll
used by South Africa to promote its racist policies. The
springbok has charmed the American eagle into its racist
snare. And we seethe eagle’s wings hopelessly entrapped as
it tries to give the impression that great changes are taking
place in South Africa as a result of its policies. Every twist
and turn by the apartheid regime is presented with great
fanfare by transatlantic satellite communications

38. Alas, it soon became clear that South Africa’s intransigence had found encouragement from some quarters in
Washington during the 1980 American presidential elections. The result was that the Geneva meeting became a
charade, a mere farce, with South Africa giving the alleged
partiality of the United Nations as its nebulous reason for
walking out.

42. In this propaganda battle, logic has been turned on its
head. The creation of three parliaments where there used to
be one is presented as a “new dispensation” meant to unite
the people of South Africa. The fact that this is consistent
with apartheid-the doctrine of separation-is conveniently
forgotten. Its divisive strategy of trying to incorporate the
Indian and Coloured communities to reinforce the upartheid edifice dominated by an Afrikaner minority is brushed
aside. Since when is the reinforcement of the instrumentalities of oppression to be regarded as a positive reform?

39. Sadly, it also became clear that Pretoria’s reading of
the signals from Washington were well founded. For, when
the new Administration articulated its policy on southern
Africa, it introduced its apologia for apartheid, known
today as the policy of “constructive engagement”. This
strategy, we were given to understand, was meant to bring
about peace and understanding among the nations of southern Africa, as well as Namibian independence. In the name
of ‘?zonstructive engagement”, the new Administration radically changed what we had come to believe to be the
position of every United States Government, that is, to tell
publicly to South Africa that its apartheid system and
aggressive disposition towards its neighbours were the root
causes of violence in the region.

43. The other day we were told in this chamber that great
strides were being made because South Africans were now
free to marry whom they wished. But where will these
multiracial couples live? The Group Areas Act forbids the
husband ‘to live in the same area as his wife-and, of
course, the children cannot live with either of the parents.
This is an absurdity. How can anybody be hoodwinked by
such gimmicks? Apartheid is about sharing power between
the 80 per cent black majority and the white minority. It is
not, I submit, about who goes to bed with whom. It is
really an insult to our intelligence to present the removal of
the so-called petty apartheid as if it were the fundamental
question in South Africa. It is definitely not.

40. Instead, by what can only be described as a perverse
twist of moral philosophy, “constructive engagement”, for
the first time, equated the brutal violence of an oppressive
system that the international community had declared to be
a crime against humanity, with the force used by its victims
to resist it. How can we, in the name of humanity, equate the
violence of the Gestapo and SS murder squads with the
resistance of the victims of the holocaust? It is a horrible
perversion of logic to describe South Africa’s aggression
against its neighbours as justified “protective action”. Since
when can the protection of an institutionalized crime
against humanity be regarded as justified? It is immoral to
lecture and pressure the front-line States and SWAP0 into
acquiescing in the existence of the evil system of apartheid
in Namibia and South Africa. Short of its verbal trappings
and mental gymnastics, that is what “constructive engagement” amounts to. It has no moral basis, and it has yielded
no positive results.

44. The present American Administration is wrong if it
believes that the apartheid edifice is crumbling and that
President Botha is somehow the South African equivalent
of a twentiethcentury Abraham Lincoln who needs our
support and understanding, He is not; and trying to give
him an aura of international respectability by wining and
dining him in the capitals of Western Europe is a tragic
error of judgement.
45. The aforementioned interpretation of the policy of
“constructive engagement” is the most generous that one
can give it. The alternative to this pathetic imagery of an
immobilized giant reduced to sycophancy by a crafty racist
regime is that of collusion between South Africa and the
United States Administration. Recent events in southern
Angola, where we sawa Mr. Lehrman and his motley band
of rebels plotting subversion and treason against Angola
and other States in southern Africa, make usstop and think
again about United States policy towards our region. We
understand that this Mr. Lehrman carried a message of
encouragement from none other than President Reagan to
Jonas Savimbi, the leader of the South African-sponsored
bandits in Angola and his confederates.

41. We speak strongly against this policy, because we
believe that it was its inception that introduced the tragic
concept of “linkage” to the Namibian independence issue.
TO South Africa, the linkage ofNamibian
independence to
the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola was an unexpected opportunity to transform its colonial racist occupation of Namibia into a global ideological crusade-the
defence of the so-called Western Christian civilization
against imaginary Russians in southern Africa. Here, a
simple matter of decolonization and racial oppression was

46. The role of the United States as a would-be honest
broker on the Namibian question is now most problematic.
5

It seems the United States has now become part of the
problem. Certainly the South African Prime Minister came
very close to letting the cat out of the bag when speaking in
the South African Parliament on 18 April this year. He is
reported, inter alia, to have said:

51. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Czechoslovakia. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
52. Mr. CI%AR (Czechoslovakia): Mr. President, I
should like to thank you and all the members of the Council
for having given me this opportunity to address the Council
during its deliberations on the very serious issue on the
current agenda. I also wish to congratulate you sincerely, on
your assumption of the presidency for this month and to
express my conviction that your distinguished personal
qualities, diplomatic skills and experience are a guarantee of
the successful fulfilment of the Council’s mandate. Your
country, Trinidad and Tobago, has for many years been an
active member of the Special Committee against Apartheid
and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, organs
which are obliged to include among their priorities consideration of the pernicious consequences of the racist and colonial policies of the Government of South Africa.

“However, as I told Parliament on 27 April 1984, the
people of South West Africa/Namibia,
including
SWAPO, cannot wait indefinitely for a breakthrough on
the withdrawal of the Cubans from Angola. Should it
eventually become evident, after all avenues have been
thoroughly explored, that there is no realistic prospect of
attaining this goal, all the parties most intimately
affected by the present negotiations will obviously have
to reconsider how internationally acceptable independence may best be attained in the light of prevailing
circumstances.” [See 17/52, appendix 2.1
47. Put most simply, the issue of the Cuban presence in
Angola is an American concern, which South Africa is
using for convenience for the. time being. If it can create an
amenable regime in Namibia it intends to leave the linkage
baby with its American parents. That that is so is evidenced
by the fact that when Angola made some important concessions on the subject last year, South Africa spurned them
for it was not sure of the emergence of a puppet regime in
Namibia.

53. I should also like to express our appreciation of the
performance of the representative of Thailand in the office
of President of the Council in May.

49. Finally, my delegation wishes to place on record its
admiration for, and appreciation of, the tremendous efforts
the Secretary-General has made to try to resolve the Namibia problem and appeals to all members ofthe Council to
rally behind him as he reassertsthe authority of the United
Nations on the Namibia issue. He needs the full support of
the Council.

54. The question of Namibia has for long years been
raising ever-growing concerns. The Council is compelled to
deal with this problem, the essenceof which is connected
with attempts to perpetuate persisting colonialism, the
enforcement of neo-colonial diktat, flagrant violations of
the norms of international law, disregard of the conclusions
of the United Nations and of the will of world public
opinion, escalation of tension and the endangering of peace
in southern Africa. The Pretoria regime prolongs the illegal
occupation of Namibia, trampling underfoot the inalienable right of the Namibians to self-determination and independence, militarizing Namibia and escalating military,
police and judicial repression and terror, carrying out consistent exploitation of the natural, mineral and human
resources of Namibia, transferring to Namibia the inhuman practices of apartheid and launching from Namibian
territory acts of aggression, subversion and destabilization
against independent African States.

50. Let the Council send a clear, unambiguous message to
the Pretoria racists that the game is up. If they do not
comply now, the Council should show that it has the determination and political will to act, and act decisively. Let the
Council give a lead to the world by warning South Africa
that it is prepared to impose and implement mandatory
sanctions if no progress is made on this issue. For outside
this chamber there are ordinary men and women from all
walks of life, as well as legislators and Governments,
already grappling with these issues.They are desperately
trying to send urgent and strong messages to the South
African regime by their campaigns of disinvestment and
other sanctions. The Council should not fail those men and
women of good will, and should not betray the people of
Namibia. It should not be a Council of cynicism and despair; it should be a Council of hope. The time to act is now.
Tomorrow may be too late.

55. It is imperialism, with its attempts to prevent the
consistent elimination of all remnants of colonialism and
racism in the region, that has caused the present situation in
Namibia and in the whole of southern Africa. It is in
accordance with the strategic interests and intentions of
imperialism that Pretoria has been blocking the efforts of
the international community to solve the Namibian question and obstructing the implementation of the series of
resolutions on that question adopted by the Council. In the
interests of United States strategy in the south of Africa, it
has raised the totally unjustified demand to link Namibia’s
independence to the departure of internationalist Cuban
troops from Angola, where those troops assist, upon the
request of the legitimate Government of the People’s
Republic of Angola, in combating the acts of aggression
and subversion perpetrated by the South African regime.

48. For all those reasons it has now become imperative
that we officially and symbolically bring the Namibian
independence negotiation process back to where it
belongs-the United Nations. It is only the SecretaryGeneral who now has both the legal and moral authority to
mediate. Others have undermined their credibility as mediators by attempting to bring extraneous issuesinto the negotiation process. They have become part of the obstacles to
be removed.

6

56. Time and again Pretoria has launched new attempts
designed to perpetuate its domination in Namibia, The
latest-the
unilateral plan for a so-called internal
settlement-has rightly been rejected by the whole international community. This action, null and void since its very
inception, constitutes nothing but an attempt to bantustanize Namibia.

delay of effective measures, including sanctions under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, that
would make the Pretoria regime terminate its illegal occupation of Namibia, liquidate the inhuman system of apartheid
and stop subversive activities in the south of the African
continent. We are convinced that the present deliberations
of the Council should lead to the adoption of effective
measures to that end.

57. The seriousness of the situation in Namibia and the
necessity of a resolute and speedy solution were convincingly explained at the beginning of the current discussion by
Mr. Nujoma, President of SWAPO, the sole authentic representative of the Namibian people. He also pointed out the
obstacles preventing the immediate implementation of selfdetermination for the Namibian people and fulfilment of
the United Nations plan. They include primarily the manysided support granted to the Pretoria regime by certain
Western States and Israel. This support is motivated by the
ideological, global, strategic as well as economic interests of
imperialism and provided mainly in the spirit of the discredited policy of so-called constructive engagement.

61. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Guyana. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
62. Mr. SINCLAIR (Guyana): The Minister for Foreign
Affairs of my country, Mr. Rashleigh Jackson, sends his
deepest regrets to his colleagues, within the Non-Aligned
Movement and outside it, for his inability to be present in
New York for this series of meetings.
63. My second duty is to thank you, Mr. President, and all
the members of the Council for having acceded to our
request to participate in the debate.

58. The ways towards termination of the suffering of the
Namibian people are set forth very clearly in the series of
conclusions of our Organization embodied primarily in
Council resolution 385 (1976), 435 (1978) and 539 (1983). At
the time of our Organization’s fortieth jubilee, when we are
reviewing the contributions of the United Nations to the
solution of the world’s problems and the role of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, adopted 25 years ago, the imperative to
put those conclusions into practice acquires ever stronger
topicality and urgency. The legacy of the victory over fascism and nazism in the Second World War undoubtedly
commits all of us to seeking speedy ways of preventing
further crimes against the Namibians and immediately
ensuring Namibia’s independence.

64. At no other time in the history of the question of
Namibia has the Organization’s resolve to defend the rights
and interests of the Namibian people been so sorely tested
as it is being tested now. For, as the Secretary-General has
pointed out in his report of 6 June [S/17242], the prevailing
difficulties with regard to this question have been compounded and given a new dimension by the recent decision
of South Africa to install a puppet administration in Namibia.
65. Our delegation is participating at a very late stage of
what has been a lengthy debate. This debate has served,
among other things, to underscore and to strengthen the
almost universal consensusthat already exists about Namibia’s freedom. It is a consensus that is well founded.

59. The Government and people of Czechoslovakia resolutely condemn the continuing illegal occupation of Namibia by the racist regime of South Africa and demand that
the Namibian people immediately be granted independence
and that the territorial integrity ofNamibia, including Walvis Bay and the offshore islands, be maintained. We stand
for immediate implementation
of the decisions of the
United Nations on this question. We reject any attempts to
link the question of Namibia’s decolonization with any
issues irrelevant to it or with any other demands. We oppose
all of Pretoria’s attempts at a so-called internal settlement of
the Namibian problem on neocolonialist terms outside the
framework of the United Nations and without the participation of SWAPO.

66. In 1966 the General Assembly terminated South
Africa’s Mandate over the Territory and made the United
Nations responsible for the future of the Territory. In 1971
the International Court of Justice, in an advisory opinion,’
stated that the Assembly had acted correctly, that South
Africa’s continued presence in Namibia was illegal, that
States were under an obligation to recognize that illegality
and to refrain from any acts which might appear to imply
a recognition of that illegal presence. In that same year the
Council adopted resolution 301 (1971), in which it
endorsed the Court’s advisory opinion.
67. My delegation does not recall an issue on the international agenda in respect of which three organs of theunited
Nations, each acting independently of the others, have
spoken in such unison and clarity and forcefulness. This is
surely one aspect of the uniqueness of Namibia. But it is not
in this fact, which is ofprofound importance in its own way,
that the consensuson Namibia is rooted. That consensus is
rooted in the fact that, under contemporary international
law, colonialism constitutes a denial of basic human rights
and essential political freedoms, colonial occupation is illegal, and people subjected to alien domination and exploita-

60. As wasnoted during the visit to Prague last March of a
SWAP0 delegation headed by the Secretary-General of
that Organization, Mr. Tdivo Ya Tdivo, the Czechoslovak
Government and people are in full solidarity with the struggle for freedom and independence being waged by the
Namibian people under the leadership of their sole authentic representative, SWAPO. Czechoslovakia is ready to continue granting that struggle its determined and all-round
support. We unequivocally advocate the adoption without
7

tion have the right of self-determination, a right which
predates even the creation of the Organization.

Council, and has studied it carefully. We consider that if this
draft were to be adopted in its present form the Council
would be showing consistency. As long ago as 1969 [resoletion 269 (1969)], the Council had decided that in the event of
failure by South Africa to co-operate in implementation of
its resolutions, it would meet immediately to determine
upon necessary steps in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations. That was 16
years ago. The Council has never gone beyond that pronouncement where the relations of South Africa with Namibia are concerned. Since then what the Council has been
doing is temporizing where South Africa is concernedacting evasively in order to gain time, postponing the real
decision, seeking what options might exist short of taking
the action that has the support of the overwhelming majority in the international community. Once again, in 1985, the
Council seems poised to decide to meet again to decide on
what to do about South Africa’s non-co-operation.

68. While condemning and rejecting South Africa’s creation of a so-called interim government in Namibia, speakers
in the current debate have also reaffirmed the centrality of
resolution 435 (1978) and the need for its immediate implementation In addition, they have highlighted the international community’s stern rejection of linkage of Namibia’s
independence with the withdrawal of Cuban troops from
Angola. The people of Namibia must be free because it is
their right to be free. Exercise of that right cannot be
circumscribed or made conditional. As President Nyerere
ofTanzania has argued, it is only by accident that Angola is
a neighbour of Namibia. What is the difference between an
insistence on Cuban withdrawal from Angola and an
insistence that Namibia will not be free until Soviet troops
are withdrawn from Afghanistan, or, for example, until
Vietnamese troops are withdrawn from Kampuchea? This
conditioning of Namibia’s freedom upon the solution of
probIems elsewhere is not only irrelevant; it is simply
immoral.

73. This attitude on the part of the Council has contrib
uted in no small measure to bolstering and giving a sense of
protection to the Pretoria regime. The body responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security is, by its
inaction, indirectly giving comfort to the regime that poses
such a grave threat to peace and security in southern Africa.

69. The debate in the Council has also served further to
isolate the rulers in Pretoria as the party responsible for
Namibia’s continued domination. There is universal rejection of the policies of apartheidand aggression practised by
the Pretoria regime, and that regime is identified as the one
whose actions pose the gravest threat to peace and security
in southern Africa.

74. In the course of the debate, the Council has been the
object of much forthright comment by several delegations,
including my own. The Council, after all, is a very exposed
and prominent body. What is more, it has clear obligations
in respect of the maintenance of international peace and
security, and Member States look to it to respond credibly
to situations where peace and security are imperiled, and
more so where its own authority is being flouted. But as we
review the Council’s performance in respect of Namibia, it
is important and only fair that we maintain proper perspective and not see the Security Council as an undifferentiated
whole. I venture to say that in any one year there is an
overwhelming majority of the membership of the Council
fully supportive of firm concrete action against South
Africa. But we realize that the pace of the Council is always
determined by the slowest and most conservative mover.
That is the way in which this Council’s procedures are
fashioned. In the case of Namibia, the pace of the Council
will be determined by that permanent member which least
wishes to see a change in the Status quo.

70. As if this needed further confirmation, the Pretoria
regime last week launched a brutal attack on Botswana, in
violation of that territory’s independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity. This attack took place even while the
Council was considering the question of Namibia.
71. The President of Guyana, Mr. Linden Forbes Samp
son Burnham, in a message to the President of Botswana,
Mr. Quett K. J. Masire, stated:
“The Government and people of Guyana are
shocked at the brutal invasion by the armed forces of
South Africa of the independent and peace-loving
nation of Botswana and by the cold-blooded’murder of
innocent people in its capital, Gaborone.
“Guyana condemns in the strongest possible terms
this latest in the long list of callous acts of aggression by
South Africa against neighbouring African States . . .

75. Let me say this in another way. Geisa Rocha, who
used to be in the secretariat of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, has written in her book, In Search of Namibian Independence, the following:

“The Government and people ofGuyana call upon all
peace-loving and progressive forces to join together in
renewed efforts to isolate South Africa in all fields and to
bring about the dismantling of the odious system of
apartheid.

“It is not particularly fruitful to urge certain courses of
action on an international organization or to condemn
such a body for inaction or ineffectiveness if the bases of
support necessary for its involvement and success do not
exist. An intelligent approach to international conflict
management , . . must be predicated on an understanding of the constraints imposed on international organizations by the interests and policies of those groupings of
States in whose hands the destinies of these bodies rest.”

“Similarly we urge upon those who continue to give
succour to the apartheid regime to review and alter their
relations with Pretoria.”
72. The Guyana delegation has seen the draft resolution
[S/17284] which is being considered for adoption by the

Mrs. Rocha then quotes from Inis Claude, who wrote:
8

“[The United Nations] is above all a tool, and, like
other tools, it has possibilities and limitations . . . The
essential questions are: who has the handle in his grasp
and what are the purposes in his mind?”

79. The situation in southern Africa will evolve its own
dynamic, There are forces unleashed inside South Africa
which will themselves determine in large measure the pace
of change. As the late Steve Biko said:

She then offers her own conclusion:

“The winds of liberation which have been sweeping the
face of Africa have reached our very borders. There is
no more doubt about the inevitability of change-the
only questions now remaining are ‘how’ and ‘when’.”

“It is my view that the predominant problem facing
the international community is not how to bring about
change in the attitude of the South African Government,
but how to secure such changes in the policies of South
Africa’s major Western allies who have the handle in
their grasp . . .”

I go even further than Steve Biko. Those winds are now
blowing already inside South Africa. Their fury will not
diminish; it will grow in intensity. We are already witnessing the phenomenon and we are also seeing the results it is
yielding.

76. That seems to be the real problem. It is inconceivable
that an Organization of one hundred and fifty-nine independent States has to be impassive and helpless in the face of the
contempt and arrogance of one. That is not the letter, nor is
it the spirit of the Charter. South Africa’s attitude is not the
fundamental problem. If the racial configuration in South
Africa as between oppressors and oppressed were the
reverse of what it is now, we might already have seen that
the attitude of the rulers is not the problem. The problem is
that South Africa’s contempt and arrogance are being tolerated by some of those who have the handles in their grasp. It
is not that they do not have options. They do have options;
but they have chosen to soft-pedal on South Africa.

,80. The cost of freedom in South Africa and in Namibia
will therefore be high indeed in terms of human life and
human suffering. But there is still room for an intervention
by the Council to reduce that cost by bringing about a
peaceful solution in Namibia. The outcome is not in doubt
nor can it be prevented. My delegation hopes that some of
us do not lose the privilege of sharing in bringing it about.
81. After the conclusion of this debate our SecretaryGeneral must resume his mission of contact with South
Africa. That mission, difficult enough, has been made even
more so by South Africa’s recent actions, which reveal the
absolute contempt in which the Pretoria regime holds the
Organization. Guyana applauds his patience and his fortitude. He has our fullest confidence, and we pledge to him
our continuing support.

77. Now, having established that, what does one do? Do
we sit supinely back and wait for those who hold the handles
to undergo change? We should not, nor can we. The
Government of Guyana, for its part, will continue espousing the cause of the freedom fighters in southern Africa. We
shall continue to be insistent in international forums on
their behalf. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of my country, Mr. Rashleigh Jackson, declared in Georgetown on 25
May last, on the occasion of the celebration of African
Liberation Day:

82. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
83. Mr. GOLOB (Yugoslavia): It is reassuring to see you,
Sir, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Trinidad and
Tobago, a member of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, presiding over this series of important Council
meetings. Your commitment to the cause ofpeace, independence and sovereignty of peoples and countries will no
doubt contribute to the successful consideration of the question of Namibia. During the preparations for these meetings Mr, Alleyne, representative of Trinidad and Tobago,
has amply demonstrated his dedication to the lofty ideals of
the Charter of the United Nations and to the principles of
the policy of non-alignment.

“For us in Guyana, the blood of the freedom fighters
of Africa and Asia flows in our veins. Commencing last
year and continuing for four years, we are celebrating a
more than century-long existence of this connection.
Their struggles have been ours and ours theirs; and in the
councils of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
and elsewhere, we seek common cause against colonialism, imperialism, racism and alien domination. The
commitment to the struggle of those who are not yet free
in Africa is thus a shared one. The People’s National
Congress and the Government and people of Guyana
therefore have an attachment to the liberation movements which is umbilical, one which is reinforced by
history and culture . . ,“.

84. The Minister for Foreign Affairs and the representative of Thailand have shown competence and wisdom in
guiding the deliberations of the Council in the month of
May.

78. The denial of self-determination and freedom in
southern Africa is causing extensive suffering and loss of life
in that region. It threatens peace and security, not only in
the southern Africa region but beyond it. Those who now
shield South Africa should certainly see a need to compel
the Pretoria regime to dismantle its racial policies and to
co-operate in Namibia’s liberation so as to avoid a situation
which in the long run could damage their own interests over
a much wider area.

85. Gravely concerned over the impediments that South
Africa, abetted by its allies, had defiantly strewn in the path
towards genuine independence for Namibia, the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of
Non-Aligned Countries on the question of Namibia, held in
April at New Delhi, requested the convocation of this series
of meetings of the Council [S/17184 and Corr.1, annex,
9

The issueof Namibia is not an East-West issue. It is a matter

paru. 44. The Ministers were guided by their solidarity with
the struggle of the people of Namibia for their independence
and against colonial occupation, a struggle Namibians have
been waging for generations,

of self-determination and independence, and let us perceive
it that way.
92. The United Nations plan for Namibia is one of the
remarkable achievements of the world Organization in the
last decade. It ought to be defended vigorously and effectively, and it must be implemented without delay, without

86. The Co-ordinating Bureau invited the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of a number of non-aligned countries to
participate personally in this series of meetings. However,
the Federal Secretary for Foreign Affairs of the Socialist
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Mr. Raif Dizdarevid,
could not personally participate owing to previous and
urgent engagements. He authorized me to speak on his
behalf and upon his instructions.

changes and without preconditions, The United Nations
plan is a result not only of debate, but of negotiation; it is

not meant to control the crisis, but to do away with it. It
rests on the principles of self-determination, independence
and sovereignty of peoples and countries. It is the only basis
for a peaceful solution. However, its implementation is
being prevented by South Africa through ever-more numerous stratagems and ploys. Irrelevant and extraneous issues,
such as linkage, are being raised and rejected and condemned by the international community. So-called internal
settlements are being devised based on puppet political
institutions, the latest being artificially brought to life these
days. It will, no doubt, meet with rejection by the interna-

87. South Africa shies from nothing to deny the people of
Namibia their inalienable rights to freedom, independence
and self-determination. It continues colonial occupation,
terror and exploitation, causing great human suffering. It
pursues the policy of apartheid and racial discrimination,
flagrantly violating the human rights of the people of Namibia. Under pressures and threats, Namibians are forced
to seek refuge in the neighbouring countries. Pretoria is
conscripting Namibians in the occupying army, thus setting
the stage for fratricidal war. It is recruiting mercenaries and
piling up military effectives. It is using the Tkrritory of
Namibia as the springboard for aggression and, subversion
against independent African countries, Angola in particular.

tional community, and rightly so.

93. All this amounts to nothing but a seriesof attempts by
South Africa to buy time, to ride on the backs of the people
of Namibia, to occupy a part of Angola and to continue to
try to intimidate the front-line States.

94. A lot has been said, but not nearly enough by far has
been done to implement the United Nations plan, For seven
years, South Africa has been trying to shunt it aside, to push
it into oblivion, and to bury it under the growing pile of
prevarication, manipulation and hypocrisy. It is for the
Council to cut short this seemingly endless exercise of evasion, defiance of the will of the United Nations and disregard for the decisions of the General Assembly and the

88. The apartheid rCgime is a permanent threat to the
security, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the frontline States. The latest criminal foray into independent Botswana should be met with immediate condemnation and
adequate measures.
89. The human and natural resources of Namibia are
being plundered by South Africa and others in defiance of
the decisions of the United Nations and of Decree No. 1’ of
the United Nations Council for Namibia.

Security Council.

95. We feel that it is for the Security Council to act
promptly and with the necessaryvigour to bring about the
implementation of the United Nations plan. It stiould not
confine itself to condemnations and appeals. It should
rather adopt an action-oriented decision that would
amount to renewed and strengthened pressure on South
Africa. The Security Council should set a time-frame for the
implementation of the plan, and should then monitor the
implementation of its decisions and intervene promptly to
that end.

90. No attempts to quell the liberation struggle of the
people of Namibia are nor will be successful. People ready
to fight for self-determination and independence are invincible, and their resolve attracts an ever-growing international
support. This explains the international recognition earned
by the struggle of Namibia and SWAPO. It is a source of
pride for us to see the President of SWAPO, Mr. Sam
Nujoma, and his high-level delegation participating in the
deliberations of the Council. Their struggle is central to the
present and to the future of Namibia. Perseverance in and
intensification of that struggle is, for the people of Namibia
and for SWAPS, the only way to respond to the duplicity of
South Africa and to its refusal to participate in a political
settlement. Our support of that struggle is an obligation.
Yugoslavia will continue to spare no effort in its support for
and assistance to the people of Namibia and their sole,
authentic representative, SWAPO.

96, If South Africa continues in its intransigence, there is

no option but the imposition of comprehensive mandatory
sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. Furthermore, the Governments of all Member
States should take appropriate legislative, administrative
and other measures, pending the imposition of mandatory
sanctions against South Africa, in other to isolate that
country in the political, economic, military and cultural
fields and in the field of sports. The Secretary-General
should be given support in continuing to play an important

91. Foreign domination in Namibia, and anywhere else in
the world, poses a direct threat to international peace and
security. The longer the occupation lasts, the greater the
danger of drawing the issue of Namibia into bloc rivalry.

role in the implementation

of the United Nations plan.

97. In the present circumstances, the activities of the
United Nations Council for Namibia have gained in impor10

tame. It is necessary to support
Council’s mandate.

the implementation ofthat

Namibia [S/17242] in which the Secretary-General states
that in spite of resolution 539 (1983), which rejected the
linkage issue, South Africa still insists that the withdrawal
of Cuban troops from Angola is a precondition for the
implementation of resolution 435 (1978). Because of that
intransigent position, the United Nations plan has remained
unimplemented.

98. The United Nations and the entire international community should do their best to bring independence and
freedom to Namibia. That would contribute to the relaxation of tensions and to stability in international relations, At
a time when belief in the United Nations is dwindling in
some quarters, this would show once again that the United
Nations is an indispensable forum for the solution ofinternational issues.

106. In paragraph 8 of its resolution 539 (1983), the Council called upon South Africa
“to communicate to [the Secretary-General] its choice of
the electoral system in order to facilitate the immediate
and unconditional implementation of the United
Nations plan embodied in Security Council resolution
435 (1978)“.

99. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Hungary. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
100. Mr. FOLDEAK (Hungary): Allow me at the outset
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency at a time when the United Nations is required to take
crucial decisions. I am confident that your personal qualities and diplomatic skill will contribute to the successful
outcome of the debate on the important issue before the
Council.

South Africa has ignored this call as well.
107. During the past two decades, the rulers of Pretoria
have furnished ample evidence that they cannot be considered reliable partners in any negotiating process. Their
obsession with aparrheid prevents them from accepting the
logic of fairness, decency and justice. They will not change
as long as they feel the presence of the protective shield of
veto in this Council.

101. I should like also to expressour appreciation to your
predecessor, the representative of Thailand, for the successful manner in which he conducted the affairs of the Council
during the month of May.

108. My delegation believes the time has come when Pretoria must be faced with decisive, united action by the
Council. It is time to use the power of comprehensive
mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations if South Africa does not comply with

102. Let me express the gratitude of my delegation to the
members of the Council for having given me the opportunity to participate in this debate.

resolutions and continues to obstruct the implementation of

the United Nations plan.

103. My delegation has been following carefully the
events in South Africa during the past months. Since the
introduction of the so-called constitutional reforms last
September, the tension in that country has been increasing
constantly. The oppressive apparatus of the racist State is
becoming more and more aggressive and violent against the
majority of the population of the country. The result is
more killings, mote victims and more tension, It is no
exaggeration to say that the racist State is at war with its
own population, That situation was discussed in the Council not long ago.

109. Namibia must be free without further delay. The
independence of the last major colonial Territory involves
the most fundamental principles on which the United
Nations is based and which must be respected by all of its
Member States.
110. It is the firm conviction of my delegation, and of the
vast majority of delegations that have spoken before the
Council, that the Pretoria regime could not defy the resolu-

tions of the United Nations and the will of the international
community without the support of its allies, first and foremost the United States. The policy of so-called constructive
engagement has led to disastrous consequencesin terms of a
general worsening of the situation in the southern Africa

104. This time the Council is dealing with another aspect
of the behaviour of the racist regime of South Africa: the
obstruction of Council resolutions, which are binding on
Member States. The latest manoeuvres by Pretoria to introduce an interim administration in Namibia, however, go
beyond simple obstruction: they constitute a serious violation of Council resolutions435 (1978)and 439 (1978). South
Africa has no right to take any unilateral measures in
Namibia outside the scope of the relevant United Nations
resolutions. My delegation absolutely condemns the establishment of an interim government in Namibia with the
involvement of the socalled Multi-Party Conference, which
is a puppet of Pretoria and represents no one.

region, in terms of the loss of more human lives and in terms
of more reckless disregard of United Nations resolutions

by the racist regime of South Africa.
111. The.latest example of the aggressive policy of South

Africa is the armed incursion into Botswana, a peaceful
neighbouring country. This armed aggression cannot be
justified. It is a serious violation of the sovereignty of an
independent State. My delegation strongly condemns this

brutal act of aggression.
105. My delegation has studied carefully the report of the
Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) on the question of

112. We firmly believe that Pretoria must not be given any
more support from any quarter. This time South Africa

11

must be confronted with decisive and unified action by the
Security Council. There should not be any encouraging
signals for Pretoria, for that would only further delay the
implementation of the United Nations plan.

began in the sixteenth century with the systematic plunder
of the human and material resources of the continent, the
consequences of which are still felt to this day.
120. A few months ago the People’s Republic of the
Congo hosted an International Seminar on the Berlin Conference, thus stressing how the lessons learned from this
commemoration could shed light on the present situation.

113. With the exception of South Africa, all parties concerned have demonstrated flexibility and readiness to implement resolution 435 (1978), the only acceptable basis for the
settlement of the question ofNamibia. The Government of
Angola and the leadership of SWAP0 have participated in
the negotiating process with good faith and a genuine desire
to solve the problem. My delegation expressesappreciation
for their constructive approach.

121. My delegation is laying stresson this one-hundredth
anniversary because of its direct bearing on what was then
called South West Africa. It was in the capial of imperial
Germany that the fate of the Territory wassealed, and the
colonial method chosen for Namibia was one of the most
barbaric conceivable. It involved quite simply the genocide
of indigenous peoples-the Hereros and the Ovambos, in
particular. Tens of thousands of people were massacred in a
very short period of time before the First World War,
simply to create space for the occupiers and to exploit the
grazing, mining and other resources of the country. Whereas elsewhere the end of the war brought with it a taste of
freedom for the stricken peoples, the same could not be said
for the people of Namibia, which went from Scylla to
Charybdis-from the bloody hands of an imperial European Power into the hands of a gang of bigots then installed
in South Africa and determined to assert their principal
virtues, scorn and cruelty. The rest is history. Despite the
celebration this year of the fortieth anniversary of the signing of the Charter of the United Nations, which marked for
the world the advent of a new international order, and
despite the 25 years that have elapsed since the adoption of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the Namibian people is still
languishing in the dark ages of the old order. Like the
neighbouring South African people living under the regime
of apartheid, it suffered the application of Nazi principles
and the Nazi order that had prevailed during the Second
Word War and, as is well known, were condemned at the
Nuremberg trials.

114. I also take this opportunity to assure the people of
Namibia and its sole, legitimate representative, SWAPO, of
the support and solidarity of the people and the Government of the Hungarian People’s Republic. My country will,
as in the past, continue to render all kinds of support for its
just struggle for independence.
115. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Congo. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
,116. Mr. GAYAMA
(Congo) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, since I am speaking at this late stage
in the work of the Security Council, the Congolese delegation is happy to express to you, quite advisedly, congratulations and sincere admiration for the way in which you have
been conducting the deliberations of this important United
Nations body. I am pleased that the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of a fraternal country friendly to the African continent, Trinidad and Tobago, has assumed the role of President of the Council at a time when the Council is dealing
with the question of Namibia. This is a question that is as
dear to you as it is to us, and we know that you will take the
opportunity to bring to bear your well-known experience
and talent to ensure the successful outcome of these
deliberations.

122. The anachronism, the violation of the norms and
principles of international law, and the non-implementation of the relevant General Assembly and Security Council
decisions are today the features and the symbols of a situation purposely maintained by South Africa.

117. I wish also to pay a tribute to your predecessors,the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and the representative ofThailand, who guided the work of the Council with great talent
last month, thereby contributing to the universal respect
this body commands.

123. After 100 years of colonization, we are still haggling
over the accession of a people to self-determination and
independence. The fact that the question of Namibia has
been on the General Assembly’s agenda since the founding
of the United Nations has apparently had no decisive effect
on finding a solution to the problem. The fortieth anniversary of the adoption of the Charter of the United Nations
should remind all Member States of the need to return to the
Organization its original spirit, so that it can once again
serve “We the peoples of the United Nations”, as mentioned in the preamble of the Charter, instead of following
the present course characterized by the selfish interests of a
few.

118. The efforts made by the Secretary-General since the
beginning of his mandate to try to resolve the Namibian
crisis are familiar to us all. We should like to thank him and
to encourage him to continue his work to make it possible
one day-as soon as possible-to celebrate Namibia’s
accession to international sovereignty. The current meetings should be a decisive landmark in that regard.
119. On the subject of decisive landmarks in the history of
Namibia, there is a very compelling one whose significance
for the history of Namibia speaks for itself-is the commemoration this year of the one-hundredth anniversary of
the Act adopted in 1885 at the Berlin Conference, whereby
Africa was carved up and subjugated, thus institutionalizing within the context of “might is right-‘?,a process that

124. Indeed, in legal terms the United Nations could do
no less than what it did when it terminated South Africa’s
Mandate over Namibia and designated the United Nations
12

Council for Namibia as the legal Administering Authority
of the Territory and, more particularly, when it adopted the
settlement plan for Namibia contained in resolution 435
(1978).
125. The only thing missing here is action, In this regard,
the obstacles have been fully identified. South Africa is
undoubtedly the main obstacle; but Pretoria is not alone. Its
support for the implementation of the settlement plan was
shelved the day when the Western Powers-from
which it
gains most of its support-had
imposed on them by one
member a strange linkage between the implementation of
the settlement plan and the domestic situation in Angola, a
sovereign country of the United Nations.
126. However, at the present stage of the question’s consideration, the United Nations can do nothing but ensure
the implementation of its plan. It would be a shameful
affront to the memory of so many Namibian martyrs,
including women and children of Kassinga, to impose more
on that people which has made all possible concessions
through SWAPO, its sole, authentic representative, on the
strength of the contact group’s commitment to promote a
peaceful solution of the problem.
127. The legitimacy of the aspirations and the magnitude
of the sacrifice endured by the Namibian people should be
reflected, we feel, in a genuine return to the spirit and the
letter of resolution 435 (1978). We therefore appeal to those
States which have acknowledged that they have some influence on the Pretoria Government not to give it too easy
alibis to behave as it wishes outside the international consensus. We also express our gratitude to the members of the
Western contact group-to
the extent that that group still
exists-which,
to be honest, have dissociated themselves
from the manoeuvres that could have taken them too far in
an unworthy compromise with the South African regime.

nance ,of an unjustified and unjustifiable status quobecause it is clear that we can expect no positive,
conciliatory gesture from the southern part of the African
continent dominated by the apartheid regime. International peace and security are directly threatened by the
aggressive policies which are acts of defiance by Pretoria
against the United Nations and the whole world.
131. The unprovoked
attack launched last Friday
against Botswana resulting in 11 deaths, many wounded
and material damage that has not yet been estimated-this
at the very time that the Council was meeting to consider
the situation-for
which South Africa’s responsibility is
quite clear, is additional proof of Pretoria’s so-called good
faith. This act, as everyone knows, is not the first and it
will not be the last, particularly if Pretoria thinks it is
above any kind of sanctions. Whether it uses clandestine
procedures as in the Angolan province -of Cabinda or
throws off its mask and openly attacks others as it did in
Gaborone, South Africa is consistent-that
is, it does
nothing that promotes peace.
132. The conditions for imposing mandatory sanctions
against South Africa under Chapter VII of the Charter are
there. It only remains now for the Council to draw the
necessary conclusions. Not to impose those sanctions in
the present circumstances would be to give the uppartheid
regime a kind of hallmark of respectability that would
render meaningless the main organ responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security and thus
give free rein to disorder and insecurity everywhere in the
world.
133. Everyone will therefore understand that we are
exhorting the international community to increase manifold assistance to SWAP0 so that the Namibian people
can wage its struggle until the inevitable victory over colonialism and oppression is won.

128. The acts of piracy of which South Africa was recently
guilty in the north of Angola, in Cabinda, reveal the arrogant scorn shown by the apartheid regime for international
opinion while it relies on the benevolent understanding of
some who consider those acts to be nothing more than
pursuit of its enemies. For the needs of the cause, South
Africa and the strategists of East-West confrontation are
ready to invent enemies outside instead of determining the
true source within the apartheid rigime itself, which is the
permanent threat to international peace and security.

134. The Congo has always supported the need to
strengthen the Namibian people’s ability to wage the struggle through its sole, authentic representative, SWAPO.
That was in fact one of the basic recommendations and
conclusions of another seminar on the subject, the Seminar
on the Intensification of International Action for the
Immediate Independence of Namibia, which was also held
at Brazzaville last March. “Namibia represents an extreme
case of colonialism characterized by brutal oppression,
exploitation and denial of basic rights of the Namibian
people by the illegal occupation regime of South Africa”,’
was the unequivocal message of the participants in that
Seminar.

129. All those factors can only further the perpetration of
acts of bravado like the decision to impose upon Namibia a
so-called internal administration, without any democratic
basis or juridical recognition than that of the occupying
Power from which it emanates.

135. It is clear from these deliberations that there is an
overwhelming and constant commitment on the part of
the Member States to the ideal of an independent Namibia-an
ideal shared by all peoples of the United
Nations. It is for us on this fortieth anniversary of the
adoption of the Charter to ensure the final universalization
of this idea. In so doing we would be fulfilling the expectations of the non-aligned countries, which initiated the convening of this series of meetings following the Extra-

130. This situation cannot go on without further endangering an already endangered future, given the accumulation of hard feelings. But, as recognized by the final act of
the Seminar of Brazzaville to which I referred before, while
the Berlin Conference sowed division and the seeds of desolation, the duty of present generations is to rebuild in
unity and understanding something to prevent the mainte13

ordinary Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau, held at
Now Delhi last April. I take this opportunity to address
our congratulations to the Ministers for Foreign Affairs,
whose participation in the Council’s work has conferred
,,pon this body a very special impact.
136. Mr. HUANG Jiahua (China) (interpretation
fi’om
Chinese): The Chinese delegation has already made a statement with regard to the question of Namibia [2584th meeting-j. We should now like to state our position on South
Africa’s invasion of Botswana.
137. Just as the Council is debating the issue of Namibia
and condemning South Africa for its continued illegal occupation of Namibia and its incessant subversion of the secuof neighbouring
countries, the South African
rity
authorities have once again launched an invasion into Botswana. That act not only seriously violates the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Botswana, but also constitutes
an open challenge to the international community as a
whole. The Chinese Government and people express the
utmost indignation over, and the strongest condemnation
of, South Africa’s act of aggression. We also express our
deep sympathy for, and solidarity with, the Government
and people of Botswana.

and people express great indignation
strong condemnation of it.

“The raid upon Botswana by the South African
authorities is not an isolated incident: the facts have
proved time and again that the root cause of the turbulent and unstable situation in southern Africa lies in the
South African authorities’ stubborn pursuit of the practice of racism and the policy of destabilizing the neighbouring countries. The South African authorities’
perverse acts will only arouse stronger resistance and
greater indignation among the African count ies and
peoples.
“The struggle of Botswana, Angola, Mozambique

1

itho

in

United

Nations,

New York

1

00300

and

the other African front-line States to combat racism,

safeguard their sovereignty and territorial integrity and
support the Namibian people’s fight for independence
has won sympathy and support from all the justiceupholding countries and peoples in the world, The Chinese Government and people will, as always, stand
firmly by the African countries and peoples and resolutely support their just struggle.”
The meeting

138. On 15 June a spokesman of the Chinese Ministry for
Foreign Affairs made the following statement about the
incident:
“In the small hours of 14 June South African troops
outrageously invaded Gaborone, the capital of Botswana, killing 12 people, wounding many more and
‘destroying some houses and motor vehicles. That was a
brazen encroachment upon the sovereignty and territorial integrity of an independent State by the South African
authorities and a flagrant provocation against the African countries and oeonles. The Chinese Government

over that act and

rose

ai

1.05

p.m.

NoIts

’ A/AC. 10!9/830.
z Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South
Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding
Security Council
resoiuiion 276 (1970), Advisory
Opinion, L C.J. Reporls, 1971, p. 16.

’ DecreeNo. 1 for the Protection of the Natural Resourcesof Namibia. enactedby the United Nations Council for Namibia on 27 Sep
tember 1974 (OfJ?cia/ Records of the General Assembly, Z’hirfy-fifth
session, Supplement
No. 24 (A/35/24), vol. I, annex II).
4 Official

Records

merit No. 23 (A/40/23),

of the General

Assembly,

chap. IX, para. 12).

Fortieth

90.61439-April

session, Supple-

1994--2,OSO
