A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/220
23 April 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 113
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/53/485/Add.2)]

53/220. Development Account
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 52/12 B of 19 December 1997, 52/220 and 52/221 A of 22 December 1997 and
52/235 of 26 June 1998,
Reaffirming its resolution 41/213 of 19 December 1986,
Reaffirming also the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations and the Regulations and Rules
Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and
the Methods of Evaluation,
Noting the proposals made by the Secretary-General for the utilization of the development dividend,1
Stressing the need to use the Development Account for projects related to the development priorities of the
medium-term plan,
1. Approves, from the eight proposals made in the report of the Secretary-General,1 proposals A, B, D
and E below:

1

A/53/374, sect. III.

99-77221

/...

A/RES/53/220
Page 2

A.

Promotion of electronic commerce (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development);

B.

Capacity-building in economic and social policy analysis in Africa through the networking of expertise
(Economic Commission for Africa);

D.

Computer and telecommunication system for international and national drug control (United Nations
International Drug Control Programme);

E.

Capacity-building and networking for the implementation of the Habitat Agenda in least developed
countries (United Nations Centre for Human Settlements),

on an ad hoc and one-time basis only, without setting a precedent and without prejudicing the outcome of its
consideration of the sustainability and establishment of the mechanism and modalities of the Development
Account;
2. Emphasizes that, in the implementation of those proposals, emphasis should be placed on the
promotion of development activities, and that the implementation should demonstrate the benefits accruing in
building national capacities, particularly in developing countries and also in countries with economies in
transition;
3. Stresses that, in the implementation of the proposals, particular attention should be given to the
utilization of technical, human and other resources available in the developing countries;
4. Decides that the proposals should be reformulated and implemented in accordance with the relevant
Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations and the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme
Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of
Evaluation, as revised by the General Assembly in its resolution 53/207 of 18 December 1998;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to reformulate the other proposals contained in his report following
criteria according to which projects should:
(a) Have multiplier effects and promote capacity-building primarily in developing countries;
(b) Promote regional and interregional economic and technical cooperation among the developing
countries;
(c) Use available human and technical resources from the developing regions;
and to submit those reformulated proposals to the General Assembly at the second part of its resumed fifty-third
session;
6. Decides to keep the implementation of the proposals under review, and requests the Secretary-General
to submit a report to the General Assembly on the utilization of the development dividend, in accordance with
relevant regulations and rules;
7. Also decides to continue consideration of the sustainability and establishment of the mechanism and
modalities of the Development Account during the resumed fifty-third session.
/...

A/RES/53/220
Page 3

97th plenary meeting
7 April 1999
