UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/25
8 May 1997
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH, FRENCH
AND RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3774th meeting of the Security Council, held on 8 May 1997 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Georgia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral concerning the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, of 25 April 1997
(S/1997/340). It has also taken note of the letter of the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the Secretary-General of
1 April 1997 (S/1997/268) and of the letter of the Permanent Representative
of Georgia to the President of the Security Council of 28 April 1997
(S/1997/339).
"The Security Council reiterates its full support for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Georgia within its internationally recognized
borders.
"The Security Council reaffirms its full support for a more active
role for the United Nations, with the assistance of the Russian Federation
as facilitator, aimed at achieving a comprehensive political settlement.
"The Security Council acknowledges the efforts in support of the peace
process of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy, with the assistance
of the Russian Federation as facilitator, and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the Group of Friends of the Secretary-General
on Georgia as mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General of
25 April 1997.
"In this context, the Security Council fully supports the proposals
made by the Secretary-General in his report of 25 April 1997 to strengthen
the involvement of the United Nations in the peacemaking process. It fully
supports, in particular, the intention of the Secretary-General to convene
a meeting with both sides to map out the areas where concrete political
progress can be made. The Council encourages the Secretary-General to
explore the idea of revitalizing the Coordinating Commission and
establishing expert groups on questions of mutual interest.

97-12158 (E)

080597

/...

S/PRST/1997/25
English
Page 2

"The Security Council welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General
to appoint a resident Special Representative, as a successor to his current
Special Envoy for Georgia, and to strengthen the political element of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG).
"The Security Council further encourages the Secretary-General to take
such steps as are necessary, in cooperation with the parties, in order to
ensure a prompt and safe return of the refugees and displaced persons to
their homes, with the assistance of all relevant international
organizations. The Council takes note of the initiation of activities by
the United Nations Human Rights Office in Abkhazia, Georgia.
"The Security Council continues to stress that the primary
responsibility for reinvigorating the peace process rests upon the parties
themselves. It welcomes the continuation of direct dialogue between the
parties. The Council calls upon them, in particular the Abkhaz side, to
intensify the search for a peaceful solution by further expanding their
contacts, and requests the Secretary-General to make available all
appropriate support if so requested by the parties. The Council notes the
appeal of the Secretary-General to both parties to pursue the current
discussions on the implementation of the decisions of 28 March 1997 adopted
by the Council of Heads of State of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS) (S/1997/268, annexes I and II).
"The Security Council remains deeply concerned at the continued
deterioration of the security conditions in the Gali region, including acts
of violence by armed groups, indiscriminate laying of mines and armed
robbery, and the resulting deterioration of the safety and security of the
local populations, of the refugees and displaced persons returning to the
region, and of the personnel of UNOMIG and the Collective Peacekeeping
Forces of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS peacekeeping force).
The Council condemns the acts of violence which have led to the loss of
life of members of the CIS peacekeeping force. It welcomes the intention
of the Secretary-General to continue to make every effort to build upon the
positive results recently achieved in order to improve the safety of the
military observers and the operational effectiveness of UNOMIG.
"The Security Council reminds the parties of their obligation to
ensure the safety and freedom of movement of UNOMIG and the CIS
peacekeeping force, and, in particular, to prevent the laying of mines.
"The Security Council welcomes the good cooperation between UNOMIG and
the CIS peacekeeping force and their efforts to promote stabilization of
the situation in the zone of conflict.
"The Security Council also welcomes the continued efforts by the
United Nations agencies and humanitarian organizations to address the
urgent needs of those suffering most from the consequences of the conflict
in Abkhazia, Georgia, in particular internally displaced persons, and
encourages further contributions to that end. It also reiterates its
encouragement to States to contribute to the voluntary fund in support of
the implementation of the Agreement on a Cease-fire and Separation of
/...

S/PRST/1997/25
English
Page 3

Forces (S/1994/583, annex I) and/or for humanitarian aspects, including
demining, as specified by donors.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to continue to
keep it closely informed of the situation."

-----
