S/2015/289

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 April 2015
Original: English

Small arms and light weapons
Report of the Secretary-General

Summary
In its resolution 2117 (2013), the Security Council requested me to continue to
submit to the Council on a biennial basis a report on the issue of small arms and light
weapons, including on the implementation of that resolution.
Weapons enable their user to dramatically enhance the ability to project power
and to exercise coercive control within and across national borders.
The same weapons — whether in the hands of government forces or of others —
that may have been meant to assist in bringing order may instead bring havoc on a
massive scale.
In particular, the diversion of weaponry is a colossal problem in many parts of
the world. It allows rebels, gangs, criminal organizations, pirates, terrorist groups
and other perpetrators to exponentially bolster their power.
Poor weapons management is an area of alarming concern. Many States lack
thorough planning, consistent attention and adequate resources to ensure safe
storage, handling, transportation and disposal.
A key common denominator in all issues on the agenda of the Security Council
is that availability, ownership and use of weapons and ammunition significantly
determine the dynamics of the crisis. If the weapons situation is not consistently
dealt with, exacerbation or relapse into renewed fighting remains a paramount risk.
The present report contains 14 recommendations for consideration by the
Security Council.

15-06048 (E)

010515

*1506048*

S/2015/289

I. Introduction
1.
In its resolution 2117 (2013), the Security Council requested me to continue to
submit to the Council on a biennial basis a report on the issue of small arms and
light weapons, including on the implementation of that resolution.
2.
While the focus of the present report is on small arms and light weapons,
including their ammunition, the increased diversion and misuse of heavy weapons
cannot be disregarded, as has recently been observed with the diversion of
weapons from Iraq and Libya to the Syrian Arab Republic, Ukraine and Yeme n.
3.
Weapons are force multipliers. They enable their user to dramatically enhance
the ability to project power and to exercise coercive control within and across
national borders. Each crisis or conflict dealt with by the Security Council has its
own characteristics. Yet, a key common denominator in all issues on the Council’s
agenda is that availability, ownership and use of weapons and ammunition
significantly determine the dynamics of the crisis. If the weapons situation is not
consistently dealt with, exacerbation or relapse into renewed fighting remains a
paramount risk.
4.
Section II of the present report frames the issue of arms and ammunition,
focusing not only on conflict and post-conflict situations, but also on situations of
transnational organized crime and terrorism, and armed violence.
5.
Section III examines ways of addressing the risk of the misuse, diversion and
illicit circulation of arms and ammunition. The section first highlights government
responsibility in proper weapons use, safe storage, sound legislation and adequate
procedures for the tracing and destruction of weapons.
6.
Subsequently, it looks at addressing the illicit circulation of arms and
ammunition, including through arms embargo monitoring, peacekeeping activities,
security sector reform, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes
and the strengthening of the rule of law.

II. Framing the issue of small arms and light weapons
7.
States have an inherent right to self-defence and may use armed force in
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations. Apart from arming their national
armed and security forces, most countries allow private security companies and
citizens, under conditions defined in national laws, to own certain firearms and
weapons and use them for lawful purposes.
8.
The same weapons — whether in the hands of government forces or of
others — that may have been meant to assist in bringing order may instead bring
havoc on a massive scale. This can occur when government forces start misusing th e
arsenals at their disposal, arms from legal stocks are diverted into illicit use or
already existing illicit arms arrive in crisis areas.
9.
In particular, the diversion of weaponry is a colossal problem in many parts of
the world. It allows rebels, gangs, criminal organizations, pirates, terrorist groups
and other perpetrators to exponentially bolster their power. Diversion may occur as
a result of a transfer without proper controls, unauthorized retransfer, thefts from

2/20

15-06048

S/2015/289

poorly secured stockpiles, hand-outs to armed groups or barter involving natural
resources. Corruption is a problem often associated with diversion.
10. Poor weapons management is an area of alarming concern. Many States lack
thorough planning and consistent attention to safe storage, hand ling, transportation
and disposal. Poor national inventory practices mean that surpluses cannot be
identified, leading to extensive build-ups of frequently unnecessary stockpiles. 1
11. Small arms typically have a lifespan of multiple decades, yet their re al value
depends on an uninterrupted supply of ammunition. It is sometimes argued that the
trade in ammunition should be excluded from international regulation because of the
high volume of its production and trade, which would render it difficult for
Governments to warrant the detailed levels of record -keeping that would be needed
for ammunition tracing and for the proper regulation of its trade. However, as
consumer traceability has evolved in other fields, such as pharmaceuticals and food
and agricultural products — goods with an even higher turnover — the question of
including ammunition in arms regulation seems to be more a matter of political
prioritization than one of technical or logistical impossibility. It is encouraging that
the Arms Trade Treaty covers ammunition in addition to weapons and their parts
and components.
12. High levels of illicit arms and ammunition in circulation contribute to
insecurity, cause harm to civilians and severely constrain assistance activities. The
United Nations and other organizations providing protection, humanitarian aid and
development resources are confronted with this reality on a daily basis.
13. Because of the immense havoc weapons and ammunition can wreak, any
Government that decides to export them must realize the profound international
responsibility it has for every transfer it authorizes. Conversely, a Government
importing or procuring from national production must ensure that it will use these
weapons only to provide for the safety and security of its citiz ens and that it has the
capacity to safeguard all weapons and ammunition within its possession throughout
their life cycles.
14. Weapons and ammunition are hardware, namely, physical commodities on
which, in principle, measurable action can be undertaken. Warehouses can be
upgraded, surpluses can be destroyed, illicit arms can be collected and serial
numbers can be recorded and traced. Undeniably, in many situations, it may be
difficult to undertake these actions; I underline, however, that the concrete cha racter
of weapons management should warrant unrelenting attention.

A.

Conflict and post-conflict situations
15. Within the past decade, over 250 conflicts have affected all parts of the
world. 2 About 55,000 people perish annually as a direct consequence of armed
conflict. 3 The number of those displaced by conflict has reached levels not seen

__________________
1 James Bevan, ed., Conventional Ammunition in Surplus: A Reference Guide (Geneva, Small

Arms Survey and others, 2008).
2 Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, SIPRI Yearbook 2014: Armaments,

Disarmament and International Security (Oxford University Press, 2014).
3 Secretariat of the Geneva Declaration on Armed Violence and Development, Global Burden of

Armed Violence 2011: Lethal Encounters (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2011).

15-06048

3/20

S/2015/289

since the Second World War: currently, more than 33 million people are displaced
because of conflict and violence. 4 Chillingly, children have been recruited and used
by armed forces and groups, killed and maimed, forced into displacement and made
victims of sexual violence in 23 conflict situations around the world (see A/68/878S/2014/339).
16. The widespread availability of small arms and light weapons and their
ammunition is a key enabler of conflict. Arms and ammunition may originate from
varied sources. Shipments of small arms to conflict zones from abroad are most
often small-scale consignments, namely, a steady trickle of weapons across porous
borders. The cumulative destabilizing force of such small-scale trade — for
example, as equipment of foreign terrorist fighters, pirates or armed groups — is not
to be underestimated. Domestically, small arms and ammunition ofte n enter illicit
circulation through distribution, theft, corruption, pilferage and resale. Government
depots remain prominent sources. These can amount to massive injections of
weapons with a wide regional effect, as has been the case recently in Iraq and Libya.
To a considerable extent, addressing this risk is a matter of managing surpluses.
Authoritative assessments estimate that some 40 percent of military firearms in the
arsenals of State armed forces can be considered surplus and should therefore be
priority items for destruction. 5
17. Most modern-day peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations include
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes which normally address
the demand-driven aspects of arms transfers. To be effective, these program mes
should lead to the rapid disassembling of warring parties and the reintegration of
former combatants into society. However, these goals can be seriously frustrated if
weapons and ammunition continue to be easily available to warring parties. Such
parties, aware of their ability to quickly re-tool their fighting forces, may have an
incentive to limit the movement of peacekeepers, to engage in systematic violations
of peace or ceasefire accords or to threaten withdrawal from such accords, thus
perpetuating climates of impunity, enhancing the risk of conflict recurrence and
undermining the international community’s investment in building peace. The
linkage between arms transfers and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
has also been recognized by the Security Council which, for instance, has made the
lifting of sanctions on arms transfers to Côte d’Ivoire conditional upon progress
made in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (see Council resolution
2045 (2012)).
18. The conduct of free, inclusive and credible elections is a critical peacebuilding
goal, which often requires extensive international assistance. This goal cannot be
properly achieved, however, in environments where electoral censuses cannot be
conducted safely for lack of security, members of political parties cannot move
freely to support organizations and campaigns, electoral agents are intimidated by
armed groups, and voters are reluctant to go to campaign meetings or to the polls for
fear of reprisals at gunpoint. In such situations, trust in the peacebuilding process
can be undermined, as election dates are postponed and the easy availability of arms
and ammunition increases the risk of renewed or post-election violence.
__________________
4 Available from http://www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=S/PV.7374.
5 Small Arms Survey, Small Arms Survey 2008: Risk and Resilience (Cambridge, Cambridge

University Press, 2008).

4/20

15-06048

S/2015/289

Protection of civilians
19. Armed attacks against civilians, including United Nations humanitarian and
associated personnel, continue to occur, often with impunity. In the Syrian Arab
Republic, the number of casualties runs into the hundreds of thousands. In Somalia,
recent United Nations reports have shown a further increase of violence against
civilians. In 2014, 10,548 civilian casualties of conflict were documented in
Afghanistan, marking a 25 per cent increase in civilian deaths compared with 2013. 6
20. The pervasive misuse of weapons in conflicts worldwide is a major factor
driving forced displacement. Conflict dynamics in the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Libya, Mali and the Syrian Arab Republic,
where weapons and ammunition are in ready supply, have resulted in the la rge-scale
displacement of civilians and have served to keep many refugees and internally
displaced persons in situations of protracted exile, in violation of their fundamental
human rights.
21. I particularly condemn the continuing armed terrorist attacks perpetrated by
groups such as Boko Haram and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant against
civilian populations in Africa and the Arab world. The abduction and use of
children, including as suicide bombers, is a grave violation of the rights of children.
I urge a multidimensional approach that addresses arsenals and ammunition flows,
legitimate grievances, past and current human rights violations and root causes of
the conflict.
22. Significantly, attacks on civilians in conflict settings have increasing ly been
carried out with rockets, mortars and heavy weapons, and women and children are
often disproportionally affected by such attacks. Strikes on schools, hospitals and
other populated areas, including in Afghanistan, Iraq, Israel, Nigeria, the State of
Palestine and the Syrian Arab Republic, have become alarmingly widespread (see
A/HRC/28/54). Children also continue to be particularly susceptible to injury from
picking up explosive remnants of war (see A/68/878-S/2014/339).

B.

Transnational organized crime and terrorism
23. The Security Council recently confirmed its concern at the growing nexus
between transnational organized crime networks and terrorist grou ps (see Council
resolution 2195 (2014)). Indeed, terrorist groups benefit from transnational
organized crime activities, including the trafficking of arms, drugs and artefacts, and
from illicit trade in natural resources, kidnapping for ransom and other cr imes, to
finance and support their activities.
24. The linkage among, and combined presence of, transnational organized crime,
terrorism and violent extremism is of particular concern in regions already affected
by armed conflicts, where this combination can further negatively affect security,
stability, governance and social and economic development, exacerbate armed
conflicts and sexual violence, and jeopardize any serious effort in respect of conflict
prevention and resolution.

__________________
6 United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), “Afghanistan: annual report

2014 — protection of civilians in armed conflict” (Kabul, February 2015).

15-06048

5/20

S/2015/289

Foreign terrorist fighters
25. In September 2014, the Security Council expressed concern that foreign
terrorist fighters increase the intensity, duration and intractability of conflicts (see
Council resolution 2178 (2014)). They may pose a serious threat to their States of
origin, transit and destination and to neighbouring zones of armed conflict. In the
Council resolution, it was noted that the threat of foreign terrorist fighters may
affect all regions and Member States, even those far from conflict zones. An influx
of foreign fighters increases the probability of weapons and ammunition crossing
borders, may fuel conflict and may extend technical know-how of armed groups in
the area.
Improvised explosive devices and man-portable air defence systems
26. The use of improvised explosive devices by terrorist and other armed groups is
on the rise. Between 2011 and 2013, more than 4,300 improvised explosive device
events in 66 countries resulted in an estimated 65,400 casualties, the vast majority of
them civilian. 7. In Afghanistan, improvised explosive devices now kill 10 times more
civilians than landmines do. Improvised explosive devices also continue to pose a
major threat in Mali. Ten such attacks against United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) personnel were recorded from
December 2014 to March 2015 alone, resulting in 28 injuries and 1 fatality (see
S/2015/219). The proliferation of these weapons is fuelled by ease of access to
components and low technology in assembly requirements. Although improvised
explosive devices are typically constructed from products that are commercially
available and relatively inexpensive, their main charges and boosters are frequently
sourced from conventional ammunition, such as artillery shells and mortar bombs. 7
Better control over ammunition therefore reduces risks relating to improvised
explosive devices.
27. The use of improvised explosive devices is increasing in sophistication.
Noticeable has been the introduction of the magnetic improvised explosive device,
observed from Somalia and Iraq to Afghanistan, and improvised explosive devices
that contain components that are difficult to detect.
28. The continued proliferation of man-portable air defence systems among armed
groups, including terrorist groups, poses the additional threat of putting civil
aviation at risk.

C.

Armed violence
29. Armed violence occurs both within and outside of conflict situations. The
absence of effective government institutions often leads to the use of armed
violence as an engrained means of resolving individual and group grievances and
conflicts. In such cases, legal and peaceful dispute resolution mechanisms are
eroded, violence at gunpoint against children and sexual and gender-based violence
can become endemic, and the rule of law cannot be upheld.

__________________
7 Small Arms Survey, “Countering improvised explosive devices”, Research Notes, No. 46,

October 2014.

6/20

15-06048

S/2015/289

30. Crime and armed violence contribute to “unproductive” expenditures that
divert public resources away from key services and capital investment. Research
suggests that developing countries may spend between 10 and 15 per cent of their
gross domestic product on law enforcement, compared with 5 per cent in more
affluent States. 8
31. Countries suffering from sustained levels of armed conflict or violence are
also those furthest from reaching their Millennium Development Goal targets. The
complex linkages among arms, violence, conflict and development continue to play
out in States around the world, as demonstrated in recent reports to the Security
Council on Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Somalia, South Sudan, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic and
elsewhere.
Women and men; boys and girls
32. The causes and consequences of the use of weapons are highly gendered.
Women have traditionally been perceived as being on the receiving end of armed
violence but their role as users of weapons, combatants or arms traffickers is
increasingly being noted. Still, across all affected societies, young men are the most
common perpetrators of armed attacks, as well as the most likely direct victims. The
phenomenon is of particular concern in societies with a high percentage of young
people combined with high youth unemployment.
33. Sexual violence in settings of conflict and violence continues to affect women,
men and children with shocking frequency and impunity. Sexual and gender-based
crimes are often perpetrated by armed individuals. Increased military or armed
group activity can bring a greater risk of attack (see S/2015/19). The victimization
of women and children through gender-based violence, including rape, violence in
the home and sexual exploitation, is an important and still underrecorded
consequence of armed violence. The impact is felt most strongly at the family level,
where children or women have to care for victims or become de facto heads of
households. In situations where they have restricted access to livelihood
opportunities, women and children struggle to provide for their families and often
suffer from deepening levels of poverty. Although adolescents and young men may
be its most prominent direct victims, younger boys and girls also suffer directly and
indirectly from armed violence, including armed conflict.
34. In my report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2015/203), I presented
information on parties to conflict credibly suspected of committing or being
responsible for rape and other forms of sexual violence and on efforts to pr event and
respond to violations. Sexual violence against girls continues to be a prominent
trend and includes rape, harassment, sexual slavery and forced marriage.
35. Children are disproportionately affected by hostilities, both directly as victims
and through their association with armed forces and armed groups. In my 2014
report on children and armed conflict, I highlighted the grave violations perpetrated
against children in situations on the agenda of the Security Council ( A/68/878S/2014/3349).
__________________
8 Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), Reducing the Involvement

of Youth in Armed Violence: Programming Note, Conflict and Fragility Series (Paris, OECD
Publishing, 2011).

15-06048

7/20

S/2015/289

36. Child protection actors within the United Nations continue to note with
concern that the character of and tactics used in armed conflict pose unprecedented
threats to children. In areas where illicit arms and ammunition are common,
children are more vulnerable to injury, death, displacement, psychosocial distress
and recruitment and use by armed forces and groups.
Recommendation 1
Given the wide-ranging impact of the misuse and illicit circulation of
small arms and light weapons, it is recommended that the Security
Council consistently address the arms situation when considering
both geographic and thematic issues on its agenda.

Recommendation 2
The real value of small arms and light weapons depends on the
availability of ammunition. Effective measures to stem the illicit use
of small arms and light weapons must include, or may even focus on,
efforts to prevent the supply of ammunition.

Recommendation 3
More research to assist policymakers in addressing the causes and
consequences of armed violence is required. The criminal violence
that frequently replaces political violence in post-conflict periods is
often difficult to redress through disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes and small arms control measures. In such
environments, weapons-collection measures and related activities
need to be accompanied by development programming geared
towards preventing and reducing armed violence, coupled with other
measures to enhance the protection of the civilian population.

Recommendation 4
Recognition of the gendered nature of armed violence and conflict
must inform policy and programmatic responses. If the gendered
aspects of armed violence, including the male social roles that often
shape it and the structural subordination of women and girls, are not
addressed, some of the key root causes of armed violence and its
various impacts on girls, boys, women and men risk being neglected.

8/20

15-06048

S/2015/289

Full and meaningful participation of women in policymaking,
planning and implementation processes related to combating the
misuse and illicit transfer of small arms, in line with the women and
peace and security agenda, remains essential.

III. Addressing the risk of misuse, diversion and illicit
circulation of small arms and light weapons
A.

Small arms and light weapons held by national security forces

1.

Arms Trade Treaty and other instruments relating to the regulation of small
arms and light weapons
37. For weapons to be used for lawful purposes only, Governments need to
effectively fulfil their tasks — from the national to the community level — of
providing security, putting in place regulation and enacting control and oversight.
Only when institutions function adequately can safe and secure env ironments
prosper and citizens’ trust in their societal fabric thrive. The importance of
assistance to institutions in situations of poorly controlled circulation of arms and
ammunition is therefore critical. Such assistance may focus on legislation, stock pile
management, the marking, record-keeping and tracing of weapons, surplus
destruction and training on adequate use of force. Apart from regional arrangements,
a number of global agreements are immediately relevant for such endeavours.
38. With the entry into force of the Arms Trade Treaty, on 24 December 2014, the
foundations were laid for a global system of arms transfer controls, including small
arms and light weapons. States parties to the Arms Trade Treaty will have to
undertake an assessment in advance of any transfer covered by the Treaty and deny
the transfer in situations specified by the Treaty. Importantly, they have a legal
obligation to take measures to regulate the transit, trans -shipment and brokering of
conventional arms and to prevent weapons diversion.
39. The Treaty’s provisions on assistance — and the commitment to establish a
trust fund only for States parties — promise that acceding to the Arms Trade Treaty
may open up significant avenues for cooperation, bringing adequate weapons
management within reach of any country.
40. The Arms Trade Treaty is a robust treaty with the potential to have a
significant place in stemming arms flows to conflict zones and supporting the
monitoring of Security Council arms embargoes. The effectiveness of the Arms
Trade Treaty will depend on its global appeal and the levels of good faith with
which it is implemented.
41. The Arms Trade Treaty complements and builds upon other global legal
instruments, including the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components and Ammunition,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime. The Firearms Protocol provides complementarity to the Arms Trade Treaty,
in particular through its provisions on marking, record-keeping, import, export and

15-06048

9/20

S/2015/289

transit control and by criminalizing the offences of illicit manufacturing, trafficking
and tampering with marking.
42. Under the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects 9 and the International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner,
Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons (the International Tracing Instrument) (see
General Assembly decision 60/519; and A/60/88 and Corr.2, annex) progress has
been made in particular in improving national laws. In addition, increased stockpile
destruction and weapons-marking initiatives have been noted, and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes have been developed and
implemented. However, many of the requirements of the instrument for
implementation at the national level remain unfulfilled. In 2014, at the most recent
meeting under this process, States agreed to further strengthen stockpile
management and to focus on the impact of new technolo gies on the tracing of
weapons. Cooperation and assistance, including the transfer of technology and
equipment, remain high on the agenda.
43. The Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement
Officials, adopted by consensus, 10 provide sound guidance for when the lawful use
of force and firearms is unavoidable. It should be noted that this agreed document
includes the provision that exceptional circumstances such as internal political
instability may not be invoked to justify any departure from the Basic Principles.
Also, the document tasks Governments to regulate the control, storage and issuing
of firearms, including procedures for ensuring that law enforcement officials are
accountable for the firearms and ammunition issued to them. The document
underlines the need for training, which should also comprise alternatives to the use
of force and firearms, including the peaceful settlement of conflicts, the
understanding of crowd behaviour and the methods of persuasion, negotiation and
mediation. There seems to be ample room for further training on these principles.
44. The International Small Arms Control Standards, developed by the United
Nations, provide guidance on establishing effective national controls over the full
life cycle of small arms and light weapons. The International Small Arms Control
Standards translate into practice the objectives of the key global agreements and
international law aimed at preventing the illicit trade, destabilizing accumulation
and misuse of small arms and light weapons. 11
45. Similarly, the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines, developed upon
request by the General Assembly under the United Nations SaferGuard programme,
assist national authorities, industry and others in enhancing the safety and security
of ammunition stockpiles, thus reducing the dual risks of explosions and
diversion. 12

__________________
9 Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons

in All Its Aspects, New York, 9-20 July 2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
10 See Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,

Havana, 27 August-7 September 1990: report prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.91.IV.2), chap. I, sect. B.
11 See www.smallarmsstandards.org/isacs/.
12 See www.un.org/disarmament/un-saferguard/.

10/20

15-06048

S/2015/289

2.

Improving stockpile management
46. National stockpile management and control has emerged as one of the greatest
challenges related to small arms (see S/2008/258, S/2011/255 and S/2013/503).
Stocks are susceptible to diversion if they are not appropriately secured and
managed. Diversion tends to feed and sustain the activities of armed non -State
actors, terrorist organizations and organized criminal networks: it is on e of the
principal sources of illicit ammunition and explosives (see A/63/182).
47. A central element in adequate stockpile management is the identification of
surpluses, namely, the weapons and ammunition that d o not constitute an
operational need. When surpluses are not recognized, the entirety of the national
weapons stockpile may continue to be seen as of operational value. Although not
used, weapons and ammunition surpluses thus continue to fill warehouses an d to
pose a grave year-on-year risk.
48. Defective stockpile management has been assessed as the norm rather than the
exception in many developing countries and in States recovering from armed
conflict. 1 In those circumstances, it is not only surplus stocks that should be the
focus of attention, but the lack of appropriate policy behind this situation.
Governments remain unaware of surpluses; their national stockpiles remain a risk to
public safety and continue to be a source of illicit weaponry used in cri me and
armed violence.
49. Destruction is the preferred solution for surplus stockpiles of arms and
ammunition, not only from a safety and security perspective, but also when
considering the costs of destruction over the costs associated with safe long -term
storage and maintenance. 13
50. Key parts of the United Nations system, including the United Nations regional
centres for peace and disarmament of the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the
Secretariat, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Mine Action
Service, the United Nations police and others, are contributing to securing
stockpiles and to relevant training of national law enforcement and security forces
of affected as well as troop-contributing countries.
51. Consistent application of the robust International Ammunition Technical
Guidelines is essential. Similarly, making use of the International Small Arms
Control Standards will also improve challenging small arms contr ol situations. Both
modular sets of standards, which complement each other, are voluntary, but provide
the best available advice on ammunition management and small arms control.
52. Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia may be seen as successes. In Côte d’Ivoire, UNDP
and the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa ,
utilizing international standards, put in place procedures and training tools on
physical security and stockpile management. The United Nations Mine Action
Service also provided national authorities in Côte d’Ivoire with a multi-year
programme of assistance on weapons and ammunition management.
53. In Liberia, the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in
Africa and the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) ha ve recently provided

__________________
13 Mandy Turner, Costs of Disarmament: Cost Benefit Analysis of SALW Destruction versus

Storage (Geneva, United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research 2006).

15-06048

11/20

S/2015/289

technical assistance and training on marking and registering small arms and light
weapons. The training is assisting Liberia in assuming complete security
responsibilities by June 2016, including on small arms, and in registering and t racking
arms used by its security forces (see Security Council resolution 2190 (2014)).
54. More can be done to mainstream physical security and stockpile management
programmes in peacekeeping mandates and concepts of operations, based on
standards and guidelines developed by the United Nations on arms and ammunition
management. It is crucial that the Security Council, while drafting or renewing
peacekeeping mandates, carefully assess the need to include relevant provisions.
3.

Other measures strengthening government control
55. The tracing by national law enforcement officials of small arms back to their last
legitimate owner constitutes an effective measure against the diversion of weapons.
For that purpose, it is essential to mark the weapon upon production and import and
ensure that appropriate records are kept. In addition, existing stocks should be marked.
Many weapons and batches of ammunition are marked when produced and some
weapons are marked when imported, but international cooperation in markin g, recordkeeping and tracing of small arms needs further attention.
56. More needs to be done in related fields as well. These include adequate small
arms control legislation (which should cover arms brokering), weapons and
ammunition destruction and reintegration programmes.
57. Many United Nations system entities are assisting Governments in these tasks,
mostly depending on extrabudgetary funding. Entities such as the United Nations
regional centres for peace and disarmament, UNDP, the United Nations Ch ildren’s
Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations Mine Action Service, UNODC, the United
Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) and others work within their
respective mandates to support the development of national small arms action plans,
provide marking machines and the relevant training, including record -keeping,
produce guidance on standard operating procedures related to small arms, deliver
assistance in legislation, set up collection and destruction programmes or develop
reintegration programmes.

4.

Potential applications of small arms and light weapons technologies
58. Innovative ways for Governments to address the management of weapons in
conflict areas have become technologically feasible. Such technologies have already
been put to broad use in commercial sectors such as the parcel business or the food
industry. Options include radio frequency identification and fingerprint recognition,
technologies that make it possible to personalize and track weapons and to secure
weapons depots.
59. New technologies in relation to small arms are at present being discussed
under the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. Assistance and the possible
transfer of technologies are important elements of this topic. I encourage Member
States, international and regional organizations, non -governmental organizations
and representatives of industry to engage in further dialogue on their potential
application in weapons management.

12/20

15-06048

S/2015/289

Recommendation 5
The Arms Trade Treaty has the potential to provide a global
framework for a responsible arms trade and could become a key
instrument fostering capacity-building in the areas of adequate
transfer controls and preventing weapons diversion. I encourage
Member States that have not done so to accede to it.

Recommendation 6
States should aim to have their relevant law enforcement officials
trained in the Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by
Law Enforcement Officials.

Recommendation 7
The Security Council should ensure that peacekeeping and special
political missions are consistently mandated to assist host countries
in the effective management of their arms and ammunition
stockpiles.
This includes, in accordance with the good practice demonstrated in
Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia, provisions on the training of national
security forces in weapons disposal, marking and recording and
large-scale weapons collection and destruction programmes, in
addition to the refurbishment of weapons and ammunition storage
facilities and the promotion of compliance with existing standards.
Member States should consider the provision of adequate technical
and financial assistance in this regard.

Recommendation 8
The Security Council should consider, on a case-by-case basis, the
relevance of technologies such as time limitation or geographical
limitation devices or biometric or radio frequency identification, to
improve weapons stockpile management and reduce the diversion of
weapons. A main hurdle for equipping weapons with such devices is
their limited commercial viability. I encourage Member States to
support further initiatives on the development and use of such
technology.

15-06048

13/20

S/2015/289

B.

Addressing the circulation of illicit small arms and light weapons
60. Small arms and light weapons in illicit circulation have left immediate
government oversight; different control measures are therefore required.

1.

Arms embargo monitoring efforts
61. The work of the Security Council sanctions co mmittees and sanctions expert
panels has continued to shed light on arms and ammunition trafficking routes.
Council arms embargoes can serve as powerful tools to address the illicit trade and
brokering in small arms and light weapons as well as the destabi lizing effect of their
circulation. Adequate implementation of arms embargoes includes solid control of a
country’s borders, including at airstrips and seaports, and inspections inside the
country. Effective monitoring of arms embargoes depends on active i nformation
exchange among different actors, including national authorities in the country
subject to the embargo and in other countries, sanctions monitoring entities, peace
operations and international and regional organizations.
62. Lack of sufficient capacity constitutes a key challenge for many States in the
effective monitoring and enforcement of arms embargoes. For instance, with regard to
Somalia, my assessment in March 2014 found a limited capacity of the Government
to adequately respond to notification requirements in connection with the partial
lifting of the arms embargo on the Government (see S/2014/243). The United Nations
is now working to support this gap in notifications. In the context of a broad er rule of
law and security programme, UNDP, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia (UNSOM) and the United Nations Mine Action Service have strengthened
the capacity of the authorities to manage and report on arms imported under the
partially lifted arms embargo, including through the development of a national
import-marking standard using international standards and through technical
assistance on weapons and ammunition management and training.
63. Other challenges to the implementation of arms embargoes need to be
addressed as well. Where States under an arms embargo are allowed exemptions,
there is no systematic procedure in place for tracking their procurement. In
managing the exemptions for the delivery of arms and related materiel, sanctions
committees often have no reliable baseline reference point for the amount of
weapons and ammunition needed by the Government for the purposes of equipping
national security forces and promoting security sector reform.
64. To make an inventory of its weapon stockpiles as a first step towards the
lifting of an embargo, a State could be encouraged to report to the voluntary United
Nations Register of Conventional Arms. Through this existing transparency
instrument, any State Member of the United Nations can ma ke available national
data on arms, including the totals of its national holdings. 14 If reported in the
context of partial embargo lifts and of sanctions regimes that foresee exemptions,
the Security Council and relevant sanctions committees would therewith be enabled
to assess the acquisition needs of the State in taking a decision.
65. Arms embargoes have varied greatly in terms of their scope and content. There
is currently no across-the-board reference regarding arms and related materiel. A
general guide on arms embargoes, which would complement committee-specific

__________________
14 See www.un-register.org/NationalHoldings/Index.aspx.

14/20

15-06048

S/2015/289

implementation assistance notices, could serve as a useful reference for sanctions
committees and Member States, both on the supplying and the receiving end, to
improve their understanding and implementation of the technical dimensions of an
arms embargo. The guide could also serve as reference for mapping assistance
activities offered by various United Nations entities.
Recommendation 9
Countries subject to an arms embargo should consider reporting to
the existing transparency mechanism of the United Nations Register
of Conventional Arms. This important element in determining the
necessary baseline of its national weapons holdings would inform the
consideration of a possible lifting of an arms embargo by the Security
Council. The United Nations can assist any country in reporting to
the Register.

2.

Role of United Nations missions in supporting arms embargo monitoring
66. Several United Nations missions have been mandated with sanctions
monitoring, including aspects related to arms embargoes. 15 It is essential that these
field missions deploy personnel, including police, who are well trained in the
management and tracing of weapons.
67. In some missions, such as the United Nations Operatio n in Côte d’Ivoire
(UNOCI), dedicated embargo monitoring units have been established. I also
recommended the establishment of a small arms embargo cell in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA). 16 In others, ad hoc arrangements have been made for field missions to
cooperate with expert panels, for example through the mission’s Joint Mission
Analysis Cell.
68. In my previous report, I highlighted some of the good practices of the UNOCI
Integrated Embargo Monitoring Unit, which was established to monitor the
implementation of the embargo pursuant to Security Council resolution 2045
(2012). It may, within Côte d’Ivoire, inspect all sites and equipment of relevance to
the embargo, when necessary and appropriate without notice. The UNOCI
Integrated Embargo Monitoring Unit also assists the Group of Experts on Côte
d’Ivoire (see S/2014/266, para. 28).
69. During the course of one year, the Integrated Embargo Monitoring Unit of
UNOCI conducted more than 600 inspections of installations and sites of armed

__________________
15 The United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire

(UNOCI), the African Union/United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
16 See S/2014/142, paragraph 78, in which I recommended that a small embargo cell be established
within the proposed peacekeeping operation comprising experts on arms, natural resources and
customs in order to support the group of experts in monitoring the sanctions regime and to
advise my Special Representative.

15-06048

15/20

S/2015/289

State actors in Côte d’Ivoire. Importantly, the Monitoring Unit also drew up arms
and ammunition profiles, which help to identify possible embargo viol ations. I am
pleased that a similar practice of creating ammunition profiles is now being used by
the Panel of Experts on the Central African Republic (see S/2014/762) and by the
Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo (see S/2015/19).
70. Overall, an internal review on United Nations sanctions considered the
Integrated Embargo Monitoring Unit in UNOCI useful as an expert technical
interlocutor with the host country and observed that it enjoyed a mutually beneficial
relationship with the Group of Experts. In this regard, I will request the relevant
field missions to reflect in their regular reporting, where appropriate, lessons
learned from their sanctions monitoring work.
71. I am pleased that United Nations entities enhanced their support to the
fulfilment of arms embargo obligations during the reporting period. In 2014, my
assessment missions on sanctions issues — one on the partial lifting of the arms
embargo on Somalia and another on the termination of sanctions in Liberia —
supported the identification of the needs of the States concerned and provided
assistance in understanding and implementing the respective arms embargoes,
including the improvement of weapons and ammunition management capacities.
The missions also enhanced coordination within the United Nations system to
support sanctions implementation in these countries.
72. An increase in expertise and capacity within the United Nations means that
more coordination with stakeholders needs to take place. The recent internal review
of United Nations system support to Security Council sanctions also found that the
existing expertise within the United Nations system to assist in monitoring, trainin g
and building national capacity on the implementation of arms embargoes was not
sufficiently utilized. For this reason, I have decided to make the Inter -Agency
Working Group on United Nations Sanctions, established in 2014, a standing body
to coordinate support.
73. This is of particular importance in situations, as described above, where a
partial embargo lift is being considered and the country has to put in place initial
measures on arms and ammunition management required by the Security Council
before the lift is authorized. When States appear to be in need of technical
assistance in this phase, a thorough assessment is required regarding the precise
assistance needed. Subsequently, relevant project proposals need to be developed
and international or regional coordination mechanisms need to be engaged to match
assistance needs with available resources. I note that in its resolution 2117 (2013),
the Council called for enhanced coordination of efforts at the national, subregional,
regional and international levels to address traffic in arms, but often it remains
unclear which stakeholder could assume ownership at which stage in the process.
Recommendation 10
In contributing to the force generation for peacekeeping missions
where there is an arms embargo in place, troop- and policecontributing countries should consider providing, in particular,
personnel possessing relevant arms and ammunition identification,
record-keeping, tracing or stockpile management expertise.

16/20

15-06048

S/2015/289

I also recommend that the Security Council mandate relevant
mission components to work more closely with United Nations
country teams to strengthen national arms control capacities.

3.

Specific attention to illicit flows of ammunition
74. Expert panels monitoring Security Council arms embargoes have suggested
that the popularity of certain types of weapons among armed groups corresponds to
the availability of their ammunition (see, for example, S/2010/91). Interestingly,
patterns of supply may influence the development of a conflict, including by
causing changes in shooting discipline and rendering existing weapons useless.
Therefore, a focus on preventing the resupply of ammunition, in particular in
situations of high risk to civilian populations, should be a priority.
75. Controlling the supply of ammunition can have an immediate impact on the
intensity of armed violence. 17 Ammunition production and supply chains in military
markets are different from civilian markets. Therefore, monitoring fl ows of the
military-style ammunition generally used in armed conflict offers greater scope for
identifying sources, trafficking patterns and diversion points than monitoring
ammunition for handguns and pistols. If, particularly in settings of conflict, lar ge
numbers of ammunition are found, a process of elimination may lead to likely
sources of diversion. 1
76. Ammunition marked with its production year remains a critical element in
monitoring the implementation of Security Council arms embargoes. Panels of
experts tasked with such monitoring rely on recovered ammunition to determine
whether it was transferred to embargoed actors or destinations after the imposition
of the embargo.
77. Expert panels that monitor arms embargoes would be aided in their work if
Member States provided information about the markings applied to ammunition for
small arms and light weapons by producers under their jurisdiction and the
markings on ammunition recovered from illicit use.
78. The systematic collection, adequate recording and publication of information
regarding the markings on recovered illicit ammunition for small arms and light
weapons would greatly enhance transparency and accountability in the arms and
ammunition trade and help significantly to limit the scope of the illicit trade.
79. Contrary to the arms themselves, bullet cartridges contain explosive
chemicals. Adequate ammunition management may include specific procedures on
determining the origin of ammunition and on ensuring its safety. The Panel of
Experts on the Sudan has made a first analysis of the precursors and components
necessary for the manufacture of small arms ammunition. These and similar
approaches aimed at better determining the origin of ammunition could be
considered for effectively restricting illicit supply (see S/2015/31).

__________________
17 Small Arms Survey, Ammunition Tracing Kit: Protocols and Procedures for Recording Small-

calibre Ammunition (Geneva, 2008).

15-06048

17/20

S/2015/289

Recommendation 11
Short training in the correct recording of information from
recovered ammunition should be targeted at the mission personnel
most likely to encounter ammunition, including members of an
embargo monitoring cell, military observers and, critically, police
personnel. Just as with records of weapon markings, the collected
information could then be made available to sanctions expert panels.

Recommendation 12
Given the distinct production process and trade patterns of
ammunition, Member States, with the assistance of the United
Nations, should explore further approaches to combating illicit
ammunition flows in particular in the context of arms embargoes.

4.

Enhanced operational information exchange on arms trafficking
80. In its first-ever resolution on small arms and light weapons, the Security
Council called upon States to intensify and accelerate the exchange of operational
information regarding trafficking in arms and to enhance the coordination of efforts
at the national, subregional, regional and international levels (see Council resolution
2117 (2013), para. 9). This call was reiterated by the Council in its resolution on
threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts, adopted in
August 2014 (see resolution 2170 (2014), para. 10).
81. These calls echoed recent agreed ways forward in the framework of General
Assembly processes related to small arms and light weapons. In the agreed ou tcome
of the Fifth Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and its International Tracing Instrument,
held in June 2014, States undertook to enhance the exchange of information at the
national, regional and international levels, including information relevant to
preventing, combating and eradicating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons and to preventing their diversion to the illicit trade, illegal armed groups,
terrorists and other unauthorized recipients (see A/CONF.192/BMS/2014/2, annex,
para. 27 (a).
82. The call also dovetails with the Arms Trade Treaty, which encourages its States
parties to share relevant information with one another on effective measures to
address the diversion of conventional arms, including information on illicit activities
including corruption, international trafficking routes, illicit brokers, sources of illicit
supply, methods of concealment, common points of dispatch or destinations used by
organized groups engaged in diversion (see article 11 (5)).
83. Similar calls were made at the seventh session of the Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, at which
States parties were encouraged to develop or strengthen coordination among

18/20

15-06048

S/2015/289

relevant and competent national authorities, with a view to enhancing capacities for
statistics and data collection, analysis and information-sharing related to illicit
trafficking in firearms.
84. Several initiatives with regional and police organizations for operational
information exchange at the national and regional levels have been undertaken,
including in South-East Europe through the South East Europe Firearms Expert
Network established by UNDP. Other examples of increased cooperation between
United Nations entities and national officials include the joint border patrolling
initiative of the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization of Liberia, in which
United Nations police components participate, and the national technical working
groups established in the Central African Republic — co-chaired by the United
Nations Mine Action Service — and in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). For
all operational information exchange on small arms, the Illicit Arms Records and
Tracing Management System firearms database of the International Criminal Police
Organization (INTERPOL) remains a key tool.
Recommendation 13
Member States should continue to strengthen their cooperation
among each other and with relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations with regard to the sharing of operational
information for the tracing of illicit weapons and to make full use of
the Illicit Arms Records and Tracing Management System global
firearms database of the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL).

5.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, security sector reform and
strengthening of rule of law institutions
85. Increasingly, conflict and post-conflict environments are characterized by a
proliferation of irregular armed groups, including militias, c riminal networks, selfdefence groups, private security companies and other non-State groupings. In order
to address these possible sources of insecurity, mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping and special political missions often include the design and
implementation of programmes for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
and for the reform of the host country’s security sector. Such efforts are supported
by a growing number of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and security
sector reform capacities in these missions and by system-wide efforts by the
Inter-Agency Working Group on Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
and the Inter-Agency Security Sector Reform Task Force.
86. In addition, the United Nations, often supported by the global focal point for
the police, justice and corrections, provides support to strengthen the effectiveness
and accountability of institutions in such areas to uphold the rule of law.
87. However, if illicit weapons continue to be easily accessible to armed groups
and civilians in post-conflict situations at the same time that efforts are made to
dismantle armed groups and movements, the risk of relapse into conflict will remain
high and the prospects of building sustainable peace will diminish. It is th erefore

15-06048

19/20

S/2015/289

vital that traditional arms control measures be linked and integrated with
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and security sector reform efforts
and informed by national strategies. It is also important to complement short -term
measures to take weapons out of circulation with a longer-term vision on how to
improve safety at community levels through strengthening security institutions and
addressing the underlying causes of conflict.
88. Throughout these processes, the rights of children must be protected and their
specific requirements taken into account. This holds true, in particular, for children
who have been recruited by armed forces and groups. Security Council resolutions on
children and armed conflict often are not accompanied by sufficient funding to monitor
and implement the mandated action plans to end and prevent grave violations.
89. I welcome the recent recognition given to the role of United Nations police
components in combating illicit arms and ammunition. In its resolution 2185 (2014)
adopted on 20 November 2014, the Security Council reiterated that United Nations
peacekeeping operations and special political missions, including police components,
may — if mandated by the Council — assist in capacity-building for host
Governments to address the illicit trafficking of small arms and light weapons. This
police assistance could be aimed at areas such as weapons collection, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes; physical security and stockpile
management practices; record-keeping and tracing; development of national export
and import control systems; enhancement of border security; and strengthening
judicial institutions, policing and other law enforcement capacities (see Council
resolution 2185 (2014)). United Nations police components can be further
strengthened to take on these tasks.
90. The delivery of security services at the community level is a crucial
component in the mitigation of armed violence and crime. Such efforts should be
planned in an integrated manner with other mission and United Nations country
team components, including police, justice, corrections, security sector reform,
gender and human rights. Only a comprehensive approach can sustainably improve
the delivery of security services at community levels and make communities safer.
Recommendation 14
Mission mandates, in particular on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and security sector reform, should be designed on the
basis of a comprehensive analysis of short-, medium- and long-term
security needs. More integrated approaches need to be adopted,
which would include the participation of relevant United Nations
agencies providing support in these areas at the planning, mission
and transition phases. In all instances, funding should accompany
mandated activities.

20/20

15-06048
