A /67/PV.37

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-seventh session

37th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 14 November 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Charles
(Trinidad and Tobago) took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 64
Report of the Human Rights Council
Report of the Human Rights Council (A/67/53
and Corr.1)
The Acting President: The addendum to the
report of the Human Rights Council, covering the
Council’s twenty-first session, held from 10 to
28 September 2012, is currently available, in English
only, on the Council’s website. It will be circulated as
document A/67/53/Add.1 in all languages as soon as the
translations are completed.
In connection with this item, I would like to recall
that the General Assembly, at its 2nd plenary meeting,
on 21 September, decided to consider agenda item 64 in
plenary meeting and in the Third Committee, pursuant
to resolution 65/281 of 17 June 2011.
In accordance with resolution 65/281, I now give
the floor to Her Excellency Laura Dupuy Lasserre,
President of the Human Rights Council.
Ms. Lasserre (Uruguay), President of the Human
Rights Council (spoke in Spanish): It is a great honour
for me to come before the Assembly today for the second
time to present the annual report of the Human Rights
Council (A/67/53). I would also like to congratulate the

newly elected members of the Council and wish them
success in fulfilling their mandate.
The year 2012 marks the sixth since the establishment
of the Human Rights Council and the first year since the
review of its working methods. Since then, the Council
has dealt with human rights situations in various parts
of the world, aiming at addressing the root causes of
human rights violations and raising awareness of them
in the context of the different crises. This has been done
through successful building on interregional coalitions
and thanks to the strong desire of all members to deal
with human rights challenges, deteriorating situations
and emergencies in a non-confrontational, consistent
and coherent manner.
An example of that approach may be found in
the consideration of the human rights situation in the
Syrian Arab Republic, which has dominated much of
the Council’s attention this year. We have held two
special sessions and one emergency debate and have
adopted resolutions on this in every regular session
of 2012, following interactive dialogues with the
commission of inquiry. In its most recent resolution
on Syria, 21/26, adopted in September at the twentyfirst session, the Council decided to extend the
mandate of the commission of inquiry on Syria and
to strengthen its capacity. I have therefore appointed
two additional members to the commission, and I hope
that those additional appointments will be supported
by strengthened support from the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for
the commission of inquiry, including through the
deployment of more staff on the ground.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-58933 (E)

*1258933*

A/67/PV.37

The Council also adopted resolutions on Eritrea,
Belarus, Myanmar, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Mali, as well
as on Sri Lanka, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Haiti, Libya, Côte d’Ivoire, Cambodia, the Sudan, South
Sudan, Guinea, Somalia and Yemen. With the decision
to appoint a new Rapporteur for Eritrea, the Council
decided to transfer the communications that were being
considered under the confidential complaint procedure.
I wish to point out that the working methods of the
complaint procedure have recently been improved,
thanks to close cooperation between the working
groups on communications and on situations.
The Council also discussed the long-standing
human rights situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories by, for example, establishing an international
fact-finding mission to investigate the impact of the
Israeli settlements on the human rights of the Palestinian
people. The Council will consider the mission’s report
at its next session, in March.
I would like to emphasize that the full implementation
of those and other important resolutions depends greatly
on the availability of additional resources, which will, I
hope, be approved by the Assembly.
During its past three regular sessions, the
Council held, among other debates, a total of 16 panel
discussions on subjects such as freedom of expression
on the Internet; sexual orientation and gender identity;
reprisals; people with HIV/AIDS or living with those
with HIV/AIDS; minority rights; children’s rights and
the administration of justice; sport and the Olympic
ideal; the promotion and protection of human rights
in a multicultural context, including by combating
xenophobia, discrimination and intolerance; legal
remedies and reparations for women victims of
violence; female human rights defenders; indigenous
peoples’ access to justice; and technical cooperation
in the context of the Universal Periodic Review
(UPR). All those panels, having benefited from the
experience and perspective of a wide range of relevant
actors — including States, academics, civil society,
United Nations institutions, international and regional
organizations and communications media — favoured
substantive and constructive discussions on subjects
that at times might seem challenging or difficult to
tackle.
In addition, the first high-level panel on
mainstreaming a human rights perspective, held in
February, in which senior officials of United Nations
2

agencies participated, focused on the area of human
rights, development and cooperation. We hope that
holding this panel annually will contribute to improving
awareness, coordination, synergies and technical
cooperation among the various relevant stakeholders,
so as to address human rights challenges and have a
positive impact on development efforts.
The high-level panel on mainstreaming human
rights within the United Nations system, to be held
during the Council’s February session, is likely to focus
on human rights and the post-2015 development agenda,
with special attention to education. The panel could
also be a good opportunity to promote improvements on
the basis of the assessment of progress, achievements
and challenges in mainstreaming human rights in
the United Nations system with regard to the current
Millennium Development Goals. It could also provide
a timely input for the High-level Panel of Eminent
Persons established by the Secretary-General, and for
the relevant special General Assembly event planned
for next year. Issues relating to the right to development
will therefore continue to have a prominent place in the
Council’s work.
With regard to special procedures, the Council
has established new mandates, including two country
mandates, namely, Special Rapporteurs on Belarus
and Eritrea, and a thematic mandate, namely, the
independent expert on human rights obligations
relating to the enjoyment of a safe, clean, healthy and
sustainable environment. That brings the total number
of mandates to 48.
In 2012, the Council heard for the first time the
reports of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion
of truth, justice, reparation and guarantees of
non-recurrence, the Independent Expert on the
promotion of a democratic and equitable international
order, the Working Group on the issue of human rights
and transnational corporations and other business
enterprises, and the Working Group on the issue of
discrimination against women in law and in practice.
The high number of panels, together with the
interactive dialogues and general debates, provide a
forum for fruitful and focused discussion on various
human rights challenges. However, we should avoid
overloading the Council’s programme of work. In
2012, the Council adopted a total of 99 resolutions,
decisions and presidential statements. As already
noted, the number of interregional initiatives continues
to increase, affirming the Council’s capacity to take
12-58933

A/67/PV.37

action on important human rights issues. To name a few
of the new cross-regional initiatives, I could mention
the safety of journalists, business and human rights,
corruption, and human rights and the environment. An
ever-growing number of country-specific issues are
also being dealt with in this way.
In the past year, the Council addressed a wide
range of human rights issues relating to the freedom of
expression and assembly, including by adopting several
resolutions in that area on, inter alia, the safety of
journalists, peaceful protests and human rights on the
Internet. The Council also discussed issues related to
the right to development, extreme poverty, the right to
food, maternal mortality and the enjoyment of cultural
rights, as well as the rights of vulnerable groups such
as the elderly.
Many of the resolutions were adopted without a
vote, again demonstrating the capacity of the Council
to agree on issues related to the protection of those
most in need. Resolution 19/8, adopted in March,
on the freedom of religion and belief is of particular
importance, emphasizing that freedom of religion or
belief and freedom of expression are interdependent,
interrelated and mutually reinforcing.
In June, the Council held a constructive discussion
on the line between freedom of expression and
incitement to hatred and violence. It was a followup to the historic Human Rights Council resolution
16/18, adopted by consensus in March 2011, entitled
“Combating intolerance, negative stereotyping and
stigmatization of, and discrimination, incitement to
violence, and violence against persons based on religion
or belief”. In that resolution, the Council called on all
States and other stakeholders to take concrete measures
to foster a national culture of religious tolerance, peace
and respect.
It should be pointed out that the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has
also been particularly active in that issue, organizing
a series of expert regional workshops on incitement
to national, racial or religious hatred, as reflected in
international human rights law. The conclusions and
recommendations stemming from those workshops
will certainly help the Council make progress on that
delicate issue.
The number of dignitaries addressing the Council
during the high-level segment of the February-March
session every year constantly increases, demonstrating

12-58933

the growing interest in the work of the Council as the
main human rights body of the United Nations. That
is further borne out by the increasing number of civil
society representatives attending Council proceedings,
as well as parallel events organized on its sidelines.
There has been an average of almost 200 accredited
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and a hundred
side events at each session. New features stemming from
the outcome of the Human Rights Council review have
been implemented to facilitate remote participation,
through video messages, by national human rights
institutions that comply with the Paris Principles and
of NGOs accredited locally by NGOs with consultative
status at the Economic and Social Council so that they
can contribute to our work.
The active participation and contribution of civil
society organizations are fundamental to the work of
the Human Rights Council, making it a unique forum
among other United Nations intergovernmental bodies.
It is essential to the Council’s credibility that human
rights defenders and other civil society actors can
contribute to the Council’s work and its mechanisms
in a free, open and safe environment that protects and
promotes their own human rights.
In that context, we must deeply lament the increase
in the number of reported cases of intimidation or
threats, as well as physical attacks on and arbitrary
detention, torture and ill-treatment of those who have
cooperated with the United Nations, including the
Council and its mechanisms. In line with the outcome
of the Council’s review, I personally have condemned
intimidation measures and reprisals in the context or
on the margins of the Council and Universal Periodic
Review meetings. I wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report on reprisals (A/HRC/21/18)
and for sending a clear message of support in that
connection when he personally addressed the Council
in September, as well as during the panel discussion on
that topic at that same session.
I would like to share a few remarks on the
second cycle of the Universal Periodic Review. As
the Assembly knows, the first cycle ended with the
review of 193 Member States by the Working Group
on the UPR, which was a remarkable achievement of a
truly universal mechanism. The UPR is certainly seen as
a valuable tool for national dialogue and consideration
of necessary actions. The second cycle, which began
in May, is now considering the implementation of

3

A/67/PV.37

recommendations made in the past four years and the
pending national challenges.
The second cycle will be crucial to consolidating the
UPR as a significant tool in addressing the protection
and promotion of human rights throughout the world
in a non-confrontational, objective, depoliticized and
constructive way. It is essential to ensure that the
main achievements of the first cycle are preserved,
in particular the 100 per cent record in terms of the
presentation of reports by high-level delegations, which
is a first in the United Nations system. I would like
to appeal to all Member States to provide support for
that valuable universal mechanism and to ensure that it
remains comprehensive during the second cycle, in line
with its legal foundations and its spirit.
In that regard, many of the participants here today
have helped to ensure the presence of delegations
coming from countries far from Geneva and without
a permanent mission there. In addition, bilateral and
regional cooperation has also been extended for the
preparation of various national reports. That has
been particularly difficult in some cases, and I would
like to thank those delegations in particular for their
endeavour. The Council has furthered its efforts to
support the participation of least developed countries
by establishing a Voluntary Technical Assistance Trust
Fund to Support the Participation of Least Developed
Countries and Small Island Developing States in the
work of the Council, which provides, inter alia, training
and capacity-building.
Before I conclude, I would like to briefly mention
the significant challenges facing the Human Rights
Council in terms of resources required to continue its
activities.
First, allow me to inform the Assembly that a
task force has been set up to follow up on certain
issues stemming from the outcome of the Council’s
review process, including the need to enhance
secretariat services to the Council, accessibility to
the Council’s work for persons with disabilities, and
the use of information technology. While most of
the recommendations of the task force do not require
additional resources for their implementation, I would
like to emphasize in particular the need to strengthen
conference services at the United Nations Office at
Geneva. That could be done within existing resources
by transferring existing vacant translator and editor
posts from New York to Geneva. That is, indeed, most

4

important in order to provide adequate conference
services for the Universal Periodic Review, which has
been underfunded since its work began, in 2008.
As I stated last year (see A/66/PV.49), reports
are increasingly not being distributed in all official
languages before their consideration. That is a serious
impediment for meetings of bodies such as the Working
Group on the Universal Periodic Review, which relies
on the ability of the States to consult and review in
advance the documentation for each State under review.
Other recommendations by the task force will
require additional resources for their implementation.
They deal with, inter alia, the need to ensure sustainable
webcast coverage of Council meetings by strengthening
the capacity of the Department of Public Information in
Geneva, as well as by securing regular budget resources
for the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights for that purpose. Indeed, so far the
Office has relied on voluntary contributions to provide
that essential service for the Council. Bearing in mind
that the Council has no more resources for summary
records, it would be crucial to at least be able to secure
regular budget resources for the webcast, as it remains
the only official archive of the meetings of the Council
and the Universal Periodic Review.
Another area where resources are also needed is
accessibility of parliamentary or official documents, as
well as other fundamental documents, for persons with
disabilities.
Allow me now refer to other budgetary issues
concerning the Council. This past year 29 resolutions
and decisions or presidential declarations have been
adopted. The ever-increasing number of special
procedures and new mandates to be supported and/
or implemented by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner carries significant resource
implications. The new resource requirements of
Human Rights Council mandates in 2012 — according
to the preliminary estimate of the Office of the
High Commissioner, which includes conference
services — total over $12 million.
In response to urgent mandates created by the
Council, the Secretary-General last year submitted
proposals to the Assembly on financing unforeseen
and extraordinary expenses arising from the Council’s
resolutions and decisions. However, the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
recommended that the existing procedures for meeting

12-58933

A/67/PV.37

those unforeseen and extraordinary expenses not
related to peace and security be utilized. That means
that the Secretary-General, and therefore the Council,
must explain why additional requirements cannot be
immediately absorbed within the approved existing
resources. We hope, however, that despite that, the
Council will still be able to fulfil one of its principal
mandates, which is to respond in a timely manner to
emerging human rights crises in the world.
Although I am fully aware of the current financial
situation due to the crisis, I would like to rely on
the cooperation and support of all Member States in
ensuring that those issues are addressed, through
the Fifth Committee, by positively considering the
best options on how to tackle the funding of the new
mandates that arise from the Council’s resolutions and
decisions, at the same time not forgetting the needs of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, particularly if we want it to deliver
more technical cooperation in the face of the increasing
requests from the field.
I have held the presidency since June 2011, and my
term will end in December this year. I therefore wish to
convey my commitment to a successful transition of the
Council presidency. Similarly, I hope that the General
Assembly will continue to provide its full and efficient
support to the Human Rights Council during its seventh
cycle, in 2013.
This morning, on behalf of my successor, I invited
the President of the General Assembly to attend the
opening of the twenty-second session of the Council,
on 25 February 2013, and to commemorate on that
occasion the twentieth anniversary of the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Vrailas (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
country Croatia; the candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland
and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
declaration.
The European Union (EU) would like to thank the
President of the Human Rights Council, Ambassador

12-58933

Laura Dupuy Lasserre, for presenting the Human Rights
Council’s seventh annual report (A/67/53) to the General
Assembly. We also appreciated the opportunity to hold
an interactive dialogue with the Council President.
Since the establishment of the Human Rights
Council, the European Union has been a strong
supporter of this main United Nations human rights
body. The Council has strengthened the ability of the
United Nations to ensure that all persons are able to
enjoy all human rights. We attach great importance to
its credibility and effectiveness and will continue to
make every effort to ensure that it is able to address
situations of violations of human rights, including gross
and systematic violations, and to respond promptly to
human rights emergencies, but also to improve human
rights standards worldwide through systematic work on
various thematic issues.
In view of this, the European Union is very pleased
to note that the Council has maintained its leadership
in addressing human rights situations. In particular, the
Council’s prompt response to the crisis in the Syrian
Arab Republic is highly important, including its holding
several special sessions and an urgent debate, as well as
extending the mandate of the commission of inquiry
and establishing a mandate for a special rapporteur,
once the commission’s mandate has been completed.
The Council has also demonstrated its commitment to
providing technical assistance and capacity-building
to the Governments of Libya, Yemen, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Guinea, Afghanistan,
Cambodia and South Sudan to promote human rights.
The European Union hopes that the Council will
continue to follow situations where technical assistance
and capacity-building can make a difference and take
action where necessary.
Serving as a member of the Council entails
important responsibilities. Assembly resolution 60/251
provided that members elected to the Council shall
uphold the highest standards in the promotion and
protection of human rights. We encourage all to pay full
attention to the human rights record and human rights
commitments of States at the time of the election of
members of the Human Rights Council and throughout
their membership.
The European Union also attaches the greatest
importance to the special procedures, one of the most
vital functions of the Council. In order to allow the
special procedures to perform their role, it is crucial

5

A/67/PV.37

that mandate holders are able to independently assess
and draw the Council’s attention to human rights
issues and situations. The European Union welcomes
the new mandates established on Belarus and Eritrea,
given the deteriorating situation in those countries.
We welcome the extension of the mandates of the
Special Rapporteurs on the situation of human rights
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Burma/
Myanmar and Iran, and the renewal of the mandates
of the Independent Experts on the situation of human
rights in Côte d’Ivoire, the Sudan, Somalia and Haiti.
Thematic special procedures play an equally
outstanding role, through their research, countryspecific visits and valuable contribution to the better
understanding of the content of specific human
rights and their contribution to the enhancement and
realization of human rights standards. Among the
many thematic special procedures, the European
Union would like to highlight the new mandate of the
Special Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice,
reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence.
The ability of mandate holders to undertake
country visits and establish direct contact with the
relevant governmental structures and other national
and regional stakeholders, especially civil society, is
of crucial importance. We regret the refusal of some
Governments to cooperate with mandate holders.
All European Union member States have extended
a standing invitation to the special procedures, and
the EU calls upon all United Nations Members to do
likewise and to actively cooperate with them.
Over the years, the Council has also contributed
to the further development and understanding of
international norms and standards in the field of human
rights. The Council is also mandated to monitor the
implementation of international human rights law
and standards. Only through objective monitoring
and reporting can it identify the needs of victims and
possible areas for capacity-building and technical
assistance to States. We are happy that activities to
strengthen international cooperation and develop
capacity-building and technical measures remained
strong areas for involvement in the Council.
The Universal Periodic Review (UPR) is a truly
universal mechanism dealing with all human rights and
applicable to all Member States without discrimination.
Participation by all States in the first cycle is to the great
credit of the process. We encourage all States to ensure

6

that universal participation is maintained through the
second cycle as well. Ultimately, the outcome of the
Universal Periodic Review process depends not only
on the quality of the recommendations, but also on the
commitment to implement them. The European Union
is committed to continuing to support countries in
implementing their UPR recommendations.
The Human Rights Council also has an important
role to play as a forum for dialogue and exchange of best
practices and experiences on a wide range of thematic
human rights issues and thus for the advancement of
the human rights agenda. The European Union wishes
in particular to highlight and welcome the following
important developments.
First, enjoyment of human rights by women
constituted a major theme at the Human Rights Council
during the period under review. The Council strongly
condemned all acts of violence against women and girls,
and it should continue working on recommendations on
how to create and strengthen linkages and synergies
among the Council mechanisms and with other relevant
intergovernmental processes. On the elimination of
discrimination against women, the Council called
on States to ensure full representation and full and
equal participation in political, social and economic
decision-making.
Secondly, the Council adopted guiding principles
on extreme poverty and human rights as a useful tool
for States in formulating and implementing poverty
reduction and eradication policies. Thirdly, the Council
continued its important work on the rights of the child,
with a full-day annual panel discussion dedicated to
the issue of administration of justice and an omnibus
resolution on the rights of the child, presented jointly
by the European Union and the Latin American and
Caribbean Group. Fourthly, the Council addressed the
human right to safe drinking water and sanitation, which
is derived from the right to an adequate standard of
living and inextricably related to the right to the highest
attainable standards of physical and mental health, by
adopting a resolution on the issue of financing.
During the reporting period, the Council also
addressed human rights on the Internet and reaffirmed
that the same rights that people have offline must
also be protected online, in particular freedom
of expression. We believe that this issue deserves
continued monitoring.

12-58933

A/67/PV.37

The European Union reiterates its strong
condemnation of acts of reprisal and intimidation of
civil society representatives attending the Human
Rights Council and cooperating with human rights
mechanisms and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights. Civil society
organizations and national human rights institutions
bring extremely valuable contributions to the Council’s
work. Their ability to interact with the Council must be
preserved.
In conclusion, let me reiterate the European Union’s
strong commitment to contributing to the work of the
Human Rights Council and to further strengthening its
role to contribute to the development of international
human rights law, to systematically uphold and ensure
the implementation of existing international norms and
standards, and to promote the observance by all States
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): We welcome
President Dupuy Lasserre back to New York and
thank her for her comprehensive report to the General
Assembly on the work of the Human Rights Council
(A/67/53).
In the past year, the Council has further consolidated
its work and has again shown its readiness to address
urgent and grave human rights violations. The Council
has proved, better than other United Nations bodies,
that it is a voice of accountability for the most serious
human rights violations, in full accordance with its
mandate.
We welcome the continuous engagement of the
Council with regard to the situation in Syria and
commend the commission of inquiry for its work, in
particular in collecting evidence that can be used in
judicial proceedings to hold to account those responsible
for the gravest human rights violations and violations of
international humanitarian law.

Eritrea. Unfortunately, the Council did not take urgent
action to the extent desirable with regard to the human
rights situation in Bahrain.
We welcome the work undertaken by the Human
Rights Council on the safety of journalists and on the
promotion and protection of human rights in transitional
justice. The Council thereby shows its ability to
address current and emerging areas of concern to the
international community with a view to strengthening
safeguards in the promotion and protection of human
rights, particularly in situations of fundamental societal
and political change. We believe that in executing its
mandate the Council should continue to be guided by
the principles enshrined in the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action. The Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action unconditionally reaffirms the
universal nature of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms and commits States to universal respect for,
and observance and protection of, all human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all.
Against that background, we have followed with
some concern the discussion within the Council on
traditional values of humankind. While we understand
that there might be added value for States to consider
particular circumstances when complying with
international human rights obligations, we are also
convinced that such circumstances cannot be invoked
to alter the fundamental entitlement of any human being
to the full protection of her or his human rights — an
entitlement that directly derives from her or his inherent
dignity as a human being. We hope that the Council
will heed those concerns in its future discussions on
the issue.

Furthermore, we welcome the Council’s call
on the Sri Lankan Government to fulfil its relevant
legal obligations and commitment to initiate credible
and independent actions to ensure justice, equity,
accountability and reconciliation for all Sri Lankans
for the serious human rights violations and violations
of international humanitarian law in the final phase of
the civil war.

The Human Rights Council has established itself
as the central standing body of the United Nations
to address all dimensions of human rights questions,
including setting standards, implementation and
emergency response. This year marks a particular
moment in the Council’s existence as one of its central
instruments to promote and protect human rights — the
Universal Periodic Review (UPR) — has entered its
second cycle. It is also a time of particular challenges
for the UPR. During its second cycle, the UPR must
prove its validity in terms of concrete results and
improvements in the promotion and protection of
human rights around the globe.

We also welcome the consensus decisions of the
Council on the human rights situations in Mali and

Progress in the implementation of recommendations
is essential to secure the legitimacy of the UPR among

12-58933

7

A/67/PV.37

States and civil society. States should make a particular
effort to show that a review by their peers can directly
benefit citizens of all parts of the world without
distinction. The legitimacy of the UPR is grounded not
least in the fact that every single State has been reviewed
under the process during the first cycle. Preserving
the UPR’s universality must therefore be the highest
priority for States, in particular of the members of the
Council, as well as of the Presidents of the Council
and the General Assembly and the Secretary-General.
States have a collective responsibility in ensuring that
the UPR remains a cornerstone of the United Nations
human rights architecture.
Refusal to cooperate under the UPR is a direct
challenge to the universal and equal applicability of
agreements in the field of human rights. Refusal risks
taking us back to an understanding that had been
overcome, one that plagued the Council’s precursor
body, where political interests and selectivity often
prevailed. We therefore hope that all States will continue
to honour the principle of inclusive and transparent
multilateralism by again submitting themselves under
the UPR.
The review if the status of the Human Rights
Council was accomplished just over a year ago by the
General Assembly. Not all expectations have been met,
but a number of positive achievements can be cited. The
existing channels for funding the Council’s urgent and
extraordinary decisions seem to be open, in principle,
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, if not at all times. The consensus
to preserve the current institutional relationship among
the High Commissioner, the General Assembly and
the Council has allowed for a pragmatic approach to
improve information-sharing and cooperation within
the agreed set-up.
Finally, the realignment of the Council’s cycle
seems to have benefited both the Council and the
General Assembly, while a number of practical
implications might still need to be addressed. At the
very least, the realignment has allowed us to welcome
the current President of the Council twice in New York.
We look forward to a fruitful exchange with her in the
Third Committee this afternoon.
Mr. Alhajeri (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): The
General Assembly is discussing today one of the most
important items on its agenda. I would like to thank the
Human Rights Council for its report (A/67/53), which

8

summarizes the important role that the Council plays in
strengthening and defending human rights.
My country’s delegation expresses its sincere
thanks to the States members of the General Assembly
for the trust they placed in the State of Kuwait by
electing it to the Human Rights Council for the period
from 2011 to 2013. We emphasize the commitment of
the State of Kuwait, through its membership in that
important body, to exerting its most sincere effort
and to dedicating its full potential to strengthening
and defending human rights principles and to support
the work of the Human Rights Council in combating
racism, extremism and discrimination. We also value
the constructive activities carried out by Member States
in that field.
The advancement of peoples and nations is measured
by their respect for human rights. Furthermore, the
Charter of the United Nations urges Member States to
advance the principles of human rights and protect the
fundamental freedoms of the individual. That requires
us all to stand side by side in our effort to achieve those
principles, since the humanitarian aspect must rise
above all differences and thus no race, religion or sect
may prevent an individual from obtaining all of his or
her rights.
The State of Kuwait emphasizes its adherence to the
principles of human rights. The Kuwaiti Constitution
of 1962 is in harmony with the rules, organizations
and conventions on human rights. The Constitution
has consolidated those rights, such as the right to
life and freedom of opinion and expression. Article
7 of the Constitution states that justice, freedom and
equality are the pillars of society and that cooperation
and compassion form the bonds linking all citizens.
Article 29 provides that all people enjoy equal human
dignity, with equal rights and duties before the law and
without discrimination based on race, origin, language
or religion.
The State of Kuwait believes in the role of civil
society institutions and in freedom of the press and
expression. It has legislated a number of relevant laws,
such as laws no. 3/2006 and 61/2007. Both relate to
regulating the work of various media outlets, including
print, television and radio, in such a way as to guarantee
a more open and democratic atmosphere, whereby the
media can address any political, social and economic
issues of Kuwaiti public affairs.

12-58933

A/67/PV.37

Article 31 of the Kuwaiti Constitution refers to
the protection of human beings from torture, abuse
and indignities. Such an atmosphere of freedom and
openness will help to guarantee the creation of a healthy
environment and thus generate dialogue exchange and
attract visions and ideas from all walks of life. It will
also ensure popular participation in expressing and
influencing political decision-making in the State of
Kuwait. That will in turn guarantee greater strength
and stability in my country, leading to prosperity,
advancement and innovation.
Article 35 of the Constitution states that freedom
of religion and belief is absolute. The State of Kuwait
has supported broader dissemination of the cultures
of tolerance and understanding through dialogue. In
that context, I am pleased to refer to the initiative of
His Highness the Amir of the State of Kuwait, Sheikh
Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, to establish
the Universal Centrist Approach Centre, which has
hosted several international conferences in support
of necessary proposals to counter extremist thought.
Furthermore, Government bodies have established
programmes targeting all segments of the society with
a view to promoting moderate and centrist thought
throughout society.
In affirming the established principles of
Kuwaiti foreign policy that emphasize strengthened
international peace and security, rejection of violence
and respect for human rights, my country provides
numerous forms of humanitarian aid through
governmental and non-governmental organizations and
bodies, to all peoples, in its endeavours to strengthen
human rights and human dignity. It has also increased
annual voluntary contributions to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
to support its efforts and its mission, as mandated by
the Member States.
As we discuss the issue of human rights and the need
to respect the humanity of the individual, we cannot but
strongly condemn the oppressive Israeli practices and
policies that persist in violating the most basic human
rights of the unarmed Palestinian people in the occupied
territories. We call on the international community to
take up its responsibility to force Israel, the occupying
Power, to abide by resolutions of international
legitimacy, to cease its aggressive, tyrannical policies,
and to respect international humanitarian law and the
principles of human rights.

12-58933

The State of Kuwait believes absolutely in the
requirement to honour human rights. For its part, it will
spare no effort to defend those rights. It stresses that
point in its participation in all international forums,
including United Nations bodies and governmental
and non-governmental organizations relevant to human
rights. We affirm the need for sincere cooperation in
the sphere of human rights in working towards the
greater benefit and security of our peoples, to which
we all aspire.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): The
Human Rights Council grew out of the need to confront
the double standards, confrontation and political
manipulation of its predecessor, the Commission on
Human Rights. We must prevent a return in the Council
to the harmful practices that plunged the Commission
into disgrace. Cuba has clearly stated that it rejects
the imposition of those practices. However, we are
concerned about the current trend to exalt in the Council
selectivity and double standards in its consideration
of human rights situations when cooperation and
respectful dialogue should guide its work.
Given that reality, the Universal Periodic Review
(UPR) is the only existing universal mechanism for
making comprehensive assessments of the human
rights situation in all countries. It is the main factor
distinguishing the Council from the Commission. The
UPR has proved itself to be a means for international
cooperation on human rights, on the basis of constructive
dialogue and respect for the principles of universality,
objectivity, impartiality and non-selectivity.
Cuba participated energetically in the process of
creating the Council. In addition, my country was an
active and successful negotiator at every stage of the
review process of the Council, in an effort to perfect
and consolidate the work accomplished in its first five
years.
However, as we have said, double standards have
permeated the Council’s work. On the one hand, many
countries have emphasized the promotion of themes
manipulated according to their own interests, such as
country-specific resolutions, commissions of inquiry
and fact-finding missions, despite the significant
cost that some entail. On the other hand, those same
countries block resolutions presented by developing
States, claiming budgetary constraints and arguing that
actions must be carried out within existing resources.
That dichotomy was widely spoken of in the Human

9

A/67/PV.37

Rights Council during the period covered by the report
before us (A/67/53).
For Cuba, as long as an unjust and exclusionary
international economic and political order persists, the
Council should continue to speak out in favour of a
democratic and equitable international order. As long
as unilateral coercive measures are imposed and harsh
blockades continue, such as the one Cuba has suffered
under for more than 50 years, the Council should reject
such practices and demand that they cease.
The special procedures of the Human Rights
Council should be guided by respect for the principles
of objectivity and impartiality and must respect the
code of conduct that was adopted during the Council’s
institution-building process. The work of human rights
treaty bodies should also follow similar guidelines. The
Council must ensure that the recovery of the right to
international solidarity is not postponed, with a view
to tackling the serious challenges presented by serious
economic, financial, environmental and social crises,
as well as energy and nutrition crises, that plague the
planet.
Faced with the tendency that the most developed
countries have succeeded in imposing on the Human
Rights Council, Cuba reiterates its willingness to
cooperate with that body and with the human rights
mechanisms of the United Nations system and its
universal and non-discriminatory institutions. We
affirm our openness to dialogue with all States,
sustained through mutual respect, acceptance of equal
sovereignty and recognition of the right of all peoples
to choose their own political systems and institutions.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): I thank the President of the
Human Rights Council for her report today and for her
continued dedication to the Council.
The Human Rights Council is responsible for
promoting universal respect for the protection of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms of all persons.
We would like to stress that it was established in order
to address violations of human rights and to make
recommendations thereon. Since its establishment,
the Council has steadily and steadfastly established
its track record in the course of actively responding to
human rights violations
We particularly appreciate the fact that the Council
has acted to address the serious violations of human
rights in Syria during its regular sessions and also in four

10

special sessions. Such actions include the establishment
of an independent international commission of inquiry,
the commission’s special investigation into the
atrocities in El-Houleh and the strengthening of the
capacity of the commission. It was a conscious decision
on the part of the Council to adopt several resolutions
on the matter in order to send strong messages to the
Syrian Government.
Furthermore, in a sign of progress, some countryspecific resolutions were submitted to the Council by
various Member States or regional groups, and, upon
obtaining cross-regional support, several were adopted
by consensus. The Government of Japan supports the
use of such a mechanism of the Council to address and
respond to human rights violations.
The Universal Periodic Review (UPR) is a truly
innovative mechanism within the Council, which can
effectively improve the human rights situations in
all Member States through their voluntary follow-up
actions. The second cycle of reviews started this year. It
is important that we pay attention to the implementation
of the accepted recommendations by each Member
State from the first cycle. The second review of Japan
was conducted on 31 October, and the draft report
of the Working Group was adopted on 2 November.
Japan will seriously examine the recommendations by
Member States, and our response will be announced
in the upcoming Human Rights Council session. The
special procedures complement the UPR by addressing
particularly serious human rights violations around the
world. In that regard, each Member State should issue a
standing invitation to the special procedures.
We highly appreciate the initiative of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights to strengthen the
human rights treaty body system, and we also welcome
the publication of her report on the matter. Japan
attaches great importance to improving the efficiency
of the working methods of the treaty bodies so that they
can make the most of limited resources and effectively
implement their mandates as specified in the treaties.
It is also important to ensure the independence of the
treaty bodies and their members. On the basis of the
discussions in Geneva, Japan looks forward to engaging
in the General Assembly process to craft reasonable
and efficient working methods for the treaty bodies.
Let us remember that the Council was also
established to realize the mainstreaming of human
rights — that is, to integrate a human rights perspective
into all activities of the United Nations. The role of
12-58933

A/67/PV.37

the Third Committee of the General Assembly, as a
universal body that includes all States Members of the
United Nations, is also important for that purpose. We
expect the Council and the Third Committee to fulfil
their roles by making use of their respective advantages.
Japan was elected a member of the Human Rights
Council for the 2013-2015 term at the election held
in this Hall during the Assembly’s 34th meeting, on
12 November. We appreciate the support and trust
shown by Member States. Let me assure the Assembly
that Japan is mindful of its great responsibilities. Japan
will continue to conduct its diplomacy by promoting
such universal values as human rights and democracy
and will act for the protection and promotion of human
rights in the international community.
Mr. De Léon Huerta (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
In 2005, the international community recognized the
need to raise the level of treatment of human rights
in our Organization by establishing a new body for
strengthening the work of the United Nations in the
promotion and protection of human rights around the
world. Since then, the Human Rights Council has
made progress in fulfilling its important mandate
and is developing new tools to bring meaningful
change to the lives of millions of people. The Council
plays a fundamental role in promoting human rights,
preventing new violations and developing guarantees
for protection and non-recurrence. It has also been able
to document serious violations of human rights in order
to combat impunity.
A very relevant feature of the Council is the
growing number of States that are ever more open to
discussing the human rights challenges they face at
national and regional levels. They are also more open
to sharing their progress and successful experiences. In
that context, numerous developing countries stand out.
We hope that all States without exception will adopt a
similar attitude. States must recognize that openness
and dialogue with the Human Rights Council’s
mechanisms and cooperation can generate substantial
improvement in the exercise of human rights in our
countries and regions.
The Council has also shown significant progress
in addressing the rights of the elderly and persons of
African descent, universal recognition of the rights
of migrants, including the right to work, promoting
registration of births and preventing discrimination
against women, to mention just a few issues.

12-58933

Mexico is aware that there is much room for
improvement in the way in which we address certain
questions, in particular national situations, cooperation
with special procedures and effective use of the limited
existing resources. The institutional agreements on
which the Council is based allows for constant evolution
of its procedures and mechanisms.
We must recognize that, due to inertia, there
is duplication of activities and, in general, we do
not promote an adequate division of labour. The
Third Committee has an important responsibility for
preventing such duplication, promoting appropriate
complementarity of efforts and seeking value added in
the way we address issues. We must ask ourselves if
we are providing due attention to and follow-up on the
work of the roughly 47 human rights procedures that in
recent weeks were subject to interactive dialogue with
the Third Committee.
Given the pressing budgetary needs, it has become
necessary to reflect on the way in which States can
contribute to an increase in and efficient distribution
of the resources on which the human rights machinery
depends, as well as to the most efficient use of available
resources. In that regard, we also wish to support the
remarks to be made later this morning by the Turkish
Ambassador on behalf of a large group of countries.
Mexico will continue to promote a comprehensive and
joint reflection on the topic with a view to achieving
concrete results.
The President took the Chair.
The Council must continue to develop international
standards for the promotion and protection of human
rights, and not fall into unnecessary legislative
inflation, the results of which will not necessarily
guarantee adequate protection of human rights in the
long term. We must promote greater coherence in the
international normative framework.
Another institutional challenge for the Council is
the need to broaden technical support in its broadest
sense. Above all, the Council and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
must provide States with tools to create and consolidate
efficient regulatory frameworks and implement public
policies in favour of human rights.
The second cycle of the Universal Periodic
Review presents a fine opportunity to promote plans
for cooperation and appropriate follow-up on the

11

A/67/PV.37

recommendations made. The General Assembly and
other bodies of the system must grant high priority to the
recommendations of the Human Rights Council, which
is the top body the Organization has to promote one of
the pillars of the Organization and thus to encourage
the incorporation of human rights in all activities of
the United Nations. It is our ongoing responsibility to
strengthen its efficacy.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to thank the President of the Human Rights
Council for her presentation, which provided us with
an overview of the developments and activities of the
Council as well as of the challenges it is facing.
The establishment of the Human Rights Council
was one of the most significant initiatives taken at the
United Nations, not only because of its contribution to
improving the United Nations human rights structure,
but fundamentally because of its capacity and ability
to change the politicized environment of confrontation
that had characterized the former Commission on
Human Rights, which ultimately gave place to the
Human Rights Council as a forum for dialogue and
cooperation.
The Human Rights Council is strongly expected
to be a forum for dialogue, mutual understanding and
cooperation in achieving the universal realization of
human rights, taking into account the cultural and
national particularities of different societies. To our
great dismay, new concerted attempts are emerging to
make the Council a mere political tool for the sake of
political ambitions of a few countries. It is deplorable
that despite the existence of the Universal Periodic
Review (UPR) mechanism in the Human Rights
Council, certain countries still continue to submit
country-specific resolutions in the Council and in the
Third Committee of the General Assembly. It goes
without saying that such resolutions are politically
motivated exercises aimed at satisfying the political
purposes and interests of their sponsors.
The Islamic Republic of Iran, along with the other
developing countries, actively participated in and
positively contributed to the reform processes of the
United Nations human rights machinery, including
those that led to the establishment of the Council, with a
view to putting an end to a long-standing politicization
and manipulation of the United Nations mechanism by
a few countries.

12

With the successful performance of the first
cycle of the UPR mechanism and the launch of the
second cycle, it was agreed that the Universal Periodic
Review constitutes a breakthrough in United Nations
intergovernmental human rights activities. The
rationale behind creating such a mechanism was to
ensure universality, objectivity, non-selectivity and
impartiality in the work of the Human Rights Council.
The real advantage of the mechanism, in a logical
setting, is to allow the human rights machinery to
act beyond the control of the monopoly of a few in
monitoring the human rights situations of all Member
States.
However, the world is still witnessing attempts
by a few countries that wish to impose their own
views and interpretations on the application of certain
internationally agreed concepts and standards. The
Human Rights Council should deal with such attempts
by designing innovative approaches.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has taken a genuine
and long-term approach to safeguarding human
rights by ensuring its full compliance with the
relevant international commitments, while upholding
the promotion of the principles enshrined in its
Constitution. Our policy has continuously emphasized
the significance of an interactive and cooperative
approach to the promotion and protection of human
rights, as stipulated in the purposes and principles
of the United Nations Charter, as well as avoiding
confrontation, double standards and politicization.
Iran’s firm commitment to the promotion and protection
of human rights includes, inter alia, undertaking
measures that lead to the further convergence of the
values and principles held by various countries with
different cultural, social and historical backgrounds
with regard to the issue of human rights.
We welcome constructive cooperation with the
United Nations human rights machinery. In their
meeting with Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon during
his recent visit to Tehran, Iranian officials expressed
their readiness to engage constructively with the
Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. Iran has invited
the High Commissioner to visit the country. Officials
from the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights made a preparatory visit in December 2011 so as
to facilitate the United Nations High Commissioner’s
visit. Iran is ready to cooperate with United Nations

12-58933

A/67/PV.37

special mechanisms that are comprehensive and include
all Member States and not a particular group of States.
In that regard, we look forward to continuing our
close cooperation with the Human Rights Council in
realizing our shared objective of attaining greater
global justice, equity and development through the
enhancement of human rights for all.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): We would like to make
this cross-regional statement on behalf of a group of
countries. The statement is identical to that delivered
on behalf of 35 countries in Geneva during the most
recent session of the Human Rights Council. The
countries associated with the statement are Algeria,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Botswana, Chile, Côte
d’Ivoire, France, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras,
Indonesia, Italy, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Maldives,
Mexico, Monaco, Morocco, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan,
Peru, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Switzerland,
Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey and Uruguay.
The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) is
experiencing new financial challenges. The High
Commissioner recently indicated that the Office would
have to cut its budget by 12 per cent in 2013, given its
current financial situation. The financial shortcoming
is partly a result of the increasing requests and need
for the support of the Office, the increasing need for
Secretariat support for the human rights treaty bodies
and the unprecedented number of new and expanded
mandates adopted by the Human Rights Council.
The financial challenge is complicated by OHCHR’s
reliance on voluntary contributions.
We all have an increasing interest in ensuring that
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, a leading institution in the promotion
and protection of human rights in the United Nations
system, can fulfil its mandate faced with the increasing
demands on its services. The main aim should be to
establish a more sustainable system for funding the
OHCHR over the coming years in a manner that balances
the various interests of States without infringing on
the independence of the High Commissioner and
her Office, which operates under the administrative
direction and authority of the Secretary-General and
the General Assembly.
With that in mind, we believe that United Nations
Members should work to establish a more sustainable
system for ensuring adequate resources for the Office

12-58933

of the High Commissioner by strengthening the funding
of the Office, including through coordinated efforts
in the Fifth Committee and other relevant United
Nations bodies, such as the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, in order to
secure a substantial strengthening of OHCHR’s regular
budget over the coming years and to ensure the timely
funding of urgent mandates. It could also be achieved
by supporting the High Commissioner and her Office in
their efforts to strengthen efficiency and to prioritize,
by ensuring the necessary space in that difficult
exercise for the High Commissioner to manoeuvre in,
and by continuing to provide voluntary contributions in
order to secure a financial base for OHCHR activities
with the help of non-earmarked contributions as far as
possible. The current financial constraints should be
borne in mind when mandating new activities.
We also support the High Commissioner for Human
Rights and her Office in their efforts to strengthen
communication regarding resource requirements and
how they could be met, including the possible impact
of different budget scenarios on the work of the Office.
We support their continued efforts to develop dialogue
with States in order to ensure transparency and easy
access to information on sources and the allocation of
funding to the Office, while preserving the independent
role of the High Commissioner.
We believe that the High Commissioner and her
Office should take a realistic and sustainable approach
to budgeting and should look carefully at the work of
the Office to strengthen efficiency and to ensure that
OHCHR works in areas where it can add value and has
a comparative advantage. The Office should continue to
roll out the new performance monitoring system across
all OHCHR presences in the field and the Geneva
headquarters. That is important in order to measure
impact and to identify clear and concrete data on how
OHCHR is performing in different areas. In addition,
they should expand the donor base and work to achieve
as wide a geographical spread of donors as possible.
Mr. Guerber (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes the strengthening of the work
of the Human Rights Council under the presidency of
Ms. Lasserre. The presence of the Secretary-General at
the Human Rights Council on 11 September was also a
notable highlight.
Switzerland approves of the cross-regional
approach, which is now becoming more common. That

13

A/67/PV.37

approach improves the effectiveness of the Human
Rights Council and the participative and inclusive
nature of the discussions in Geneva. That aspect has
been further strengthened by the establishment of
a fund to support the participation of less developed
nations and of island States.
It is encouraging to note that new subjects have been
introduced in the Council, notably gender orientation
and sexual identity. However, the tendency that has
sometimes been noted to tone down the language
related to non-discrimination and gender equality is
somewhat worrisome.
In the aftermath of the events in the Near East and
North Africa and the citizen movements throughout the
world, Switzerland is pleased to have put the subject
of the protection of human rights during peaceful
demonstrations on the Council’s agenda. Discussion of
the subject will resume at the Council’s next session
in March 2013. Switzerland is also pleased about the
appointment of and the first report by the Special
Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice, reparation
and guarantees of non-recurrence (A/HRC/21/46)
and that on human rights and the environment
(A/HRC/19/34).
Switzerland is proud of the fact that it was examined
for the second time in the framework of the Universal
Periodic Review during the previous session of the
Working Group. The interactive dialogue between
Switzerland and the States was the culmination of
national consultations organized at various phases of
the national preparation for the review. More generally,
cooperation among all States during the first cycle of the
review represented one of the greatest successes of that
mechanism. Switzerland calls for the continuation of
that initiative, because it is important not to undermine
the universal character of the review. In our view, the
implementation of the second cycle of the review also
took place under good conditions. We now need to place
an emphasis on the follow-up of recommendations and
implementation of the relevant measures.
As for the intergovernmental discussions on the
strengthening of treaty bodies, Switzerland considers
that the aim of the process is to make the present system
more efficient, to eliminate duplication of effort and to
enable the treaty bodies to fulfil their mandates more
effectively, while at the same time guaranteeing their
independence. As the co-facilitators stressed in their
report to the President of the General Assembly, it is

14

important to focus the discussion on specific issues,
while bearing in mind the financing of the system of
treaty bodies. Switzerland believes that long-term
planning, working methods and the lack of adequate
resources should be central elements of any solution.
Finally, with regard to the challenges in funding
the activities of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Switzerland endorses the statement made today
by the representative of Turkey. Despite the present
economic and financial climate, Switzerland calls on
Member States to increase the part of the regular budget
earmarked for the Office of the High Commissioner and
to maintain the level of their voluntary contributions.
Switzerland welcomes the statement by the High
Commissioner on the subject at the press conference of
18 October in Geneva on the occasion of the renewal of
the mandate.
Mr. Orjiako (Nigeria): My delegation welcomes
the President of the Human Rights Council,
Ambassador Laura Dupuy Lasserre, and thanks
her for her presentation of the report of the Council
(A/67/53) to the Third Committee and the Assembly.
Nigeria attaches great importance to the respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms. We are
committed to upholding human rights, not just within
our borders but in our region and across the world. We
are committed to supporting the Human Rights Council
as the principal body within the United Nations human
rights machinery. We want to see the Council achieve
its mandate, as set out in resolution 60/251. We have
remained actively engaged with the Human Rights
Council in the past six years, during which we actively
served as a member.
Nigeria notes with satisfaction the commencement
of the second cycle of the Universal Periodic Review,
with the fourteenth session of the Working Group
two weeks ago. Judging by the active and enthusiastic
participation of the States so far reviewed under the
second cycle, we believe that the cycle is off to a good
start, and it is our hope that we shall see universal
participation in it, just as we saw during the first cycle.
Nigeria continues to view the review mechanism as
a useful mechanism in the promotion and protection
of human rights, and indeed we look forward to our
second national review in 2013 during the seventeenth
session of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic
Review.
The wide range of thematic issues addressed by
the special procedures of the Human Rights Council
12-58933

A/67/PV.37

indicates that the notion of human rights is taking on a
broader dimension and is now being mainstreamed into
deeper aspects of human development. We are pleased
to note that the appointment of the mandate holders
reflects equitable geographical representation and
regional spread. We commend the mandate holders for
the efforts that they have been putting into their work,
and we urge them to continue to discharge their tasks
impartially and in accordance with their mandate.
People across the world look to the Human Rights
Council to promote and protect their human rights, and
one way we can assure them that the Council is there
to serve their interests is by maintaining the high level
of access that non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
have enjoyed in the Council. Nigeria is pleased with the
participation of NGOs in the activities of the Human
Rights Council and the freedom they have to express
their views on issues under consideration at the sessions
of the Council. We believe the Council’s engagement
with NGOs provides an avenue for the voice of ordinary
men and women to be heard and for the cause of victims
to be pleaded before that world body.
The considerable number of resolutions adopted
by the Human Rights Council during the current year
is a reflection of the wide array of issues that the
Council has had to deal with. However, it is a fact that
resolutions come with programme budget implications,
which create challenges of funding. Cognizant of the
fact that human rights represent one of the key pillars
of the United Nations architecture, Nigeria supports
the call for the General Assembly to significantly
strengthen funding for the work of the Council.
Finally, we wish to reaffirm our commitment to
collaborate and cooperate with all States in order to
advance the work of the Human Rights Council. As we
leave the Council at the end of this year, we would like
to send a clear message that our exit from that unique
body shall not in any way diminish our interest in its
activities or reduce our commitment to its noble ideals.
Mr. Hassan (Malaysia): My delegation warmly
welcomes the presence of Ambassador Laura Dupuy
Lasserre, the President of the Human Rights Council
in the General Assembly and her presentation of the
report of the Council (A/67/53).
Malaysia, together with the rest of the international
community, has high expectations on the work of the
Council. Events around the world, particularly in the
Middle East and North Africa, have highlighted the

12-58933

magnitude of the work that is facing the Council. Now
that the dust is beginning to settle, the citizens of the
affected countries are starting to enjoy greater freedom
in their lives. However, there is an awareness that there
is more to be done. The nascent Governments, while
trying not to repeat the missteps of the previous fallen
leaders, are currently faced with the delicate task of
juggling the call for progress and the need to retain
support. Malaysia believes that the Council can play
a prominent role in supporting those Governments,
especially by guiding them towards a human rights
standard that is acceptable to the international
community.
Allow me to touch on a few matters relating to the
Council. First, on the subject of the Universal Periodic
Review, Malaysia is pleased to note the success of
the first cycle of the review process. The review is a
primary human rights mechanism, premised upon equal
treatment of all countries. Malaysia wishes to report
that it is in the process of preparing its report for the
second review in June 2013. Consultations have been
undertaken with Government agencies, and further
discussions with civil society actors will also take place
before the final report is prepared.
To ensure the full participation of all countries in
the review process, Malaysia is of the view that the
Voluntary Fund for Financial and Technical Assistance,
established by the Council in its resolution 6/17, should
be strengthened and put to work to provide a source of
financial and technical assistance to help countries. That
would especially benefit the least developed countries
and help them to implement the recommendations
emanating from their reviews.
Secondly, my delegation notes the international role
played in supporting the process of State-building and
national reconciliation in various parts of the world. We
wish to reiterate our view that such processes must be
driven at the domestic level. It is important that any
involvement of external parties must have the consent
of the concerned States and should be based on the
principles of cooperation and constructive dialogue.
Thirdly, Malaysia welcomes the Council’s continued
attention to the human rights situation inflicted
by Israel on the Palestinian people in the occupied
territories. We must never forget that the core issue for
the Palestinians is their inalienable right to statehood.
Malaysia strongly supports the legitimate right of the
Palestinian people to an independent State of Palestine,

15

A/67/PV.37

based on the two-State solution, taking into account the
security concerns of both parties. We urge the Council
to continue to press the issue and to ensure that the
Palestinians are afforded their basic rights as human
beings, including their right to an independent State.
Fourthly, regarding the process of strengthening
and enhancing the effective functioning of the human
rights treaty body system, Malaysia appreciates the High
Commissioner’s initiative in conducting consultations
with Member States on the subject. Nevertheless,
we wish to emphasize that the process should be an
intergovernmental one, in which involvement by the
States parties in the various treaties in every stage is
of paramount importance. We therefore look forward to
the open-ended intergovernmental process that is taking
place within the framework of the General Assembly to
address the challenges pertaining to strengthening and
enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights
treaty body system.
We hope that the Council will carry on its good
work in promoting and protecting human rights for
all, and that it will not yield to the agendas promoted
in certain quarters. The many achievements to date,
which include the successful implementation of the
Universal Periodic Review mechanism, put the Council
in good stead in its promotion and protection of human
rights for all. However, Malaysia believes that more can
always be done to ensure the promotion and protection
for the victims of human rights violations. Malaysia
is committed to that end and will continue to strongly
support the work of the Council.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): I would like at the outset
to express our appreciation for the statement by
Ambassador Laura Dupuy Lasserre, President of the
Human Rights Council, before the General Assembly,
following her valuable statement in the general debate
on the report of the Council (A/67/53) in the Third
Committee, in accordance with resolution 65/281.
Since its establishment by resolution 60/251, the
Human Rights Council has continuously improved
its performance by unifying work standards and has
contributed through its machinery to the promotion of
universal respect for human rights. All Member States
without exception have the duty to implement those
mechanisms, which must be applied in a fair and equal
manner on the basis of objectivity, impartiality and
neutrality, devoid of double standards, politicization
and selectivity.

16

The international community is continuously
exerting and consolidating efforts to ensure respect for
and protect all human rights, and seeking to restore the
balance in international interests between economic,
social and cultural rights, on the one hand, and civil and
political rights on the other. Moreover, it strengthens our
common efforts to combat all forms of discrimination,
incitement to hatred and violence on the basis of
race, sex, language or religion, including through the
implementation of our commitments, in accordance with
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, the
outcome document of the Durban Review Conference
and the political declaration that the General Assembly
adopted by consensus during the tenth anniversary of
the Durban Declaration in September 2011 (resolution
66/3). Despite those efforts, we are still facing
challenges owing to the insistence of some countries
on invoking the freedom of expression and opinion to
justify provocative acts that incite hatred and violence
on the basis of religion or belief and that have dangerous
implications for international peace and security.
We have an obligation to strengthen and respect the
institutional balance between the roles of the principal
organs of the United Nations in addressing human rights
issues, with a particular emphasis on economic, social
and cultural dimensions. In doing so, we must reject
the attempts of some to impose their values, concepts
and perceptions, as well as the standards of their justice
and legal systems, all the while promulgating certain
controversial notions that do not take into account the
diversity of the social, cultural, religious and legislative
values of various nations.
It is therefore incumbent on us to reiterate our
commitment not to politicize the Council and to
reaffirm its central role in ensuring respect for all
human rights and international humanitarian law for
all Member States and peoples, without exception or
discrimination, in particular in occupied territories,
and most importantly, in Palestine. We have to fulfil our
responsibility to ensure full compliance by Israel, the
occupying Power, with all its international obligations,
including its commitment to cooperate fully with the
Council’s resolutions and with the Special Rapporteur
and the fact-finding missions mandated by the Human
Rights Council to investigate gross violations of human
rights in the occupied Palestinian territories. In that
regard, Egypt deplores Israel’s decision to suspend its
relation with the Human Rights Council. We consider
that a dangerous precedent, which will, unless firmly

12-58933

A/67/PV.37

dealt with, undermine the effective functioning of the
Council and its mandate.
Strengthening the role of the Council requires
enhancing dialogue and promoting constructive
cooperation to ensure the effectiveness of the special
procedures system. That is the shared responsibility of
the mandate holders, the States and all other relevant
parties, which must be based on the principles of
transparency, impartiality and mutual cooperation,
while ensuring full respect by the special procedures
of the mandates and responsibilities established by the
Human Rights Council and that Member States fulfil
their obligation to cooperate within the respective
mandates.
Finally, Egypt stresses the importance of
strengthening the principles of transparency and
accountability in the work of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, whether funded from the regular
budget or from other sources. We request that the
necessary financial resources to support the activities
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights in implementing its mandate and
to enable it to support and advise Member States, to
follow up on the implementation of Council resolutions
and to provide the necessary assistance to Member
States in the field of capacity-building be sourced from
the regular budget of the United Nations. Voluntary
conditional funding should be avoided as far as possible.
Assured funding will strengthen the role of the Office
in supporting the work of the Council.
Mr. Cho Ki-joung (Republic of Korea) (spoke in
French): At the outset, allow me to commend the Human
Rights Council, under the presidency of Ms. Laura
Dupuy Lasserre, for the quality of its work over the past
year.
The Human Rights Council has rapidly met the
urgent need with regard to human rights, particularly
in Syria. The Council took the necessary decisions not
only through its regular sessions but also by organizing
a special session. It sent a clear message to the
international community that any violation of human
rights must be stopped immediately and responsibility
must be apportioned. Such rapid response and
effectiveness have further enhanced the primary role
of the Human Rights Council as a guarantor of the
protection and promotion of human rights.
On behalf of the Government of the Republic of
Korea, I would like to warmly thank Ms. Laura Dupuy

12-58933

Lasserre for her tireless and lofty efforts as President
of the Human Rights Council throughout her term of
office. Furthermore, the Republic of Korea calls on all
Governments and entities involved to respect all urgent
requests of the international community through the
Human Rights Council.
The Republic of Korea would also like to stress the
crucial role of the Universal Periodic Review (UPR)
procedure. As was the case with the first cycle of the
Review, the second cycle has begun very successfully.
Better still, during the second cycle, which began this
year, we have seen a number of developments.
First, the number of participating countries has
increased considerably compared to the previous cycle.
Secondly, there have been improvements with regard not
only to the number of recommendations submitted, but
also to their quality. Thirdly, the majority of delegations
of those countries that have been evaluated have been
headed by a leading official of the Ministry of Justice.
That has allowed the messages of the international
community to be transmitted directly to the minister
responsible for implementing recommendations.
However, to ensure the full success of the UPR
process, it is up to each State assessed to implement
the recommendations made. While reaffirming its
commitment to the UPR process, the Republic of Korea
calls on the Governments concerned to implement all
recommendations in order to ensure that there is a
tangible improvement in human rights on the ground.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank all Member States that have provided their
valuable support to our country’s candidature for
election to the Human Rights Council. Through its
promises and voluntary commitments, our Government
has clearly demonstrated its resolute will to play a
constructive role in promoting human rights nationally
and internationally. All promises and commitments will
be respected during its term of office. The Republic of
Korea will spare no effort in undertaking the work of
the Human Rights Council, while maintaining close
relations with other members and observers of the
Council and with civil society.
Ms. Hernando (Philippines): At the outset, allow
me to thank the President for this opportunity to speak
on the report of the Human Rights Council (A/67/53).
This agenda item is of particular importance to the
Philippines as a founding and current member of the
Human Rights Council. My delegation also thanks

17

A/67/PV.37

Laura Dupuy Lasserre, President of the Human Rights
Council, for presenting the Council’s report to the
Assembly.
Last year marked the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the Declaration on the Right to Development, which
unequivocally establishes development as a right and
puts people at the centre of the development process.
Yet many children, women and men continue to live
in dire need of fulfilment of their entitlement to a
life of dignity, freedom and equal opportunity. It is
unfortunate that more than 60 years after the adoption
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which
articulates our highest aspirations for freedom from
fear and want and our commitment to protecting the
sanctity and dignity of every human life, regardless of
sex, race or creed. Poverty, disease, lack of shelter and
illiteracy remain, affecting the realization of a wide
range of civil, political, economic, social and cultural
rights.
As a member of the Human Rights Council, the
Philippines is committed to continuing to support
advancing discussions on the right to development
with a view to its realization. We believe that the
establishment of the Human Rights Council, aimed
at strengthening the United Nations human rights
machinery to ensure effective enjoyment by all of
every human right — political, civil, economic, social
or cultural, including the right to development — is but
one of the manifestations of our continuing faith in and
enduring commitment to the values and principles of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
The reform process that led to the creation of the
Human Rights Council stemmed from the need to
elevate human rights to the same level as the pillars of
peace, security and equitable economic development, on
which the United Nations was founded. Development,
peace and security and human rights are interlinked and
mutually reinforcing. It is only through the observance
of and respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms that we can truly attain peace and social
progress.
Since its establishment in 2006, we note that the
Human Rights Council has made reasonable progress
in fulfilling its mandate, as set out in resolution 60/251.
The Universal Periodic Review (UPR), with its
intergovernmental and peer-review nature, remains
an effective mechanism of the Council in ensuring
that States fulfil their responsibility to respect and
implement human rights and fundamental freedoms.
18

It has spurred greater interest and attention to human
rights at the national and international levels and has
shown us that all countries, regardless of their level
of development, share human rights challenges. We
are optimistic that the UPR will continue to help the
Council ensure respect for the principles of universality,
objectivity and fairness and to institutionalize
cooperative and constructive dialogue on human rights
in a less politicized and non-selective manner.
In May, the Philippines presented its report for
the second cycle of the UPR, which was adopted by
the Council in September. My delegation values the
UPR as a continuing process, not merely a venue for
scheduled reporting and review. We are convinced that
the UPR can bring about concrete positive changes
in the treatment of human rights on the ground as it
addresses human rights issues in a manner that takes
into consideration the views of many sectors of society.
The Philippines believes that the primary goal of
the Council is to help and to encourage all countries
to build an enabling environment, both on the ground
and internationally, and to better promote the human
rights of their peoples in constructive cooperation
with the international community and civil society.
We are of the view that a consensual and cooperative
approach in dealing with country situations can lead
to a more practical and results-oriented outcome. The
Council should therefore be a partner of all States and
stakeholders in the promotion and protection of all
human rights, with a strong focus on capacity-building
and international cooperation. It must continue to
work in a constructive manner, fostering dialogue and
cooperation and engaging in meaningful interaction
with States and all stakeholders at the national and
international level.
Mr. Balé (Congo), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The special procedures play an important role
in protecting and promoting human rights. The
independence of mandate holders is vital to their work
but, as we have repeatedly stressed in the past, it must
always be balanced with important considerations,
such as professionalism, integrity, efficiency and
effectiveness.
As a founding and current member of the Council,
the Philippines endeavours to contribute to the efficient
and effective work of the Council by working with
all States and stakeholders in a constructive manner,
fostering dialogue and cooperation and focusing on

12-58933

A/67/PV.37

the importance of bridging national, regional and
international human rights goals, standards and
strategies. The Philippines is the main sponsor of
initiatives in the Council on human rights and extreme
poverty and on combating trafficking in persons,
especially women and children. It traditionally
sponsors initiatives on the protection of the human
rights of vulnerable groups, such as migrants, women,
indigenous peoples and persons with disabilities, and
is a member of the cross-regional Platform for Human
Rights Education and Training.
Sensitive to the current and emerging human rights
challenges and aware that the effective realization of
human rights is vital to alleviating poverty and creating
a better quality of life for all, my delegation reaffirms
its unwavering commitment to the protection and
promotion of human rights.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Botswana warmly
welcomes the President of the Human Rights Council
to the sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly
and thanks her for the comprehensive report that she
presented to the Assembly (A/67/53).
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made earlier in the meeting by the representative
of Turkey on behalf of the cross-regional group on
the financial challenges of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
As a member of the Human Rights Council,
Botswana is fully committed to the promotion and
protection of human rights, both at home and abroad.
We attach great importance to the work of the Council
as we believe that it continues to make a positive
impact on Member States in fulfilling their human
rights obligations. However, we believe that much more
remains to be done.
Botswana commends the Council for the work
that it has achieved at the recently concluded session.
The decisions taken on various thematic and country
mandates will go a long way in assisting the countries
concerned to address the challenges that they face in
the protection and promotion of human rights.
However, we are concerned about the situation of
human rights violations in a number of countries that
are on the Council’s agenda, in particular the situation
in Syria. We further call on the Security Council to
take the necessary measures to compel the Government
of Syria to end the impunity and violation of the

12-58933

fundamental rights and freedoms of the Syrian people.
The extension of the mandate of the independent
international commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab
Republic is also a commendable decision of the Council.
We hope that the concerned parties will cooperate with
the commission and allow it to successfully carry out
its mandate.
We have taken note of the challenges and constraints
of the Office of the High Commissioner, particularly in
the past year. In that regard, Botswana has continued
to engage actively in the work of the Human Rights
Council in Geneva. We have positively engaged with
various special procedures mandate holders in support
of their work despite the challenges that they face in
carrying out their mandates.
We also share the High Commissioner’s concerns
about resource constraints and the increasing workload
of the Human Rights Council. Our abiding faith in
and commitment to supporting the Office of the High
Commissioner is demonstrated by our response to calls
for human rights appeals, both political and financial,
and to the work of the special procedures and mandates
that emanate from the Human Rights Council.
My delegation is also pleased by the work carried
out under the special procedures of the Human Rights
Council. We take particular note of the report of the
Special Rapporteur on the use of children in armed
conflicts and reiterate our support to guard against
impunity and the violation of children’s rights in all
situations, including armed conflict.
We also recognize the valuable role and the
contribution of the human rights treaty bodies to
the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms. Their effective functioning
remains critical. We are confident that the ongoing
intergovernmental process on the strengthening of
the human rights treaty body system will enhance
efficiency in the financing and working methods of
such bodies and will complement efforts to promote the
development agenda of the Human Rights Council.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
Botswana’s support for the work of the Human Rights
Council and its mechanisms. We hope to achieve our
aspirations in that regard.
Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, allow me to thank Ms. Laura
Dupuy Lasserre, President of the Human Rights

19

A/67/PV.37

Council, for presenting the report on the work of the
Council (A/67/53).
Today, it can be confidently said that in the period
since the Council’s establishment, that body has become
one of the key elements of the international human
rights architecture called on to help the development
of constructive inter-State cooperation in that area.
The Council has specific qualities that distinguish
it positively from its predecessor, the Human Rights
Commission.
However, a worrying trend increasingly seen in
the work of the Human Rights Council, in particular
in recent years, is emerging. Unfortunately, its work
continues to be characterized by the polarization of
various groups of States, making it difficult to hold a
meaningful and constructive discussion of human rights
issues. There is concern about the continuing practice
of many States and groups of countries to use human
rights as an instrument of political pressure, imposing
foreign value systems without taking the national
historical, economic, and sociopolitical characteristics
of States into account.
We continue to see attempts to divide States into
two categories — the bad and the good, the students and
the examiners — undermining the intergovernmental
nature of the Council. Such an approach fundamentally
contradicts the initial purpose of the Council as a
body created to develop dialogue and cooperation. The
Council must work in the interests of all Member States
without exception and not give preference to any one
nation’s individual needs.
In that regard, we would like to once again draw
attention to the basic principles of the Human Rights
Council: universality, impartiality, objectivity and
non-selectivity. We are firmly convinced that unless
those principles are respected, we cannot foster genuine,
constructive,
mutually
respectful
international
dialogue and cooperation to promote human rights and
fundamental freedoms, and the Council’s work as a
whole will be doomed to fail. We must recognize the
fact that the primary responsibility for promoting and
protecting human rights lies with States themselves
and that the basic task of the international community
resides in providing them with technical, resultsoriented assistance.
One of the most important functions of the Council,
pursuant to the provisions of resolution 60/251, is to
conduct the Universal Periodic Review of the human

20

rights situations in Member States. Russia supported
the creation of that procedure in the hope that holding
such a review on the basis of equality and mutual
respect would help to reduce confrontation in inter-State
discussions of human rights. We are convinced that in
the future the Universal Periodic Review must to a great
extent replace the discredited practice of lopsided and
politicized resolutions on the human rights situations
in individual countries. The review procedure has
considerable potential, but that can be realized only
if there is genuine universality, without exception or
exemption from the general rules.
One of the most important instruments that
the Council can use to implement its mandate is the
system of special procedures, which is a legacy of
the Human Rights Commission. Unfortunately, along
with some benefits of the special procedures system,
it has shortcomings, which have been justly criticized.
It is important that the future functioning of human
rights mechanisms move towards depoliticization.
That can be guaranteed by unswerving respect in the
special procedures, a principle adopted by Member
States at the sixty-second session in resolution 62/219,
setting out the Code of Conduct for Special Procedures
Mandate-holders of the Human Rights Council.
On the subject of cooperation between the Human
Rights Council and the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, we believe it to be of fundamental importance
to strictly follow the provisions of resolutions 48/141
and 60/251, which clearly define the place and role of
the High Commissioner and the Office of the High
Commissioner in the United Nations human rights
structure. We believe that the work of the Office of
the High Commissioner should focus on enhancing
dialogue and cooperation with States in order to provide
them with assistance in guaranteeing human rights and
freedoms.
In that regard, we suggest that such important
mechanisms as the biennial Strategic Management
Plan of the Office of the High Commissioner should
be reviewed by the Human Rights Council before
being presented to the General Assembly. However, we
should have a genuine dialogue among Member States
rather than a mere mechanism for collecting views,
as was done this year. That would allow the High
Commissioner to get a clearer picture of the current
needs of various States in promoting and protecting
human rights, and the Office could thereby design its
work in a more targeted way.

12-58933

A/67/PV.37

In order to ensure that human rights become a real
element of everyone’s lives, it is important not only to
recognize their juridical definition but to make a fresh
consideration of the moral dimension. That dimension is
first and foremost reflected in traditional human values
that have developed in our societies over millennia and
are reflected in religions, cultures and customs. I refer
to such traditional values as dignity, responsibility,
freedom, work, the family and mutual respect. Such
moral principles must form the foundation of social
life and become the cement that binds nations, peoples
and ethnic groups. We firmly believe that if traditional
values are respected in the relationship between human
rights and traditional human values, they will bolster
respect for human rights and their universal enjoyment.
We believe that an excellent starting point on this theme
was the discussion initiated by Russia in the Human
Rights Council.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We welcome the President of the Human Rights
Council, Ambassador Laura Lasserre, and reaffirm our
determination to continue our constructive cooperation
with her, working to guarantee that all human rights
are addressed in a fair, impartial, equitable and
non-selective way, free of the pitfalls and ploys of
politicization and double standards that undermine
many of our accomplishments here in New York and
in Geneva.
My country, as is well known, participated actively
in creating the Human Rights Council in Geneva and
in the consensual activities that led to its formation.
Therefore, everything pertaining to human rights lies
at the heart of Syrian foreign policy.
We have read with deep interest the Council’s report
(A/67/53), which covers extremely important topics,
especially information about violations of human rights
in the occupied Arab territories, the Syrian Golan
and the Palestinian territories. The Syrian Golan has
been under an unjust Israeli occupation for 45 years,
and despite the Human Rights Council’s demands that
Israel, the occupying Power — to use United Nations
language — implement the resolutions of all the bodies
and agencies of the United Nations, including of course
the Human Rights Council, Israel continues to flout
said resolutions. The Israelis continue to commit war
crimes and crimes against humanity and to openly
boast of their crimes, unhindered by any punishment
or accountability, while international public opinion

12-58933

continues to ponder seriously why it is that they are
exempt from prosecution and accountability.
We can only express our concern about the efforts
of some parties to turn the Human Rights Council into
a private and prefabricated sector that works within
narrow political parameters that serve the agendas of
some influential States and contradict the spirit and
mandate of the Human Rights Council itself. We say
this because some, unfortunately, have succeeded in
turning back the clock to the time of the Human Rights
Commission and are once again politicizing the work of
the Human Rights Council.
This was made abundantly clear when resolutions
were adopted in which the Council condemned the
violations of human rights in some developing countries
but continued to ignore and dismiss mechanisms to
address human rights situations and their violations
in so-called developed States. In those States, racism
is rampant, as are xenophobia, racial discrimination,
discrimination against indigenous people and
immigrants, and inhumane and abusive treatment of
detainees and refugees. These countries have militarily
invaded sovereign States Members of the United
Nations and, more important, violated their right to
development by adopting unilateral, coercive economic
measures against the peoples of developing countries.
The list goes on.
Unfortunately, some Western States have adopted
a double standard in their understanding of terrorism.
There is the terrorism that others perpetrate, which must
be fought by all means and methods. Some States have
even gone to extremes in combating such terrorism and
stressing the need to uproot and condemn it. That is, in
their view, the first kind of terrorism; the second is the
kind that those Western States themselves perpetrate.
That is acceptable terrorism, which can be committed
without drawing any criticism. On the contrary, it can
be defended. This is a dangerous precedent and a stain
on the record of the Human Rights Council and on the
logic of international relations.
I would like to provide a real example from Egypt in
1906. In a small village called Denishwei, soldiers and
officers from the British occupation at the time wanted
to go on a hunting trip. They violated the sanctity of
women in that village, whose people rose in protest
against those unwanted visitors. Many people were
killed, including one British officer. The result was
that the British occupation organized an impromptu

21

A/67/PV.37

field court in the village of Denishwei and sentenced
dozens of its residents to death. That is why it is known
as the massacre of Denishwei. A well-known Egyptian
poet named Hafez Ibrahim was a contemporary of that
massacre. He described the massacre in a line of poetry
that says that killing an individual, even in a jungle, is
an unforgivable crime, but killing peaceful people is a
controversial issue.
The four resolutions pertaining to Syria and
mentioned in the report of the Human Rights
Council
(A/HRC/RES/19/1,
A/HRC/RES/19/22,
A/HRC/RES/20/22 and A/HRC/S-19/2) were based on
unilateral media reports. The texts of those resolutions
were drafted using misleading and hostile terms and
language that were without precedent in their hatefulness
towards the Syrian people and Government. They
condemn only one side — the Syrian Government. Not
in a single paragraph do they demand an end to violence
or to the disarming of the armed terrorist groups, or
that a national dialogue be launched to resolve the crisis
peacefully on the basis of the six-point plan, the Geneva
declaration and the Brahimi commission.
These resolutions go even further. Their sponsors,
who claim to defend the human rights of the Syrian
people, have neglected to mention the deteriorating
economic and humanitarian situation in Syria, which is a
result of the coercive unilateral economic measures that
have been imposed on the Syrian people by the States
members of the European Union, the United States and,
unfortunately, some Arab States. This occurred despite
the fact that the report of the independent international
commission of inquiry (A/HRC/21/50), which was
established by the Human Rights Council itself, noted
the impact of the economic measures on the livelihoods
of the Syrian people. Needless to say, these coercive
measures threaten the sovereignty and independence of
States and flagrantly violate the Charter of the United
and the principles of human rights.
I can only say that it is regrettable and shameful
for the League of Arab States and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation to have been the first to impose
these inhumane sanctions on the Syrian people, in direct
violation of their human rights. It is also shameful for
many of the rich countries who are members of those two
organizations not to offer a single dollar in assistance
to the Syrian people, while they channel millions of
dollars to terrorist mercenaries and Al-Qaida elements
to enable them to shed the blood of innocent Syrians
and destroy the Syrian State.

22

Recently, The Telegraph, a British newspaper,
published an important article on a British doctor
named Shajul Islam. He had decided to go and wage
jihad in Syria, so he left his career as a physician in
Britain and went to Syria to wage jihad. The British
newspaper described this man as a doctor by day and
a terrorist by night in Syria. Yet there are those who
still insist that there is no terrorism in Syria, no armed
groups in Syria and no ships arriving from Libya laden
with weapons and endowed with Qatari funding and
operational facilities from Turkey, to be used to kill the
Syrian people.
My country is experiencing a humanitarian crisis,
the reasons for which are well known. Terrorism
has struck my country because of the systematic
violations perpetrated by members of terrorist armed
groups that are funded and backed from outside. The
foreign backing of these armed groups and their vital
role in what is happening in Syria have been clearly
proved, and evidence thereof is now in the hands of the
Security Council, the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
My country’s Government has offered every form
of cooperation with a view to arriving at a solution
to the humanitarian crisis and the deteriorating
economic conditions. Damascus has received and
continues to receive delegations from the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
the International Committee of the Red Cross and
many other international delegations, whether political,
spiritual or media-related.
My country has also accepted the revised response
plan and granted permission to many non-governmental
organizations to participate in the plan in order to
respond to humanitarian needs. We also guarantee
entry visas to humanitarian aid workers and have
issued licenses and eased all bureaucratic measures
to allow OCHA to conduct field visits to many areas
inside Syria without delay. As Council members and
the President of the Human Rights Council know, we
have participated constructively in the six meetings of
the Syrian Humanitarian Forum, held in Geneva.
Despite all that, some nations that are known to
support terrorism in my country continue to try to
demonize the Syrian Government and to portray it as
a killer of its own people, while completely ignoring
the presence of armed terrorist groups in Syria and the

12-58933

A/67/PV.37

Syrian Government’s duty to combat those groups and
those that back them.
Here, I would like to stress that the solution to the
humanitarian crisis in Syria is not through the political
animosity of some States members of the Council
towards Syria in order to settle old and new scores with
us. Nor will it be achieved by fanning the flames of
discord or by funding or harbouring armed terrorists
and encouraging them to perpetrate massacres and
terrorist bombings against Syrian civilians.
Instead, a solution can be achieved by abiding by
the principle of providing humanitarian assistance, in
particular under resolution 46/182, which determines the
mechanisms and conditions for providing humanitarian
assistance to States Members of the United Nations. A
solution could be ensured if donor States and bodies
were to demonstrate the political will to provide what
has been pledged and to end the policy of imposing
unilateral economic measures.
The politicized resolutions of the Security Council
hamper and will continue to impede efforts to establish
a Human Rights Council that addresses all human
rights violations in the world on the basis of clear
standards that apply to all without discrimination. Such
resolutions obstruct the impartial role of international
parties in putting an end to the crisis in Syria. Instead,
they actually encourage more inflexibility, the rejection
of national dialogue and continued armed violence,
killing and bloodshed. They will hamper any of the
steps recently taken by Syria to foster cooperation and
openness towards international missions.

Human Rights Council, for the introduction of the
Council’s report (A/67/53). As we can see from the
report, in recent times continuous efforts have been
made by the Council to respond to numerous human
rights situations around the world.
It has been highlighted on many occasions that
human rights are increasingly interrelated with the
efforts of the international community for peace,
security and economic and social development, for
the promotion of democracy and other advances. My
delegation fully shares that view. In that respect, I wish
to underline the importance of actions taken by the
Council, the special procedures and the human rights
treaty bodies, and reaffirm our full support for the
efforts of the Council to fulfil its mandate.
Today, we are witnessing an unprecedented
international quest for the effective implementation of
human rights. As we all know, our leaders reaffirmed
their strong commitment to the protection and
promotion of human rights at the High-level Meeting
on the Rule of Law at the National and International
Levels, held last September (see A/67/PV.3). There is
an impressive record of accession to and ratification of
international human rights instruments, as well as the
establishment of national human rights machinery by
many countries. Nevertheless, numerous human rights
challenges persist, including poverty, discrimination,
religious intolerance, armed conflicts, refugee flows,
arbitrary executions and the impact of the pervasive
economic and financial crisis. One of the latest examples
is the ongoing conflict in Syria, with its devastating
consequences on civilians.

In conclusion, we hope to see Ambassador Lasserre
use and intervene with her significant moral weight,
which we acknowledge and respect, to demand that the
States involved in harbouring, arming, supporting and
financing the armed groups stop what they are doing
to all Syrian people and the entire Syrian State and
society. Those States are responsible for terrorizing
Syrian citizens and inciting them to flee their homes,
thereby turning them into refugees, and for using armed
terrorist groups as a tool to destabilize Syria, to strike
at the unity and cohesion of its people, and to create a
prefabricated humanitarian problem that seeks to stain
Syria’s image and to harm its international record as a
people and a State.

Those challenges call on Member States to
implement sound policies at the national level and to
promote enhanced cooperation at the international
level. Moreover, the States concerned need more
substantive support from the international community
to address such issues through enhanced technical
assistance and advisory services aimed at capacitybuilding and human rights education. It is gratifying
to note in that regard that the Council has made great
strides to support States in implementing their human
rights obligations, to advocate the promotion and
protection of human rights and to advance the process
of strengthening the treaty bodies.

Mr. Och (Mongolia): First of all, allow me to
join previous speakers in expressing our gratitude to
Ambassador Laura Dupuy Lasserre, President of the

Over the past 20 years, Mongolia has been actively
engaged in carrying out an extensive legal reform aimed
at bringing national laws in line with international
standards. Thus, Mongolia is undertaking step-by-step

12-58933

23

A/67/PV.37

measures to amend the existing legislation with the aim
of abolishing the death penalty in law and practice.
Among others, Mongolia attaches great importance
to the implementation of its reporting obligation under
the human rights treaties. Thus, the first national human
rights report of Mongolia was reviewed in 2010 under
the Universal Periodic Review, a unique mechanism for
promoting human rights worldwide.
We have shown consistent support for the special
procedures of the Human Rights Council. In October,
an independent group of experts appointed by the
Human Rights Council visited Mongolia to examine the
human rights impacts of business activity in Mongolia.
I am pleased to note that it was the first country mission
of the Working Group on Business and Human Rights
since its establishment in June 2011. My Government
attaches particular importance to the issue of examining
and addressing the impacts that businesses have on the
human rights of its people. Consequently, the emphasis
on human rights has been made in the action plan of the
new Government for 2012-2016.
It is gratifying to note that the Working Group
focused on identifying negative impacts, but also positive
impacts that business activities could have on the full
spectrum of human rights, from creating employment
to driving economic growth. As Ms. Margaret Jungk,
a member of the Working Group, highlighted in her
statement summarizing the work of the mission, the
key challenge for any country, especially one that is
undergoing rapid economic development like Mongolia,
is to maximize these positive effects and, at the same
time, minimize the negative effects.

to the Human Rights Council for the elections to
be held in 2015. It is my earnest hope that, with the
support of fellow member States, we will succeed in
our endeavours.
Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): My delegation would
like to thank Ambassador Laura Dupuy Lasserre,
President of the Human Rights Council, for having
presented the Council’s annual report (A/67/53). We
appreciate her able stewardship in taking forward the
work of the Council over the past year. We welcome the
opportunity to interact with her and share our views on
the activities of the Council.
My delegation has had and still has high
expectations of the Human Rights Council, the principal
body of the United Nations dedicated to the promotion
and protection of human rights. The Council, with its
institutional machinery such as the Universal Periodic
Review (UPR) mechanism, the special procedures, the
Human Rights Council Advisory Committee and the
complaint procedure, is truly in a position to contribute
to significant improvements in the enjoyment of human
rights.
By establishing the Council, our predecessors
intended to usher in a new era in the human rights
discourse and to introduce a new culture when it comes
to dealing with human rights. We are disturbed by the
news of increasing polarization in the Council. That
is not a good sign. If we do not move away from that
path and seek mutual respect and understanding, the
body may soon be as discredited as its predecessor, the
Commission for Human Rights.

Once again I wish to express our gratitude to
the Working Group for its important findings and
recommendations. I am confident that due attention
shall be given to those recommendations and to the
respective actions taken by the Government and
businesses in Mongolia. We also look forward to
receiving soon the final report of the Working Group,
which is expected to be submitted to the Council in
June 2013.

It is important to nurture the Council as a forum
that fosters dialogue and cooperation instead of
divisiveness and confrontation. We should focus efforts
on making human rights mechanisms more transparent,
accountable and balanced so that real change can be
brought to the realm of human rights protections. As
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has said, all victims
of human rights abuses should be able to look to the
Human Rights Council as a forum and a springboard
for action.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
Government’s commitment to continued cooperation
with the Council, as expressed by our Foreign Minister
during his meeting with the President of the Council
in October in Geneva. As the Assembly is well aware,
Mongolia, in its desire to make an active contribution
to the work of the Council, presented its candidature

The creation of the Universal Periodic Review
mechanism was one of the most significant innovations
in the area of human rights. Its greatest strength lies
in its universality, with all countries facing scrutiny
regardless of their region, size or influence. This peer
review mechanism aims to create an environment of
mutual trust, confidence and understanding. If we can

24

12-58933

A/67/PV.37

exploit its full potential, the mechanism may change the
culture of human rights discourse. With the second cycle
of the UPR in motion, we expect it to be developed into
a more meaningful and effective mechanism so that we
can eventually get rid of naming and shaming through
the controversial country-specific mechanisms.
Our delegation shares the view that the system of
special procedures is important to ensure the effective
promotion and proper protection of human rights. The
streamlined appointment procedure for mandate holders
can be mentioned in that connection. The selection
process may be further improved, inter alia, through
efficient outreach and periodic updating of the roster.
With the code of conduct in place, we believe that the
special procedure is on the right track to garner the
greater legitimacy it has lacked. However, there are still
reports of non-compliance with the code, which was
very meticulously crafted and unanimously adopted in
the Human Rights Council. We would emphasize the
critical importance that the mandate holders abide by
the code of conduct and remain within their respective
jurisdictions for the proper functioning and credibility
of the procedure.
On the creation of new mandates, the Council
should be careful to avoid unnecessary proliferation
or attaching undue importance to a particular group
of rights or thematic areas. In total, there should be a
balance between the two major groups of rights. The
Council should also avoid bringing in controversial
issues or norms that are not universally accepted
through any loopholes.
The relationship of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights with
the Human Rights Council remains an issue. We
attach great importance to the position of the High
Commissioner in promoting and protecting human
rights. High Commissioners have, over the years,
played an important role in upholding human rights
all over the world. We support non-interference in her
activities. However, as is the case in other bodies of
the United Nations, the Human Rights Council should
have oversight responsibility. That issue should be
considered at an appropriate time.
The Council is organizing ever more special
sessions to deal with human right emergencies. The
initiative, nevertheless, has to date remained focused
on country situations. There are critical thematic issues
that deserve urgent attention. We had one such session

12-58933

on the impact of the financial crisis on human rights
couple of years ago. There should be many more such
sessions on contemporary issues of importance. I could
mention, for example, the incitement of hatred on
the Internet. There is an urgent need to address such
developments before they create further divisions in
society and breed further intolerance and hatred.
As the workload of the Council continues to
increase, we cannot and should not ignore its financial
needs. It is a pity that the Council is not provided with
sufficient money to function properly. A mechanism like
the UPR suffers due to inadequate budget provisions for
translation services. If we want to see it work as a robust
body, we have to ensure that the requisite means are at
its disposal. We would urge the General Assembly to
take this into consideration when budgetary questions
are considered in the relevant Committees.
Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the President of the Human Rights Council,
Ms. Laura Dupuy Lasserre, for the report on the work
of the Council (A/67/53) and her briefing. We reiterate
our unconditional support for the main body of the
Organization devoted to human rights.
Today we are considering the content of the report
delivered pursuant to the agreements reached in
resolution 65/281. Given the importance of this topic,
we thank the Chairman of the Third Committee for
having refrained from scheduling Committee meetings
at the same time as those of the General Assembly, and
we encourage the continuation of this practice.
The work of the Council during the reporting period
has been commensurate with the challenges faced by
the Council. This should continue and to that end we
should meet its financial needs, among other things. The
successful conclusion of the first cycle of the Universal
Periodic Review was an important achievement. We
encourage all States to take part in the second cycle
with the same enthusiasm and to commit at the highest
level to applying its recommendations. We need to
seek recommendations that are ever more specific and
concrete and seek mechanisms for cooperation to build
the national capacities needed to implement them.
Costa Rica has been a member of the Human
Rights Council since June 2011. It is from that position
of undoubtedly great responsibility that we address
this meeting. Within and outside of the Council, our
country cooperates actively on the promotion and
protection of human rights. We are guided by the

25

A/67/PV.37

principles of universality, impartiality, objectivity,
non-selectivity, non-politicization, constructive dialogue
and cooperation.
Costa Rica is working actively in interregional
groups and seeking to build bridges and contribute
to the effective implementation of the decisions and
resolutions issued by the Council. Working with
other countries and through long-term dialogue and
negotiations, we have focused in particular on areas
such as human rights education and training and the
relationship between human rights, climate change and
the environment.
As part of a like-minded group of countries, we
were able to bring about the adoption of the United
Nations declaration on human rights education and
training and the second phase of the World Programme
for Human Rights Education. Furthermore, at the
twenty-first session, held last September, we sponsored
a new and successful resolution that follows up on the
Programme (A/HRC/RES/21/14). The resolution was
sponsored by 85 delegations and adopted by consensus.
During the nineteenth session, we reached consensus
in the Council on establishing the post of independent
expert on the issue of human rights obligations relating
to the enjoyment of a safe, clean, healthy and sustainable
environment (see A/HRC/RES/19/10).
We have also sought to contribute, as Chair
of the Council’s situations group, and specifically
through Ambassador Christian Guillermet-Fernández,
to fostering renewed involvement by members and
generating greater credibility and efficacy in that body.
Another of our Council priorities has been the
promotion of the human right to peace. In that regard,
we should like to highlight the resolution adopted at
the twentieth session that establishes a working group
to progressively negotiate a draft declaration on the
subject (A/HRC/RES/20/15). As a country with no
army, which has entrusted its very existence to the
proper functioning of the multilateral system, that
codification initiative has been of great importance.
Our commitment to the cause of human rights is not
merely a key component of our foreign policy, it also
has deep roots in our national identity and practices.
We have had mandatory and free primary education for
both boys and girls since 1869. We abolished the death
penalty in 1882 and our army in 1949. We continue
to honour that historic tradition with a significant

26

investment in social development and the promotion of
economic, social and cultural rights. Costa Rica was
the first country to sign the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. We
played a key role in the establishment of the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and in the
adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention
against Torture.
More recently, we have been working constructively
and actively in Geneva and New York in the review
process of the Human Rights Council and the process
aimed at strengthening the treaty bodies. We have
extended an open invitation to all special procedures
of the United Nations, and we are ready and willing
to cooperate effectively with the human rights
mechanisms.
Costa Rica would like to continue to cooperate
constructively with the work of the Council and has
therefore presented its candidacy for re-election
for the period from 2014 to 2017. We are committed
to remaining open to dialogue and transparency
concerning our actions in that body.
Mr. Sareer (Maldives): Let me first of all extend
our appreciation to Her Excellency Ms. Laura Dupuy
Lasserre, President of the Human Rights Council, for
being here with us today and for the presentation of the
report of the Human Rights Council (A/67/53) to the
General Assembly for this session.
We take note of a number of important milestones
achieved in the wake of an eventful and highly
productive year for the Council and welcome the
leadership role taken by the Human Rights Council
on the most pressing and urgent matters before the
international community, where other United Nations
organs have failed.
Let me also take this opportunity to extend our
sincere congratulations to all Member States that were
recently elected to the Human Rights Council for the
term from 2013 to 2016. Maldives looks forward to
working closely with those delegations in Geneva in a
constructive manner on all issues before the Council
when they assume their seats.
As a member of the Human Rights Council,
Maldives has continued to play an active part in
supporting the promotion and protection of human
rights in the international arena as well as domestically.

12-58933

A/67/PV.37

We will continue to work within the Council with other
Member States, United Nations bodies and civil society
to ensure that universal values on the promotion and
protection of basic rights are upheld and respected by
all States Members of the United Nations.
Since assuming its seat on the Council in 2010,
Maldives has collaborated with all delegations on
numerous issues that we deemed important to the
effective functioning of the international human rights
machinery. In March, during the nineteenth session
of the Council, Maldives, along with a core group of
countries, submitted a draft resolution entitled “Human
rights and the environment” (A/HRC/RES/19/10),
which established a special mandate holder to look
into the relationship between human rights and the
environment. We believe that the protection of the
environment and human rights are intrinsically linked,
and we hope that the work of the independent expert on
human rights and the environment will bring to fruition
the core interests of Member States at the national,
regional and international levels on this important
issue.
Maldives also worked with a cross-regional
group of countries to create a voluntary trust fund to
support activities designed to enhance and improve the
capacities of least developed countries and small island
developing States in order to encourage their effective
participation in the work of the Council. The resolution
(A/HRC/RES/19/26), which had 113 sponsors, with
broad cross-regional support, establishes a strong
mandate to encourage smaller delegations to participate
more effectively and actively in the consultative and
decision-making processes on human rights matters.
The initiative was also important to a number of
delegations that do not have diplomatic representation
in Geneva. It provided them with a mechanism
through which their contributions to the Council can
be facilitated, and it upheld the principle of universal
participation in all matters relating to human rights.
During the twenty-first session of the Council, in
September, Maldives, along with a number of other key
partners, continued to support the initiative on the right
to freedom of assembly and of association. This year’s
resolution (A/HRC/RES/21/16) was focused on the role
of civil society in promoting the freedom of assembly
and association. In 2012, the same group of countries
created the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the
rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and association.
We believe that is a substantial cross-regional

12-58933

achievement in the light of the Arab Spring and the
ongoing efforts to promote human rights by members to
add value to the revolutionary changes on the ground.
On the domestic front, Maldives is currently
engaged in a process to consolidate its newly formed
democratic institutional framework. While the country
is faced with a number of challenges in that endeavour,
emphasis has been given to the most immediate
measures, such as enhancing the administration of
justice, strengthening independent institutions and
oversight mechanisms, and improving the capabilities
of law enforcement agencies. Those reforms are aimed
at ensuring that human rights and greater freedoms
are effectively implemented, as stipulated under the
Constitution of Maldives.
The Human Rights Council, in our view, has largely
been a success and a force for good. In recent times,
we have all too often seen the politics of diplomacy
impede the work of United Nations bodies with little or
no regard to the basic rights of ordinary people, which
we are committed to protecting. The lack of consensus
and the impotence of the Security Council are one such
example demonstrating that members need to do more
in working together to overcome their differences.
The work of the Human Rights Council on matters
relating to the situation of human rights in respective
countries has been commendable, and Maldives
will continue to strongly support mechanisms in the
Council that are aimed at the independent investigation
of atrocities committed in countries, especially in such
tumultuous times as these, with a view to enabling
transparent, open and inclusive processes that would
effectively uphold the basic tenets of why the Human
Rights Council was created in the first place.
On the issue of Palestine, Maldives will continue
to support the creation of an independent State of
Palestine, living side by side and at peace with the
State of Israel. We remain, however, deeply concerned
by the repeated violations of the human rights of the
Palestinians living under appalling conditions in the
occupied territories.
In conclusion, Maldives looks forward to an active
year in the Council, and we would like to see a continued
focus on the situation in the Middle East. We would also
like to see the active participation of all Member States
in the work of the Council, especially the small island
developing States and the least developed countries.

27

A/67/PV.37

Maldives attaches great importance to the
advancement of women and the promotion and protection
of the rights of the child. During our membership of the
Council so far, Maldives has been a strong supporter
of the Universal Periodic Review process and has
supported various initiatives in the Council that would
further enhance and improve multilateral efforts to
promote human rights domestically and globally.
Mr. Elbahi (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
my delegation expresses its thanks and appreciation
to Ambassador Laura Dupuy Lasserre, President of
the Human Rights Council, for the comprehensive
statement that she delivered here and the one that she
will deliver to the Third Committee later today, in
accordance with resolution 65/281. We wish her every
success in accomplishing her tasks.
The establishment of the Human Rights Council
six years ago was an important achievement for
the General Assembly and its subsidiary organs in
addressing human rights issues on the basis of the
equality of all member States, and as reflected in the
Universal Periodic Review, to which all members
without exception are subject. The Council also
provides advice, in accordance with its mandate set out
in resolution 60/251, through the special procedures
system. That is an important service provided that
mandate holders adhere to the principles of impartiality
and avoid politicization and selectivity, according to the
text of the mandates and the Code of Conduct for Special
Procedures Mandate-holders of the Human Rights
Council, adopted by the Council in its resolution 5/2
and re-emphasized in its resolution 11/11 of June 2009.
In reiterating the Sudan’s cooperation with the
Human Rights Council, it is my pleasure to report that
the Sudan submitted its first report to the Universal
Periodic Review in Geneva last year, accepted its
recommendations and established a special mechanism
to implement them. The mechanism is a high-level
national commission under the Advisory Council
on Human Rights, which is the highest Government
authority for the promotion and protection of human
rights in the Sudan. Those positive developments,
which were included in the report, in addition to the
Sudan’s signing of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and its two Optional Protocols, have been
welcomed by the Council. My delegation reiterates
once more its readiness to abide by and implement all
the recommendations of the Universal Periodic Review.

28

At its most recent session, the Human Rights
Council unanimously decided to extend the mandate of
the Independent Expert on the situation of human rights
in the Sudan in order to provide technical assistance
under agenda item 10. The decision represented the
Council’s recognition of the positive developments in
the human rights situation in the Sudan and clearly
reflects the efforts of the Government of the Sudan
to promote and protect human rights. My delegation
welcomes that decision and hopes that the Independent
Expert will help the new national human rights
commission to become fully operational, on the basis
of the Paris Principles. During the first five months
of its existence, the commission has drawn up a
comprehensive plan of action to protect and promote
human rights, in cooperation and coordination with
national and international partners.
In addition, my country has seen several positive
developments that will certainly contribute to the
protection and promotion of human rights in the Sudan.
They include the establishment of the Transitional
Darfur Regional Authority under the Doha Darfur
Peace Agreement, a special court for Darfur, and the
post of special prosecutor for Darfur.
The Government has accepted the humanitarian
mandate for Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan.
Moreover, in an economic initiative for the two States,
a series of measures have been adopted to expand
agriculture, including the heightening of the Roseires
Dam in Blue Nile province. In Abyei, the deployment
of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
is complete, and the signing of the nine sub-agreements
on cooperation with our sister country, the Republic
of South Sudan, represents the culmination of many
efforts.
In conclusion, my delegation calls for sufficient
funds to be made available to enable the Council and the
High Commissioner for Human Rights to thoroughly
fulfil their responsibilities, notably by giving economic,
social and cultural rights the same priority accorded to
civil and political rights and by opposing the tendency
to exploit concept of the freedom of expression and
opinion to insult religions, faiths and creeds, or to
justify acts that incite hatred and violence based on
religions or creeds. We also ask the Council to avoid
the inclusion of controversial concepts in its work.
The Acting President (spoke in French): In
accordance with resolution 57/32 of 19 November

12-58933

A/67/PV.37

2002, I now give the floor to the observer of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union.
Mr. Bermeo Estrella (Inter-Parliamentary Union):
The Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) continues to work
for stronger parliamentary engagement with existing
United Nations mechanisms to enhance respect for
human rights. Since the beginning of the year, the work
has centred in particular on associating parliaments
more closely with the work of the Human Rights
Council, in particular its Universal Periodic Review
(UPR) mechanism.
The IPU believes that parliaments have a critical
role to play to ensure that the UPR becomes ever
more effective. Parliaments, through their legislative,
oversight and budgetary functions, can directly
contribute to the success of the UPR. However, a
study that we conducted in 2009 to assess the extent to
which parliaments were involved in the UPR process
found that the vast majority were not even aware of the
existence of the UPR.
The IPU has therefore made it a priority to raise
awareness among parliaments about the UPR and
about the contribution that they can make to it. From
the beginning of this year, the IPU has systematically
informed parliaments of the forthcoming examination
of their countries’ national reports. We have started
to organize capacity-building workshops for
parliamentarians to promote a better understanding of
the UPR and of the role of parliaments. As part of those
efforts, earlier this week the IPU, together with the
Commonwealth Secretariat, brought together more than
70 parliamentarians and staff from some 30 countries.
Without exception, participants underscored our earlier
findings that once parliaments knew about the UPR,
they wanted to be associated with it.
The question, of course, is how to do that. There is no
doubt that parliaments have a key role to play in helping
to ensure that UPR recommendations are translated
into national action. However, should parliaments
also contribute to the drafting of the report? There are
some who say it should not, because it is the preserve
of executive branches and because parliaments would
otherwise compromise its independence. However,
others believe that nothing prevents parliaments from
contributing to the report and subsequently holding
Governments to account for the implementation
of the UPR recommendations. Whichever side one
would choose, there seems to be consensus that, as

12-58933

a minimum, parliaments need to be informed of the
report and should have a possibility to debate it before
it is sent to the Council in Geneva.
Should members of parliament also be part of the
official delegation presenting the report to the Council?
Again, opinions differ — largely for the same reasons as
those related to parliaments’ contributions to the drafting
process. However, no one seems to disagree that there
is great merit in allowing members of parliament, in
an observer capacity as part of their official delegation
or otherwise, to attend the interactive dialogue in the
Council on their countries’ situation. As a result, they
will gain direct insight into the functioning of the UPR
and get first-hand impressions of how the executive
fared in the process, in particular how it responded
to questions and concerns from the Council and what
commitments it decided to undertake.
Ideally, parliamentarians attending the Council’s
sessions should represent both the majority and
opposition parties in parliament and work directly on
human rights issues, such as members of dedicated
parliamentary human rights committees.
Allowing parliaments to contribute to the UPR
requires the Council to take full account of that
contribution and, where possible, seek to promote it
in the course of its own deliberations. For instance,
nothing is preventing the Council from questioning
official delegations whether their parliament has seen
or debated the report. In the same vein, the Council can
ask official delegations if they intend to subsequently
inform their parliaments of the UPR recommendations.
The IPU, with the support of the presidency of
the Human Rights Council, has undertaken several
activities this year to raise awareness among Council
members and the human rights community at large
to illustrate in concrete terms how parliaments have
directly contributed to the impact of its work at the
national level, and thus bring home the message that the
Council has much to gain by enhancing parliamentary
involvement in its work. The IPU intends to take those
initiatives to the next level in 2013 and to advocate for
the organization of a panel discussion of the Council,
as part of its official programme, on the contribution
of parliaments to the UPR and, more largely, to the
promotion of human rights, so as to strengthen synergies
between the Council and parliaments.
Let me conclude by referring to resolution 66/261,
which the Assembly adopted in May, on interaction

29

A/67/PV.37

between the United Nations, national parliaments and
the IPU and in which the Assembly encourages the IPU
to provide a parliamentary contribution to the Human
Rights Council.
I hope that my intervention has shown the Assembly
that the IPU is as determined, as ever, to play its role
in ensuring greater parliamentary involvement in the
Human Rights Council and, more specifically, in the
UPR, with a view to enhancing its effectiveness.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on agenda item 64.
A representative has requested to speak in exercise
of the right of reply. Before giving the floor to that
representative, may I remind members that statements
in exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes
for the first intervention and to five minutes for the
second intervention and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of Bahrain.
Ms. Alkhalifa (Bahrain): We take the floor in
exercise of the right of reply to the statement given by the
representative of the Principality of Liechtenstein. The
Kingdom of Bahrain would like to note that any observer
of the transparent interaction and active engagement
of the Kingdom with the Human Rights Council, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the various mandate holders should
be reassured of Bahrain’s commitment to the promotion
and the protection of human rights.
Our participation as the first country to undergo
the Universal Periodic Review (UPR) process in both
its first and second cycles, in connection with which
we fully accepted 90 per cent of the recommendations
presented in September, is a fact that should be
welcomed and lauded by our peers. Any doubt cast on
the commitments of the Kingdom of Bahrain reflect
blatant disregard of the continuous efforts made by the
Kingdom to fulfil its international obligations.
The Kingdom of Bahrain will continue on its
path of reform, a fact that is reflected in the various
reports of our international partners. Those reports,
such as that of the working group of the UPR, are all
public documents. We call on the representative of
Liechtenstein to familiarize himself with their findings,
to ease any concern.

30

The Acting President (spoke in French): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 64.
Agenda item 75
Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft resolution (A/67/L.4)
The Acting President (spoke in French): Before
we proceed, I would like to remind members that the
debate on agenda item 75 and its sub-items (a) and (b) is
scheduled to the place on Tuesday, 11 December. I should
also like to remind members that the commemoration
of the thirtieth anniversary of the opening for signature
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
will take place on Monday, 10 December.
We shall now consider draft resolution A/67/L.4,
entitled “Plenary meetings of the General Assembly on
10 and 11 December 2012 devoted to the consideration
of the item entitled ‘Oceans and the law of the sea’ and
to the commemoration of the thirtieth anniversary of the
opening for signature of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I wish to
announce that since the issuance of document A/67/L.4,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
the draft resolution: the Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium,
Belize, Denmark, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, Greece,
Lithuania, Madagascar, Montenegro, Poland, Portugal,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Suriname, Tonga and the United Republic of Tanzania.
The Acting President (spoke in French): May I
take it that the General Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/67/L.4?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 67/5).

A/67/L.4

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor to the representative of Argentina to make a
statement following the adoption of resolution 67/5.
Ms. Millicay (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina would like to acknowledge the many
delegations that have worked in a very cooperative
and active way to promote the commemoration of
the thirtieth anniversary of the signing of the United
12-58933

A/67/PV.37

Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which will
be a joint effort on the part of many Member States,
with the usual support of the Division for Ocean Affairs
and the Law of the Sea and the Office of Legal Affairs.
We would therefore like to thank all Member States for
their support for the adoption of resolution 67/5.
The Acting President (spoke in French): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 75.
Agenda item 110 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(b) Election of thirty members of the
United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law
The Acting President (spoke in French): The
30 outgoing Member States of the Commission on
International Trade Law are as follows: Armenia,
Bahrain, Benin, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Egypt,
El Salvador, France, Germany, Greece, Honduras,
Japan, Latvia, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Morocco,
Namibia, Norway, the Republic of Korea, the Russian
Federation, Senegal, Singapore, South Africa, Sri
Lanka and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland. Those Member States are eligible for
immediate re-election.
I should like to remind members that, as of
8 July 2013, the following States will continue to be
represented on the Commission: Algeria, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Botswana, Brazil, Colombia,
Croatia, the Czech Republic, Fiji, Gabon, Georgia,
India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Italy, Jordan,
Kenya, Mauritius, Nigeria, Pakistan, Paraguay, the
Philippines, Spain, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
the United States of America and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela. Therefore, those 30 States are
not eligible for election.
The General Assembly will now proceed to the
election of 30 members to replace those members
whose term of office will expire on 7 July 2013. In
accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure, the
election shall be held by secret ballot and there shall
be no nominations. I should like to recall, however,
paragraph 16 of decision 34/401, whereby the practice
of dispensing with the secret ballot for elections to

12-58933

subsidiary organs when the number of candidates
corresponds to the number of seats to be filled should
become standard, unless a delegation specifically
requests a vote on a given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on the
basis of dispensing with the secret ballot?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in French): With
regard to candidatures, I should like to inform members
of the following.
For the seven seats from among the African States,
there are seven endorsed candidates: Cameroon, Côte
d’Ivoire, Liberia, Mauritania, Namibia, Sierra Leone
and Zambia.
For the seven seats from among the Asia-Pacific
States, there are seven endorsed candidates: China,
Indonesia, Japan, Kuwait, Malaysia, the Republic of
Korea and Singapore.
For the four seats from among the Eastern European
States, the group has endorsed Armenia, Bulgaria,
Hungary and the Russian Federation.
For the five seats from among the Latin American
and Caribbean States, there are five endorsed
candidates: Ecuador, El Salvador, Honduras, Mexico
and Panama.
For the seven seats from among the Western
European and other States, there are six endorsed
candidates: Denmark, France, Germany, Greece,
Switzerland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland.
Since the number of candidates of the five regional
groups is equal to or less than the number of seats to
be filled by each group, may I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to declare those candidates elected
for a six-year term beginning on 8 July 2013?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I
congratulate the following States that the General
Assembly has declared elected members of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law for
a six-year term beginning on 8 July 2013: Armenia,
Bulgaria, Cameroon, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Denmark,
Ecuador, El Salvador, France, Germany, Greece,
Honduras, Hungary, Indonesia, Japan, Kuwait, Liberia,

31

A/67/PV.37

Malaysia, Mauritania, Mexico, Namibia, Panama,
the Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Zambia.
With regard to the one remaining vacancy from
among the Western European and other States, the

32

General Assembly will hold elections upon notification
by interested Member States from that region.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 110.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

12-58933
