OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-SIXTH

YEAR
th
MEETING:

17 DECEMBER

1981

..CONTEJ’ITS
Page

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/23 18) ..II..I...II........I..I...,,.,,,,,.,.
Adoptionoftheagenda

. . . . . . . . .......I.I

. ..III....I.I..I.,,,,,.,,,,,.,,

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 14 December 1981 from the Permanent Representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/14791), . . , . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , , , . , . . . . , . , , . , , .

I

SlPV.2318

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ I . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplemem
of the Offiiul
Records of the Security
Cortncil.
The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resobrriotrs
arId
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, whkh has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

‘:

2318th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 17 December 1981, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. OlaraA. OTUNNU (Uganda).

the representatives
of Pakistan,Romania,Yugoslavia
and Zaire in which they requestto be invited to
participatein thediscussion
of the itemontheagenda.
China,France,GermanDemocratic
Republic,Ireland, In accordance
with the usualpractice,I propose,with
Japan,Mexico, Niger, Panama,Philippines,Spain, the consentof the Council,to invite thoserepresenTunisia,Uganda,Unionof SovietSocialistRepublics, tativesto participatein thediscussion
withouttheright
United Kingdomof Great Britain and Northern to vote, in accordance
with the relevantprovisionsof
Ireland,UnitedStatesof America.
the Charterand rule 37 of the provisionalruler,of
procedure.
~
Provisional
agenda (WAgendnl2318)
Present: Therepresentatives
of thefollowingStates:

I--~-I-

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Noik (Paki1. Adoptionof the agenda
~
stan), Mr. Marinescu (Romania), Mr. Komafina
(Yugoslavia) and Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda (Zaire)
2. The situationin the occupiedArabterritories:
Letter dated14December1981from the Per- took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.
manentRepresentative
of the Syrian Arab
Republicto the United Nationsaddressed
to the presidentof the Security Council 3. The PRESIDENT: I shouldlike to draw the
attention of the membersof the Council to the
(S/14791)
followingdocuments:
S/147%,a letter dated 16De-.~
cember 1981from the representativeof Romania
Ttie meeting was called to order at 11.15 o.m.
addressed
to thePresident
of theCouncil,andS/14797,
a note verbaledated16Decembeifrom the represenAdoption of the agenda
tative of Japanaddressed
to the Secretary-General.
The agenda was adopted,

4. The first speakeris the representative
of Turkey.
I invite himto takea placeat theCounciltableandto
makehisstatement.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 14 December 1981 from the Permanent
Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the
United Nations addreswd to the President of the
Security Council (S/1479!)--

5. Mr. KIRCA (Turkey):TheGovernment
of Turkey
isdeeplyconcerned
at Israel’sdecisionto applyIsraeli
laws, administration
and jurisdiction to the Golan
Heights.This actionby Israelis fraughtwith grave
dangerfor the stabilityof the regionandis likely to
undermineeven further the tenuouspotentialh
peacein the area.

1. The PRESIDENT:In accordancewith the decisionstakenat the2316thand2317thmeetings,
1shall
invitetherepresentatives
of IsraelandtheSyrianArab
Republicto take placesat the Counciltableandthe
representatives
of Cuba,Egypt, India, Kuwait, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,Saudi Arabia,
Turkey andViet Namto takethe placesreservedfor
themat the sideof the Councilchamber.

6. The GolanHeightsbelongto Syria, That areais
withinitsinternatioriallyrecognized
boundaries.
Internationally recognizedboundariesbetween States,
including Syria’s boundarieswith its neighbours,
cannotbemodifiedbyforceor by anyunilateralact or
decision.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hum (Israel)
and Mr. El-Faffal (Syrian Arab Republic) took places
at /he Courlcil fable; Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba),
Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Krishnan (India),
Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait), Mr. Tueni (Lebanon),
Mr, Munfasser (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Allagany (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Kirca (Turkey) and Mr. Ha
Van Larr (Viet Nam) took the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber.

7. TheGolanHeightshavebeenunderIsraelioccupation since June 1967.The presentdecisionis
tantamountto the annexationof the GolanHeightsby
Israel.Thiscreatesa very gravesituation.The haste
with whichIsraelappears
to havetakenthisdecision
andits timingin the context of the presentconfiguration of the internationalpoliticalsituationcauseusto
2. The PRESIDENT:I shouldlike to informmem- worry even moreaboutIsrael’sreal intentionsand
bersof the Councilthat I have receivedlettersfrom attitude.
1

8. To properly assess the possible consequences of
the Israeli action we must first understand its true
meaning.
9. Israel’s decision is contrary to international law
iltld the Charter of the United Nations in a fundamental sense, because one cardinal rule of international
relations is that the acquisition of territory by force is
inadmissible. By annexing the Golan Heights under its
occupation, Israel is in violation of that principle.
IO, This decision is also in contravention of the
resolutions of the Security Council, in particular
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). Those resolutions set out some of the fundamental conditions under
which a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East can be achieved. Israel’s withdrawal from
the Arab and Palestinian territories occupied since
June I967 is one of those conditions. Like its illegal
acts with respect to Jerusalem, Israel’s decision to
annex the Golan Heinhts is in flagrant violation of the
Security Council’s r&olution.
-

the international community and, more specifically, to
the eventual decision of the Security Council. Israel
has the most to gain from a responsibie and reasonable
course of action. Israel’s/irir wwtrpli
with respect to
the Golan Heights is fraught with extreme danger and
portends the most serious and highly dcstabilizing
repercussions in a volatile and fragile region. Many
speakers before us have explained why and how; we
need not repeat their remarks.
15. The Government of Turkey is of the view that
Israel alone is responsible for the consequences of its
action with respect to the Golan Heights. Turkey’s
position on Israel’s illegal and unilateral decisions and
nractices in reeard to the occuoied territories is well
known. Consistent with that position, the Ministry of
Foreien Affairs of Turkev has declared. in an official
stateGent published in Ankara, that the decision of
Israel on the Golan Heights is not and will not be
acceptable and that Turkey regards that decision as
null and void.
16. In conclusion, we call upon Israel to rescind
without delay its decision on the Golan Heights.

I I. There is more. Israel is also unilaterally and
unlawfully negating the Agreement on Disengagement
between Israeli and Syrian Forces of May 1974
[S/l 1302lAdtl. I, mtwx 4. The annexation of the Golan
Heights makes a mockery of any demarcation lines in
the area and of the cease-fire itself.

17. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
representative of Zaire. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

12. As if its constant violations were not e‘lough,
Israel, with its decision concerning the Golan Heights,
has also demonstrated its complete disregard of the
fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.’ Israel is responsible for applying the provisions of said Convention to
the Golan Heights, since it is occupied territory. Until
now.
Israel was only violating them. Now, with the
illcgation annexation of the area, Israel is contemptuously discarding the Convention altogether.

18. Mr. KAMANDA wa KAMANDA (Zaire) [inter.tkttn Frenckl: Mr. President, first of all
i should lcke to address-to you my sincere congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of December. The
oustanding qualities that you have displayed both as
President of the Council and representative of Uganda
have won our admiration and respect. Undoubtedly,
this is a source of great pride to us Africans who
invented neither gunpowder nor the compass, but who
intend to provide proof that we are also people without
whom the world would not really be a world.

13. From whatever perspective one looks at Israel’s
decision. it is impossible to attribute an iota of
goodwill to its intentions. We listened carefully to
what the representative of Israel also had to say on the
subject [23/6d meetitrg].
Yet we could not find a
sir@ element in that exposition which could even
remotely be relevant to Israel’s specific action on the
Golan Heights. lsrael has no case and cannot deceive
the international COJnmUnity
with its irr&Vant
jUStlfications.
14. In this abrupt and shocking decision, the only
clcmcnt of consistency as far as Israel is concerned is
its irrational persistence on the path of arrogance,
opporlrinism,
short-sightedness.
Israel’s inability
properly to perceive and appreciate the interests of its
neighbours and thereby its own interests and the
concerns of its friends continues to have a devastating
impact on the prospects of a durable settlement in the
Mitldlc East. If Israel believes that it has acted in its
own intcrcst in respect of the Golan Heights, we feel it
is wrung. We urge Israel to take heed of the appeal of

wetuiion

19. Next, I should like to pay a well-deserved tribute
to your predecessor, Mr. Taieb Slim. We all unanimously recognize his wisdom, keen judgement I sense
of dialogue and total devotion to a patient and effective
search for appropriate solutions to the problems of the
world and -we -should like to thank him for the
remarkable way in which he directed the work of the
Council.
20. It is with mixed feelings of emotion and stupcfaction that the entire world learnt of the decision taken
by the lsraeli Government to annex the Syrian Golan
Heights, which had been occupied since the war of
1967. It is with equal emotion that we listcncd to the
statement made by the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic [ibid.].
21. The occupation of the Syrian Golan Heights
during the Six-Day War in 1967 was already ample
reason for disquiet on the part of the entire inter-

Gl.4
ny
*e

26. Thus, Israel’s act, which we deplore today, is an
unjustified and gratuitous act that serious,ly endangers
the process of a peaceful and negotiated settlement of
the conflict and unnecessarily complicates the starch
for a comprehensive, just and durable solution to the
Middle Enst crisis. Undoubtedly, it constitutes a
violation of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War;’ it
constitutes n violation of the Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces [S/l!M2/
Add-l, annex Il.

national community, which was following closely the
situation in that extremely sensitive part of the Middle
East.-The outright annexation of that Syrian land in
1981 is quite obviously the height of arbitrariness and
adds further to the complexity of a problem to which
the United Nations has for years been trying to find an
appropriate solution, in the legitimate interests of ali
States of the region, which means equally in the
interest of international peace and security.
22. We can all gauge the anxiety of a peaceful family
which discovers that, perched on a tree next to its
house, there squats an individual having a threatening
and provocative demeanour who at his leisure scrutinizes the comings and goings of the household, because the Golan Heights, in fact, dominate the very
heart of Syria.

ncl
he
:clt
et-all
lahe
‘he
iis
@a
,g‘;
41o
JUt
ute
,tliisc
ive

t11e
the
the

27. It is good to know that governments, political
leaders and the peoples of the world are not necessarily priests; but even a priest absolves only when he
sees that a sinner is sincerely repentant.
28. This emotion derives also from the fact that-at a
time when the United Nations and the international
community are expecting Israel to heed the resolutions.
of the Organization and to withdraw from the Arab
territories occupied in l%7; at a time when the
United Nations and the international community are’.
expecting Israel, in accordance with the Camp David
accords,‘to withdraw altogether in April 1982 from the
occupied Egyptian territories as an initial step towards
the future withdrawal from other occupied Arab
territories; at a time when the efforts of the United
Nations, men and States, all of which cherish peace
throughout the world, are trying to define a series or
principles that would enable peace to return to that
region, particularly through the complete cessation of
any state of belligerency and the recognition of each
other’s right to exist and of the security of all States in
the region--Israel is taking a completely different
course, proffering the most serious threats to the
future of harmonious and trusting international relations, to peace and security in the yiddle East.

23. We can all easily understand the pain and anxiety
of a peaceful peasant who is drawing from the land the
fruits of his existence, his subsistence and his nourishment, who overnight learns that a powerful neighbour
has decided quite simply to deprive him of his land and
his fields because he has the means to do this.
24. What is true of individuals is true of the life of
States. There are certain rules of behaviour in society,
there are norms of common and collective life which
no one has the right to circumvent in the name of the
loftiest ideals of man for peace, liberty, security and
development. It is violations of these rules of social
behaviour, rules that are enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations and in international law, which
lead to war, to breaches of the peace, to tensions in
international relations and imperil international peace
and security.
25. The feelings of the entire international community, which, in Europe, Africa, Asia and Latin America, has forthrightly condemned this act of annexation,
derive from the fact that this decision of annexation
runs counter to numerous resolutions of the United
Nations, in particular resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) of the Council, which stipulate the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territories by force and
request the withdrawal from the territories occupied in
1967 and also because this decision is contrary to the
Charter. the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Pricndly Relations and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations [Getterul Assembly resolution 2625
r;YXV). annerl. the Declaration on the Preparation of
Soci&es for iife in Peace [Generul Assemhy resolufiotl 33/73], the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security [General Assembly resohfion
2734 fXXVll-to
mention only a few. The principle
of thd inadmissibility of the gcquisition of ierritbry
by force was laid down to prevent any situations
involving a breach of the peace in the Middle East and
as a guiding principle in the search for a comprehensive, just and lasting solution of the Middle East crisis.

2Y. There can be no doubt, and this cannot have
escaped the Israeli authorities, that this conduct of
violating and provoking neighbouring peoples and
States, this desire to dictate to or to confront the entire
world, all- the countries of the world, even friendly
countries, with afait accompli are not likely to create
conditions propitious for a negotiated settlement of the
problem of the Middle East. Once again, it would
appear that Israel does not desire peace in the Middle
East.
30. It has been suggested, and reported in the press,
that it was as a follow-up to the statements by
President Hafez el Assad, according to which Syria
would never recognize the Hebrew State, that Israel
took the decision to annex the Golan Heights, a
decision that has been described by the Israeli Prime
Minister as historic and of mr\jor political importance.
Mr. Begin, addressing the deputies, said: “Thib is no;
only an historic decision; it is also an important
political decision”.
31. That decision is indeed historic in tha: it per’
petuates the lsraeli tradition of annexing territories
3

~:which have not belongedto it since 1948, Undoubt- 36. With the annexationof the Syrian Golan Heights,
Israel is inviting the international community to follow
edly, it is a token of its present power, but history will
-undoubtedly also view ihe eminently historic nattire of it along a slippery path. The Republic of Zaire,.Andy
its massive violations of the Charter of the United undoubtedly the United Nations and the entire interNations, of the numerous resolutions of the Orgadzanational community, cannot follow in Israel’s foot.
tion and of the principles of international law not as a steps. And if our tendency is not to follow in its
contribution to peaceor the effort to find a negotiated footsteps, it is Israel itself which is isolating itself from
solution to the problem of the Middle East but, rather, the in&national community at just the time when the
international community is offering its hand to underas an expression of its desire to perpetuatea “no-war,
no-peace” situation leading to the most reprehensible take dialogue, in order to find negotiated solutions to
excesses and to the perpetuation of tension in that part the problems of the region, taking into account the
of the world.
oti:ious interests of Israel.
32. Thus, the highly political nature of this decision
of annexation, which has today been proclaimed by
Israel, may well bejudged not on the basis of material
or territorial gains made by Israel but, rather, in the
light of the serious negative consequences of an
attitude which will make it the object of universal
international opprobrium.

37. We must deplore the fact that the dynamic people
of Israel-a creative people, an intelligent people. an
imaginative people and, iet us be frank, a-people of
genius whose spiritual values, allied with the values of
ihe three msjoi monotheistic religions of the world,
belong to the cultural heritage of mankind-cannot
today placeall those qualities at the service of drawing
together the peoples of the world to serve the aoal of
re&zing man’s profound aspirations, eminently’;convexed in the ideals and objectives of the Charter. It is
in .that spirit that we request Israel to reverse the
decision it has taken to annex the Syrian Golan
Heights. Furthermore, we believe the Council should
declare that annexation null and void and reaffirm that
it in no way affects the legal status of the Golan
Heights; it should also energetically and vigorously
reiterate its request that withdrawal be effected from
the illegally occupied Arab territories.

33. There are serious reasons to be disturbed at the
logic applied, according to which every time a State, a
government or a politician, -rightly or wrongly, for
national or for other reasons, makes a statement which
runs counter to the interests of. Israel or any other
powerful State in the world, the latter has the right to
indulge in measures of reprisal and armed retaliation
against the State responsible for that statement. If that
is the case, we are in danger of moving slowly towards
an order of international relations based on force or
the power of weapons, in contempt of the legitimate
interests of States which are not nowerful or armed, or
which are insufficiently armed.-This would impI; a
return to the Middle Ages, when the right to might,
when the policy of mi8ht is right, governed the
relationships between men and States. In other words,
this is one way of saying that no one, except the
powerful, has the right to express his views or, indeed,
to be right.

38. This occasion also seems a propitious one to
make an appealto all Member States of that region to
display restraint and the patience required for any
msjor creation, for any major achievement, and
resolutely to undertake the search for a peaceful
settlement of disputes, a recognition of thepolitical
independence,sovereignty and territorial integrity of
all the States in the region and their right to live in
peace within secure and recognized borders.
39. 1 think the time has also come to call upon the
members of the Security Council, particularly the
five nermanent members, to exolore the nossibilitv.
throigh a sui generis agreementind in the-light of ali
the resolutions adoated bv the United Nations on the
Middle East and Palestine, in the light of all the
suggestions and actions in good faith which have been
made so far, in the light also of the principles of the
Charter and of international law, to guarantee the
existence and the security of all the States in that
region, including that of a Palestinian Arab State
which would not be a threat to its neighbours-a
sui generis agreement
whichwouldsettlethisunfortunateaffairof the MiddleEastbeforetheendof this
century, if possible.Because
at the rateat whichthe
internationalsituationis deteriorating,at the rate at
whichirrationalityandoutburstsof violenceseemto
prevail over reasonand a desirefor peace,the
persistence
of serioussourcesof tensionin the world
is very likely to lead to or revive the horrendous
holocausts
of the past,

34. We thought those times were long since gone
when the world unanimously condemnedHitler’s Nazi
adventure and the pogroms, the concentration camps
and the massacre of the Jews, and finally laid the
foundations of a new era of peace and undkrstanding
among nations, of recognition of human rights and the
rights of peoples, an era which we wished to institute
and to give concrete form to in an upsurge of solidarity
by creating the Jewish state of Palestine-that is,
Israel-pursuant to resolution 181(II) of 29 November
1947.
35. How can we today explain why the State of Israel
is trampling underfoot the entire set of principles the
international community took into account when
granting Jews their rights, all their rights, in Palestine?
How can we explain that these principles, which
derive from the very internal legislation of the State of
Israel, which claims to be a State based on the law,
have been flouted by Israel when it is a matter of
applying them to the rights of neighbouring States and
peoples?
4

,.

igbts,
ollow
, and
interfootin its
‘from
%-I the
,Ddern1.5

“We the peoples of the United Nations determined

to

Qk.

Of

ues of
qorld,
annot
awing
6al of
f- con-. It is
;e the
Golan
Bhould
ri that
Golan
r&xlsly
I from
1ne

to

ion to
r any
and
Bceful
Jitical
Gty of
ive in
in the
y the
bility,
af all
sn the
.11 the
: been
of the
w the
n that
state
l$‘s-a
Llnfor3;’ this
$1 the
ai.e at
elil

t0

:, the
\vorld
lItlolls

44. I could not conclude my remarks without assuring the peoples and Government of Syria of our
complete sympathy and solidarity at this time cf
grievous national trial.

“to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war, which twice in our lifetime -has brought
untold sorrow to mankind, and

ft the
leopIe
le. an

the United Nations, but it is certainly not in the
interest of nations such as ours which wish to live in
peace with their neighbours and partners throughout
the world. I should like to express the hope that the
Council will be in a position, in this particular case as
in others, to be equal to the tremendous hopes which
people have placed in it.

40. How can we tomorrow, facing coming generaations, facing our children and our grandchildren,
-justify the prospect of such divergences, such divergcnces on the part of men, from the basis of the very
existence of the United Nations, whose peoples
solemnly proclaimed in the Preamble of the Charter:

45. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table ani to make his statement.

“to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person, in the
-equal rights of men and women and of nations large
and small, and
~

46. Mr. KOMATINA
(Yugoslavia): Mr. President,
I should like to congratulate you on your assumption
of the post of President of the Security Council for the
month of December. My pleasure is even greater since
you represent Uganda, a country with which Yugoslavia maintains and develops friendly and close
relations of co-operation within the Movement of NonAligned Countries and at the bilateral level. Your
proven skill and political perception arc a guarantee
that the Council will take a stand commensurate with
:he significance of the matter under consideration.
I wish you success in performing this responsible
duty. I should also like to pay homage to. your
predecessor, the representative of Tunisia, Mr. Taieb
Slim, for the successful manner in which he conducted
the proceedings of the Council for the month of
November.
~

“to establish conditions under which justice and
respect for the obligations arising from treaties and
other sources of international law can be maintained, and
“to promote social progress and better standards
of life in larger freedom,
“and for these ends
-“to practice tolerance and live together in peace
with one another as good neighbours, a@
“to unite our strength to maintain iaternational
peace and security, and

47. The Council is meeting again in connection with
the situation in the Middle East, this time to prevent a
new and provocative act of annexation of foreign
territory by force, which threatens to push the already
unstable situation in that sensitive region to the brink
of a new conflict.

“to ensure, by the acceptance of principles and
the institution of methods, that armed force shall not
be used, save in the common interest”. . . .
41. It is up to the Security Council, in which all the
nations of the world have placed their trust, it is up to
the Council, in which we have vested the main
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security and to which we have granted the right of
acting in our name when discharging the duties
deriving from those responsibilities, to answer this
question.

48. The Yugoslav delegation wishes to contribute to
the consideration of this urgent problem, to underline
its concern over the consequences of the annexation of
the Golan Heights and to express its solidarity with
Syria for this violation of its territorial integrity.

42. If the Council shows itself to be impotent when
tackling such situations, it is its authority, its prestige
and its credit which will be completely shaken, and if
the authority, the prestige and the credit of the
supreme body of the United Nations responsible for
maintaining peace and international security are irreversibly called into question and flouted, humanity
will have to confront very gloomy prospects which will
belie the existence of the Grganization as well as the
principles proclaimed in the Preamble of the Charter.

49. Undoubtedly, Israel’s act of annexation constitutes a flagrant violation of the essential principle of
international law-the inadmissibility of acquisition of
foreign territory by force, which is one of the
foundations of stable relations between States and the
basic axiom of their behaviour. That principle is
contained in the common stands of non-aligned countries as an inseparable part of the rejection of the
policy of occupation, expansion and intervention, and
as the fullest expression of the interest in and
aspirations to peace and security of the overwhelming
m$ority of States Members of the United Nations.

43. I do not know if such a prospect is in the interest
of Israel or those Slates that make a practice of defying

50. The Israeli act constitutes a brazen violation of
the Charter and of all the resolutions of the United
5

Nations, as well as of the 1949 Geneva Convention
-relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War.’ It is a reflection of Israel’s unchanged policy of reliance on force. which attemots to create
-a -completely new situation in the Middle East by
the accumulation of fairs accotnalis.
The continued
occupation of the Ahab territories, fol!, led by the
repeated acts of annexation, yesterday of Jerusalem,
today of the Golan Heights, together with the continuous acts of aggression against Lebanon, completely
disregard the Charter of the United Nations and all
elements that the international community considers
as unavoidable conditions for a lasting, just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East,
5 I, The decision of the Israeli Government to annex
the Golan Heights constitutes an extremely dangerous
act of unilateral change of status of that part of
occupied Arab territory. It is a serious challenge to
Syria and the Arab world, as well as a direct threat to
international peace and security. It is one in a series of
acts testifying to the fact that Israel has reached the
limit, which can have global consequences for the
Middle East region and the world as a whole.
52. It is not necessary to point out the illegal
character of such and similar acts. Hence, they are
null and void since they were committed by occupying
authorities in a foreign territory. That is an undeniable
norm of international law which all States,~including
Israel, have undertaken to abide by. Israel is constantly violating this norm, aiming at the strengthening
of the occupation, at the legalization of annexation and
at the definitive prevention of any attempt peacefully
to solve this acute focal point of crisis. This act
reconfirms once again that what Israei strives for is not
peace in the Middle East but expansion.
53. The international community cannot accept any
policy off&s crccotnplis or any form of usurpation of
the legitimate rights of other peoples if it does not wish
to become their involuntary accomplice. No country
can remain indifferent in this and in similar cases.
Therefore, this act of annexation must be condemned
in the name of the protection of the essential premises
on which the international order is founded, namely,
security and peace for all countries, particularly
militarily and economically weak countries.
S4. We consider that the Council should, by immediate and energetic action, undertake measures which
would annul this act of annexation, protect the
sovereign rights of Syria and the Arab States in the
territories which were taken from them by the Israeli
aggression and compel Israel to rescind its decision.
The Council must effectively prevent and nip in the
bud any future activity in that direction. All those
measures can have lasting effects and guarantees only
in the context of the comprehensive endeavours
towards ajust and peaceful solution of the Middle East
crisis within the framework of the United Nations, a
sululion based on the withdrawal of Israel from all

territories occupied in the 1967 war, on the realization
of the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination and on the recognition of the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) as its sole and legitimate representative.
55. My delegation strongly condemns this action by
Israel and supports the demand for the nullification of
the decision to apply its law in the Golan Heights. In
case of Israel’s refusal, we expect that the Council will
apply all the measures provided by the Charter.
56. Mr. OUMAROU (Niger) (it~trrprefatiott
frotn
Frenck): Israel’s decision to extend its laws to
occupied Golan must undoubtedly be regarded as a
particularly serious and distressing event, in the
present international context fraught with uncertainty
and tension.
57. Occurrine furthermore at a time when the General Assembly has just started KOconsider the situation
in the Middle East. that decision, which was debated
in and adopted b; the Knesset in circumstances of
which we are aware, must be considered as a further
act of defiance on the part of the authorities of Tel
Aviv to the international community and, indeed, to all
bodies endeavouring to find a just and lasting peace for
the region. In. that light, the law annexing the Golan
Heights, like the foul attack on the nuclear centre in
the Iraqi city of Tamuz or the bombing, so far
unpunished, of Beirut by Israeli aircraft, cannot but
deserve our unanimous disapproval and condemnation.
58. Indeed. nothing justifies Israel’s attitude in this
affair-nothing,
alas, other than confirming what we
have susoected. namely, the periodically revealed
determination of the Hebrew State to maintain a state
of successive crises in the region in order to bettel
cement its policy of aggression, war and domination.
59. Three months cannot pass without Israel’s provoking, harassing or attacking, in one way or another,
one of its neighbours. Sometimes its guns open tire
because of a simole troop movement or the arrival of
(ldditional tnatCrkd on the other side of its borders:
sometimes it is its own fear of upheavals and of the
tension created in the region by its own fantasies that
lead it to undertake aggressions. which it claims 10 be
preventive, aimed against very carefully chosen targets, the attack upon which has obviously been
patiently prepared and premeditated. Of course, later
it uses this as a pretext to accuse the aroused
international community of partiality and to do everything it can to maintain and increase its isolation.
60. Nevertheless, as President Seyni Kountcht? solemnly stated from the rostrum of the General Assembly on 5 October. it is high time that Israel understand
“that its tranquillity, devrlopment, survival c,umot
be found in military power or in war. but in a

peaceful
and rapid settlement
of the -Palestinian
problem.
Its stubborn
desire to pursue its policy
‘of aggression,
expansion,
confiscation
and frantic
Judaization
of the Arab
territories
that it hasp
occupied
since 1967 will probably
do less for its
future than would a courageous
willingness
to cooperate with the international
community
in order to
reach an agreement
on the ways and means of
bringing about a just and lasting solution to that sad
problem,
which is eminently
political and human.“’

ization
rminaxation
)I esen-

tion

ion

by
of

hts.

In

cil will

*.

C .frotn
ws
to
d

as

I
1

a

in h!
flninty

62. It goes without
saying, therefore,
that my Government.
which rejects the use of force in relations
among States, vigorously
denounces
and condemns
any acquisition
of territory
in this manner.
In this
particular
case, the decision taken by Israel to impose
its laws, its jurisdiction
and its administration
on the
occupied
Syrian Golan Heights is declared
null and
void by my Government.

5 Genuation
ebated
C&S of
Lrther
of Tel
$ to all
lee for
Golan
ltre in
30 far
ot but
n&m-

63. For Niger and for the rest of the world
that
cherishes
peace, justice and law, the Golan Heights
are and will continue
to be an integral part of Syrian
territory.
More than ever, the Council has the duty to
ensure the triumph
of that principle
in the interest of
the Charter and of respect for the rules of international
law.

i~i this
Iii1

64. Mr. YANG0
(Philippines):
I should like to place
on record
my delegation’s
felicitations
to you,
Mr. President,
on yocr assumption
of the presidency
of the Security
Council
for the current
month.
My
delegation
is gratified
to see you directing
the deliberations
of the Council.
You have already
shown
outstanding
qualities
of leadership.
Your skilful guidance is further needed as we continue
13 grapple with
the remaining
issues for the month. Allow me also to
pay a special tribute to your predecessor,
Mr. Tdieb
Slim of Tunisia, another eminent son of Africa, whose
tireless and tenacious efforts in managing the business
of the Council last month under trying circumstances
deserve our admiration
and gratitude.

We

b&led
1 state
bettel
ation.
s

pro-

other,
fin fire
iial of
~fders:

of the
:L, that
b tobe
‘11 tarI teen
, later
orlsed
:‘/eryn.

61. Any other attitude
will simply perpetuate
the
tragedy of the Middle East and indefinitely
put off the
advent of an era of peace in tl& part of the world, one
in which the immense material
and human resources
that are presently
being wasted will finally serve to
promote
the development
and well-being-of
the Arab,
Jewish and Palestinian
peoples.

following
considerations.
First, no State. under whatever pretext,
has the right to acquire territory
by the
use of armed force. Territorialdisputes
between States
should be resolved
peacefully
at the negotiating
table.
Secondly,
this legislation
violates both the letter and
the spirit of Council resolution
242 (19671, in which the
premises for the peace process in the Middle East are
set forth and in which the Israeli withdrawal
from the
occupied
territories,
the termination
of all states
of belligerency
and respect for and acknowledgement
of the sovereignty,
territorial
integrity
and political
independence
of every State in the area and their right
to live in peace within secure and recognized
boundaries free from threats or acts of force are called for.
Thirdly,
it is a breach
of the Geneva
Convention
relative to the Protection
of Civilian
Persons in Time
of War, of 12 August 1949,’ since the Golan Heights,
being territory
occupied by Israel in the wake of the
1967 war, fall within the ambit of that Convention.
Fourthly,
it is a transgression
of the territorial
integrity, poiitical independence
and sovereignty
of Syria, a
State Member
of the United
Nations.
Fifthly,
and
more important,
it has the serious effect of further
complicating
and obstructing
the arduous search for a
just, comprehensive
and lasting solution
to the situation in the Middle East.
67. In the light of the foregoing,
the Philippines
views
the recent
law passed by the Israeli
Parliament
affecting the Syrian Golan Heights as null and void and
in flagrant
violation
of the Charter
of the United
Nations and .of thegeneral
priociples
of international
law.
68. It is regrettable
that the Israeli Government
should choose to embark on this inexcusable
move at a
time when strenuous efforts are being made to resolve
the long-festering
problem of the Middle East in a just.
comprehensive
and lasting fashion.
For, in the long
term, the solution of the problem
does not lie in the
acquisition
of occupied
territory
by annexation,
but
rather
in demonstrations
of good faith and in the
avoidance
of provocative
acts.
69. With this brief outline
of the position
of my
country
with regard
to the matter
before
us, my
delegation
is prepared
to support
a draft resolution
that would declare the Israeli action null and void and
demand that iC be rescinded
forthwith.

swm-

65. We are at present considering
the recent passage
by the Israeli Knesset of a legislative
measure
providing that the laws, jurisdiction
and administration
of
Israel shall apply to the Golan Heights. It is known to
all that the Golan Heights have been under military
occupation
since Israel captured them from the Syrian
Arab Republic.
111
our view, therefore,
that legislation
amounts
to an annexation
of the Golan Heights that
cannot be accepted by Ihe international
community.

70. Mr. MU&lOZ
LED0
[Mexico)
(irIff~,p,c’fccricl/I
fro,,l &~lnislr):
All i;tose who have taken part in this
debate. with the sole exception
of the representative
of
fhP offending
Government,
have agreed on the seriousness of the matter under consideration
because it
involves
a flagrant violation
of international
law rind
because it is an action in blatant disregard
of United
Nations decisions and a further
step backward
in the
process of bringing peace IO the Middle
I%t.

c+llrlot

66. The I-&ppines
cannot acquiesce
in this latest
action taken by the Israeli Parliament
because of the

71. The annexation
of the G&II Heights by the Stz1t
of Israel is null and void as far as the international

I6 sol-

‘sl:llld
in

a

!

,--.

~community is concerned, since to allow it would be
~~_::tantamount
to admitting
of --:acquiring
territory by force,
~~~ I= _the ~--validity
---~ ~-~1
= :-_

area through negotiation and dialogue. Those actions
demonstrate the persistence of an unacceptable criterion with respect to bringing peace to the Middle
East, consisting in the continued expansion of only
one of the parties to the conflict. Furthermore, they
-place in jeopardy the partial agreements that have
__~~
beenconcluded,
~~. ,~ .~
~

_ 72. The principle of the territorial integrity;of States
IS at the very basis of international coexistence and, if
we were to accept its violation with impunity, we
would be seriously damaging international peace and
security, which it is our duty to safeguard. We would
be leaving the definition of frontiers to the sway of the
most powerful and condemning most countries to a
state of defcncelessaess.

80. Those who have advanced the doubtful theory of
preventive strikes are now demonstrating that their
strategy is deliberately offensive. Those who would
justify acts of aggression by the defence of theil
frontiers are now revealing their purpose of extending
them to unknown limits,

73. This act by the Government of Israel not only
runs counter to the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly, but Israel also
seeks to find grounds for it in a fanciful interpretation
of those resolutions.

81, Hence this should become a point of no return for
the question of the Middle East. If this act of
annexation is not rescinded in keeping with the
provisions of the draft resolution [S/14798], the Council should take decisions commensurate with the
seriousness of the violation.

74. In stating that its national security calls for the
occupation of the Golan Heights, the Government of
Israel makes nonsense of Council resolution 242
(19671, the purpose of which is precisely to guarantee
the observance of frontiers and to offer security to all
States of the region, not only to one to the detriment of
the others.

82. The international situation is particularly critical
at the moment; hence, we should act quickly and
energetically. Otherwise, we shall be erzouraging
dangerous opportunistic policies which take advantage
of tensions arising in other parts of the world in order
to present the international community with fairs
uccomplis.

75. It will be difficult for Israel in the future to avail
itself of the provisions of the Council’s resolutions,
which are the best guarantee of it; own security, if it
flouts and disregards them in this way.

83. Finally, let us not forget that tolerance of
-territorial annexation has frequently been at the root of
major wars.

~~ 76. The occupation of Arab territories in 1%7 has not
been, and cannot be, validated, IsLab.. is obliged to
withdraw from them and, if it has not done so thus far,
it is because it has acted with impunity-timely
denunciation and condemnation have not had any
effect on it. Insofar as we tolerate the causes, we will
also be responsible for- t)c cqnsequeces,

84. In the light of the above arguments, my Government has instructed me to be a sponsor of the draft
resolution submitted for the consideration ‘of the
Security Council and to give it my firm support.
85. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Pakistan. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

77. The populr..ion of the occupied territories is
subject to the provisions of the fourth Geneva Convention.’ In keeping with those provisions, and in
accordance with resolution 465 (1980), we cannot
allow legal or admiristrative measures likely to alter
the institutional, physical or dor Jgraphic aspects of
the occupied territories, let alone condone annexation,
whose aim is obviously to give validity to such
measures.

86. Mr. NAIK (Pakistan): Mr. President, I should like
first of all to offer you our warmest congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of December. The outstanding
manner in which you have conducted the important
tasks before the Council has already won you the
approbation and the respect of all States Members of
the United Nations. It testifies to your diplomatic skill
and vast experience in international affairs. I also wish
to pay a tribute to Mr. Taieb Slim of Tunisia, who
presided over the deliberations of the Council last
month. It is a matter of pride for us that you,
Mr. President, and Mr. Slim, representing two brotherly States members of the Orgsnization of the Islamic
Conference, have steered the work of the Council with
great distinction. Pakistan edjoys fraternal and
friendly relations with both Tunisia and Uganda.

78. The sc-called justification for this annexation
given by the representative of Israel in the Council is
wanting in logic and scarcely fitting. To defend
annexation by the presumed need “to regularize” the
legal situation of the inhabitants of an occupied
territory is absurd. It is not possible, in law, to
regtdarize what by definition is irregular, nor is it
possible to legalize what in principle is illegal.
79. The actions we are considering are causing
concern because they clearly show the refusal of tl.e
offending State to seek solutions to the problems of the

87. The Israeli decision to extend its laws and
jurisdiction to the occupied Syrian territory of the
8

Golan
Jatest
--violati
~~~univel
Israeli
transfi
of thl
settle1
Holy
Heigh
expan
Arab
88. ’
de jur
conqi
his G
forwa
did nc
(1967:
this r
[2266,
89. ’
tion 0
the C!
inadn
It als
Coun
cupie

J@O
“tt
~- the
ins
ant
inc
leg
set
in I
the
-Ci\
ser
jus

90.
tion (
the v
lastir

91.
beyo
authc
stren
the t
that,
punit
prevl
nor i
and z
by di
the (
them

Golan Heights, with a view to their annexation, is the
-latest manifestation of Israeli lawlessness and a grave
violation of the Charter of the United Nations and the
universally recognized principles of international law.
{. Israeli expansionism was all too evident in its policy of
transforming the historic and demographic character
of the occupied territories by establishing illegal
~settlements there. The Israeli decision to annex the
Holy City of Jerusalem, and now the occupied Golan
Heights, represents yet another stage of its unbridled
expansionism and continued aggression against the
Arab and Palestinian peoples.

92, Pakistanhas strongly condemnedthe Israeli
actionto illegallyannexthe occupiedSyrianterritory
of the GolanHeights,In hisstatement
of 14December
beforetheGeueralAssembly,theForeignSecretaryof
Pakistansaid that Pakistanconsideredthat actiolltotally null and void and a flagrantviolation of the
Charterof the UnitedNations.’
93. 1 takethis opportunityto expressour complete
solidaritywith the SyrianArab Republicin its efforts
to preserveits territorial integrity and to regain
sovereigntyover the occupiedGolanHeights.

88. The Israeli move to convert its occupation into
de jure annexation
isa blatantassertion
of theright to
conquest.In anattemptto justify the illegalactionof
his Government,the Israelirepresentative
even put
forwarda preposterous
thesisthat the Israeliaction
did notconstitutea violationof Councilresolution242
(1967),since,in the eyesof Israel, the Council,in
this resolution,“did not determineany boundaries”
[2316Ur meeting, para. 411.

94. TheCouncilshouldnolongertoleratethe blatant
repudiationof its decisionsby a stubbornriggressor.
The Council has already expressedits profound
concernby conveningthis urgent meeting.This
concernshouldnow be matchedwith firm action. It
must censure,B the strongestterms, the Israeli
decisionto enforcelawon theoccupiedGolanHeights
anddeclareit to be unacceptable
andtotally invalid.
The Council mustdemandthat Israel rescindthis
decisionforthwith. If Israelpersists
in its lawlessness
89. ThisIsraelicontentionrepresents
a wilful distor- andfailsto complywith the Council’sdecisions,we
tion of thetrueintentof resolution
242(1%7),in which urgethe latter to act firmly andto proceedto impose
theCouncilunequivocally
emphasized
theprincipleof
mandatorysanctionsunderChapterVII of the Charinadmissibilityof acquisitionof territory by war.
ter. Suchactionwouldbe necessary
for the preservaIt alsobetraysan arrogantdisdainfor the various tionof theauthorityandeffectiveness
of theCouncilin
Councilresolutionsregardingthe statusof the oc- carryingout its primaryresponsibility
for the maintecupiedterritories,of whichI shallquoteresolution465 nanceof internationalpeaceandsecurity.
(19801,
in whoseparagraph
Sthe Councildetermined:
~~.
“that all measurestaken by Israel to change 95. The PRESIDENT: The -next -speaker-is the
of Romania.
I invite himto takea place
--;the physicalcharacter,demographic
composition, representative
institutionalstructureor statusof the Palestinian at the Counciltableandto makehis statement.
and other Arab territoriesoccupiedsince 1%7,
includingJerusalem,
or any part thereof have no 96. Mr. MARINESCU (Romania)(interpretdion
first of all I shouldliketo
legalvalidity andthatIsrael’spolicyandpracticesof from French): Mr. President,
to youonthe
settlingpartsof its populationandnewimmigrants expressourmostsincerecongratulations
and efficient way in which you have
in thoseterritoriesconstitutea flagrantviolationof ~outstJnding
of theSecurityCouncilduring
the GenevaConventionrelativeto the Protectionof conductedthebusiness
thismonth.You havegainedthe wellCivilianPersons
in Timeof Warandalsoconstitutea your presidency
of all the representatives
at this
seriousobstructionto achievinga comprehensive, deserveda,dmiration
sessiui of the General
Assembly.It is our conviction
just andlastingpeacein the MiddleEast”.
that under your expert guidancethe Council will
90. Indeed,the Israelipursuitof systematic
annexa- continueto carry out its work underthe best posWe also wish to congratulate
tion of the occupiedterritoriesis aimedat mutilating siblecircumstances.
of Tunisia,who,
the very basisof UnitedNationseffortsfor ajust and Mr, TaiebSlim, the representative
with hiswell-knownflair, conductedthe business
of
lastingpeacein the MiddleEast.
theCouncilduringthe monthof November.
91. TheIsraeliillegalactionshaverepercussions
far
beyondthe MiddleEast.Theyare erodingthe moral 97. Likepreviousspeakers,
Romania
wantedto take
authority of the United Nationsand hopesfor the part in this debateof the Council becauseof its
strengthening
of worldorderbasedontheprinciples
of constantdesirethat there be a comprehensive,
just
the Charter.Thosewho protect Israelmustrealize andlastingpeacein theMiddleEastandthe dangerous
that, whilethey canpreventthe Councilfrom taking andvery harmfulconsequences
of the recen’.decision
punitiveactionagainstIsrael,by sodoingtheycannot of the lsraeliParliamenton the beginnhlgof sucha
preventthe deterioration
of the MiddleEastsituation peaceprocess,on the securityin that regionandon
nor its ominousconsequences
for international
peace internationalsecurity.
andsecurity.Thecauseof peacewill beadvanced
only
by discouraging
Israelfromconsolidating
itscontrolof 98. Like the restof the world, Romanianotedwith
the occupiedterritoriesand compellingit to vacate concernthedecisionof theIsraeliParliament
to annex
them.
the GolanHeights,territory belongingto the Syrian
9

.Arab Republic and occupied by the Israeli troops since
‘the-1967-war.
-99. As the Romanian Press Agency, authorized to do
so by the Government of the Socialist Republic of
Romania, said in its statement of IS December
m[.S/f4796],we regard as illegal and null and void this
act by the Israeli authorities, which constitutes a
flagrant violation of the principle of the inadmissibility
of the annexation of territories occupied by force, and
of the national sovereignty and territorial integrity of
an independent State.
100. It is also an action that runs counter to Security Council resolutions agreed to by Israel, which
expressly state Israel’s obligation to withdraw from
the Arab territories occupied since 1967. We are
obliged to note that Council resolution 242 (1967) was
not only agreed to by Israel but indeed is repeatedly
invoked by its repre?entatives as&e bssis for peace in
the Mid&East,
~~
101. Three days ago, in the General Assembly,
within the framework of the debate entitled “The
situation in the Middle East”, my delegation said that
Romania’s position of principle, which is similar to
that of almost all other countries, is that, pursuant to
the Charter of the United Nations and the generally
accepted rules of international law, the acquisition of
territory by force is inadmissible and all territories so
occupied must be restored to the peoples to which
they belong by right. This is precisely the case for the
territories occupied by Israel since 1967. The General Assembly and Security Council resolutions that
establish the fundamental principles of a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East and ways and means
of achieving it provide that Israel has a clear obligation
to withdraw from all the Arab territories it occupies.
Consequently, any illegal and arbitrary act, designed
to change the status of the territories and to annex part
of them, ie a flagrant violation of the rules of
international law and the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations and will serve onlv to increase tension
in that part of the world and co further impede a
comprehensive political settlement of the conflict in
the Middle East,
102. The impact of the events in the Middle East
shows that real peace and security cannot be achieved
through the use of force, disregard for international
law or the denial of the right of other peoples to a free
existence. Quite the contrary: events have incontrovertibly shown that acts of force and expansion and
violation of the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of other States, far from contributing
to the solution of a problem, merely further complicate
matters and create further premises ior fresh conflagration.
103. Israel’s continued occupalion of Arab and
Palestinian territories, the increasing number of illegal
steps taken by it in those territories, including Arab

Jerusalem. the refusal to recognizc the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people to an independent
existence, Israel’s military activities against its iiciahbours-all
have been strongly condemned by ihe
international community. These acts, which cannot be
justified and the latest one of which is now under
discussion, increase instability, maintain a dangerous
source of conflict and exacerbate tension, with the
‘most serious consequences for peace and security in
the region and throughout the world.
104. The very serious state of tension in the Middle
East requires all States to act most responsibly so that
the situation may be settled through negotiations and a
lasting and just peace be established among all peoples
and States in the region.
105. It is precisely in this spirit that Romania has
actively and steadfistly advocated a peaceful solution
to the Middle East conflict and the establishment of
calm and stability in that suffering region. As President
Nicolae Ceausescu recently said:
“We feel that efforts must be intensified to brine
I -about a comprehensive and lasting peace in thi
Middle East based on the withdrawal of Israel from
the Arab territories occupied in 1967, on the solution
of the problem of the Palestinian people, including
the constitution of an independent Palestinian State.
-At the same time, it is necessary to ensure the
integrity@ sovereignfy_otfall States in the region”.
lO6. In order to attain those objectives. Romania has
spoken out, and most resolutely continues to do so, in
favour of a new framework of negotiations, of the
holding of an international conference under the
au:eices of the United Nations, which should take an
active par: in it, with the participation of the PLO and
the countries concerned, the Soviet Union and the
United States, together with other States which can
make a positive contribution to a settlement of the
conflict in the rerion. We believe that in such a
framework all the complicated problems of the region
could be settled, including the withdrawal of hiel
from the Golan Heights and the other Arab territories
occupied in the 1967 war.
107. Basing ourselves on the interests of bringing
about a comprehensive settlement and a lasting and
just peace in the Middle East, and the interests of the
peoples of that region, including the people of Israel
itself, we believe that the Parliament and Government
of Israel should without delay revoke and annul this
illegal decision to annex the Golan Heights.
IOR. We hope thol the prcscnt debate will lead to
such a result and that the resolution to be adopted by
the Council will stipulate most clearly and rcsolutcly
that Israel’s decision to impose its laws, jurisdiction
and administration in the occupied Golan lleights IF
null and void and that Ihe Israeli authorities must
immediately renounce it and annul it.

109. We arc convinced that the adoption and, above
all, the ~implementation of such a resolution will
strengthen confidence and create a climate conducive
to the process of peaceful settlement of the Middle
East c&lict and to the establishment of st@lity and
tranquillity in that part of the world.

the policies ion which it is established, which are
manifested in the occupation of lands, the expulsion of
-the original inhabitants.Ithe continuing annexation of
new territories and the persistence 01 aggression to
eliminate any ability of resistance or even of construction and development in the Arab countries so that
those countries may remain at the mercy of the entity
created by the colonialist Powers and adopted by the
United States of America ;o be a tool and extension of
its aggression against the Arab nation. The material,
military. political and economic support which makes
of Israel an American State with priority over everything, even over the United States itself, makes the
United States a partner of Israel in any act of
aggression it commits, despite all the appearances of
innocence and surprise that the United States may
assume.

110. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. 1 invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
111. Mr. MUNTASSER (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya):
Mr. President, first of all 1 should like to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and to express to you our admiration
and pride on the way you have presided over the
deliberations of the Council this month as well as on
your brilliant achievements in other caoacities. I also
take this opportunity to express o;r thanks and
admiralion to Mr. Taieb Slim for the excellent wav in
which he presided over the deliberations of -the
Council last month.

116. Israel’s annexation of the Golan Heights is not
only a violation of the principles of international law,
the Charter of the United Nations and the resolutions
of the Security Council, it also provides to all those
who are misled by Israel and who protect it solid
evidence that Israel is an entity established on
aggression, occupation and expansion and that unless
it is faced with a firm and strong position world-wide,
this entity will lead to a breakdown in the concepts on
which international peace and security are based.
Unless the world today, having seen this clear
evidence of Israel’s intentions and aims, Stands firm
and united against it, this entity will become a
destructive danger-against human civilization in this
part of the world.

112, Israel’s decision to annex the Golan Heights to
the usurped Palestinian lands has come as a surprise to
those who were misled by Israel and by its claims that
it was seeking peace and security and wanted to live in
~peace with warmonger neighbours which never responded to its continued lavish offers of peace.
113. The annexation of the Golan Heights may come
as a surprise to the friends of Israel with which Israel
was supposed to have consulted and whose views it is
supposed to have taken into consideration, in particular those of the United States, with which a few
days ago it had signed an agreement on strategic cooperation. Israel would not have dared to carry out
this aggression, to turn its back on the international
comm~~nity and the United Nations and to ignore the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, had it not been for the total support and
alliance in evil and aggression extended to it by the
United States of America.

117. This is true terrorism, and this is State terrorism
as defined by the concepts of international law. These
are not the ihrillers coticocted by the American news
media in the vicious campaigns against Libya, designed to provide frail justification for intervention and
aggression and to cover Israeli crimes and terrorism.
118. The United States support for Israel and its
strategic alliance with it make of the United States a
collaborating partner in all aggressive, terrorist and
expansionist acts committed by Israel.

114. 1 said that Israel’s annexation of the Golan
Heights might have come as a surprise, but the truth is
that it comes as no surprise to those who know the true
na!ure of Israel and its aggressive. expansionist
intentions. It is an rntity established on aggression, the
expulsion of the indigenous inhabitants and the occupation of their land. Ils pronouncements of peace
menn no:hing but its OWN peace and the capitulation of
others. 11s pronouncements about secure borders
mean striking at all positions that can stand unto resist
and confront the I&eli acts of aggression, ihe latest,
but not the last, of which was the destruction of the
Iraqi nuclear facility.

119. The United States of America is obliged to
comply with the will of the international community
and not to oppose the resolutions of the Council. It has
to be committed to the Council’s resolutions and go
along with the condemnation of Israel and therejection
of the measures adopted by the latter. The U&d
States must stop providing support to Israel-support
without which Israel would not have dared to commit
its aggressive and expansionist acts and practices.
120. The delegation of my country therefore calls fol
the strongest sanctions against Israel, for the imposition of a world-wide and total boycott against it, for
the rejection of its measures of annexation of land and
for a declaration that those measures are null and void.
It is absolutely clear to the whole world how Israel was

11.5. The annexation of the Golan Heights is no
surprise to those who know the true nature of the
Yio!iist cantity. its agprcssive, expansionist goals and
11

established, how it extended itself up until now and
how it plans to exist and expand. It is the duty of the
internationalcommunity to cease recognizhlgan en!ity
established on expansion, aggression and occupation
and which persists in these practices despite the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council.
The meeting rose

at 12.45 p.t%

NOTES
’ Uniled Nations,
Treaty Serler,vol,
75, No.973,
P. LW.
a A Framework
for Peace in the Mlddlc Easl, Agreed at Camp
David, and Framework
for the Conclusion
of a Peace Treaty
bctwecn Egypt and Isrnel. signed III Washington,
DC, on 17 Septwber
1978.
1 Oj37clal Records of the Gener4l Aa lembly, TA
Pltwor, Mee/lttns,
25lh meeting, para. 46.
4 Ibid., 97th meeting, para. 209.
