S/PV.8008

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8008th meeting

Thursday, 20 July 2017, 10.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Kandeel
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-22304 (E)
*1722304*

S/PV.8008

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. El-Ghassim
Wane, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Mr. Festus Mogae, Chairperson of
the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, to
participate in this meeting.
Mr. Mogae is participating in today’s meeting via
video-teleconference from Juba.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Wane.
Mr. Wane: I am grateful for the opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the Secretary-General’s
report on the situation in South Sudan. I will restrict
my remarks to updates on the political and security
situation received since the circulation of the report on
18 July and will provide some additional considerations.
As far as the deployment of the Regional Protection
Force and the status-of-forces agreement violations
are concerned, I do not have much more to add to the
report that was recently shared. However, allow me to
emphasize that, while the Regional Protection Force
continues with its process of deployment — we do
expect some progress with the arrival of the Rwandan
and Ethiopian units in the next two months — the peace
process in South Sudan continues to face a number of
challenges. As a matter of priority, we must overcome
such challenges, if we are to make the most of the
opportunity created by the deployment of the RPF
in Juba and put the country back on the path towards
sustainable peace and stability.
First, I would like to say a few words on the security
environment, which remains extremely volatile.
Clearly, South Sudan is in need of an effective and
credible ceasefire. Since the Government announced
2/17

20/07/2017

the declaration of a unilateral ceasefire in June,
there have been worrisome reports of active military
operations in Greater Equatoria and Upper Nile states.
On 7 July, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) received a credible report that the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) has moved towards
Mathiang in Upper Nile, after which heavy fighting
was reported. The aim of the offensive seems to be
to capture opposition-held areas all the way to Pagak.
Similarly, clashes have continued between the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army in Opposition and SPLA
troops near Torit in Eastern Equatoria, where UNMISS
has recently had to reinforce its presence owing to
heavy fighting in the area. Obviously, the nature of
those operations ran contrary to the unilateral ceasefire
declared by the Government.
Secondly, the Government has publicly expressed
its commitment to creating an environment conducive
to the national dialogue and that is, of course, to be
welcomed and encouraged. At the same time, there have
been recently certain decisions that undermine those
commitments. On 17 July, two republican decrees were
issued, replacing six members of the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army in Opposition of the Transitional
National Legislative Assembly, who are linked to Riek
Machar, with members who are aligned with First Vice
President Taban Deng Gai, and that certainly further
excludes a key constituency of the peace process.
On 18 July, the websites of two important
media outlets were blocked after they criticized the
Government and, once again, that raises questions
about the respect for the freedom of expression. On
10 July, the national security services arrested the
Director General of the State-run South Sudan National
Broadcasting Corporation. We understand that he
has now been released, but clearly all those actions
point to the need for the South Sudanese authorities
to make more sustained efforts towards creating an
environment that is conducive to the conduct of a
credible national dialogue.
With respect to the national dialogue, we believe
that every effort should be made to ensure that the
process is inclusive and transparent, takes place in
a free and secure environment, has clear outcomes
that complement the Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in South Sudan, and is supported by a
sufficiently broad political consensus from all of the
political forces in the country. That is critical in order
to ensure that the national dialogue is not displaced or
17-22304

20/07/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

rejected by the opposition and does not lead to more
disputes, fighting, fragmentation and displacement in
the country.
I stress that President Mogae, the Chairperson of
the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, will
brief the Council on the implementation status of the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan and on the proposed revitalization process led
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and endorsed by the IGAD Summit. The
success of that initiative will definitely depend on the
extent to which the Government and the opposition
embrace it and commit to its full implementation.
That IGAD initiative is an important development that
requires active international support, including from
the Security Council. I would therefore encourage
the Security Council to, once again, express its full
support for the IGAD-led process and to urge all South
Sudanese stakeholders to embrace that process as a
genuine opportunity to restore peace in the country.
In conclusion, I would like to underline the critical
importance of the unity of purpose of the region, as well as
unity between the region and the rest of the international
community, and the need for all concerned members of
the international community to send a strong message
to the South Sudanese stakeholders that the current
status quo is unacceptable and unsustainable. A change
in behaviour is long overdue for the sake of the people
of South Sudan, and the pursuit of political objectives
through violence, which continues, unfortunately, to
exact a heavy toll on the people of South Sudan, should
not be allowed to continue.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Wane
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mogae.
Mr. Mogae: I would like to thank the President of
the Security Council, His Excellency Mr. Liu Jieyi, for
kindly inviting me to brief the Security Council today.
The Council will recall that in my most recent
briefing in March (see S/PV.7906), we were confronted
with unprecedented hostilities targeting civilians that
resulted in gross human rights abuses, violations of
international humanitarian law, a dramatic increase
in the number of refugees and internally displaced
persons, and an appalling humanitarian crisis in
the country. In that context, I posed the following
questions. How do we stop the fighting? How do we

S/PV. 8008

stop people from dying of starvation, and how do we
ensure the inclusion of all parties — communities and
stakeholders — in the peace process so as to allow for
peace, relief and inclusivity?
Immediately after that briefing, my team devised
and drafted the One Voice initiative, which is a
12-point message from all of us to the South Sudanese
leadership, demanding the cessation of hostilities and
the restoration of the permanent ceasefire. It remains
as pertinent and relevant today as it was when it was
written. With the blessing of the Chairperson of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
His Excellency Mr. Hailemariam Desalegn, Prime
Minister of Ethiopia, I engaged in a comprehensive
and constant round of consultations with all the critical
stakeholders, specifically in line with our One Voice
initiative and the pursuit of peace.
I have maintained regular and forthright dialogue
with the President of the Republic of South Sudan, His
Excellency Mr. Salva Kiir Mayardit, and the First Vice
President, General Taban Deng Gai, while constantly
reiterating our message of peace, humanitarian relief
and political inclusivity. I have met and briefed IGAD
Heads of State and Government, the IGAD Council of
Ministers, the African Union Commission Chairperson,
His Excellency Mr. Faki Mahamat, and the African
Union Peace and Security Council. I have also met with
His Excellency Mr. Omar Al-Bashir, President of the
Sudan; His Excellency Mr. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni,
President of Uganda, and His Excellency Mr. Uhuru
Kenyatta, President of Kenya, for the purpose of
identifying a way out of the escalating violence and
humanitarian crisis.
I appeal to IGAD, the African Union, the United
Nations and our international partners to adopt One
Voice in our common engagement with the leaders of
South Sudan. I underscore the need for the leaders of
the region to align their messages and actions so as to
prevent the situation in South Sudan from deteriorating
even further. The leaders of the region expressed their
grave concern about the recent escalation of violence,
the ongoing violations of the permanent ceasefire, and
the worsening humanitarian situation in the country.
They emphasized that the conflict in the country
requires a political — not a military — solution. They
demanded wide inclusivity in the dialogue among
the belligerents.

17-223043/17

S/PV.8008

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In South Africa, I met with the Vice President of
the Republic of South Africa, His Excellency Mr. Cyril
Ramaphosa, in his capacity as South Africa’s Special
Envoy to South Sudan. I also met with Dr. Riek Machar,
former First Vice President of the Republic of South
Sudan. The message I conveyed to Mr. Machar was to
renounce violence, declare a unilateral ceasefire and
participate in the national dialogue. He declined to do
so. However, he demanded a new political process for
the region outside South Sudan.
I have also taken the time to meet with some of the
key Sudanese stakeholders in opposition and currently
out of the country. I met with Ms. Rebecca Nyandeng
Garang de Mabior and former detainees, Pa’gan Amum,
Kosti Manibe, Mr. Majak D’Agoot and Mr. Cirino
Hiteng. I also met with Mr. Lam Akol, Thomas Cirilo,
James Oryema and others in order to listen to their
grievances. My message to all of them was that those
who are still fighting should stop immediately for the
sake of the country that they claim to love so much, and
that all serious parties should pursue a political path to
return to the peace process.
In principle, most welcomed my message. Like
Mr. Riek Machar, they demanded a negotiated ceasefire
and expressed their willingness to participate in a
credible political process outside South Sudan, which
might lead to their return with the implementation of
the peace agreement. In that regard, they underlined
the importance of the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force. I hope that by engaging with such
determination, we will drive a peaceful, open and
transparent dialogue, which is imperative if we are to
achieve an inclusive political process and to silence the
guns
Accordingly, IGAD held an extraordinary Summit
of the Heads of State and Government in Addis Ababa
on 12 June and, following my recommendation, they
decided to convene a high-level revitalization forum
of the parties to the Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, including
estranged groups, with a view to discussing concrete
measures aimed at restoring a permanent ceasefire,
returning to the full implementation of the peace
Agreement and developing a revised and realistic
timeline and implementation schedule for democratic
elections at the end of the transition.
We welcome that timely decision of the IGAD
leadership to seize the opportunity to end the senseless
4/17

20/07/2017

fighting, revitalize the implementation of the peace
Agreement and restore hope to the people of South
Sudan. The revitalization of the implementation of the
peace Agreement is not a renegotiation. The forum
will explore options that can restore dynamism and
prominence to the peace process. It is our hope that
such a revitalization process will be pursued in the
spirit of peace, inclusivity and compromise. I hope
that all reasonable and positive proposals to restore
and reinforce the effective implementation of the
peace Agreement will be put forward, discussed and
considered at the forum. I encourage all parties and
estranged groups to seize this opportunity to put the
country first, make compromises and accommodate
one another for the sake of peace.
Pursuant to its mandate, the IGAD Council of
Ministers met on 2 July and adopted guidelines and
an indicative matrix for the convening of the highlevel revitalization forum within three months. The
revitalization process is intended to ensure the broadest
possible consultation with stakeholders and to generate
proposals that could make the implementation of
the peace Agreement more accommodating, viable
and sustainable.
Ultimately, the success of that process will require
a willingness on the part of the parties to the peace
Agreement, and the estranged groups to compromise
and accommodate one another politically. A window
of opportunity has opened, and we must all seize it.
I believe that, with a resolute and unified approach
on the part of IGAD, the African Union, the United
Nations and the international community — and with
cooperation from the South Sudanese leaders — we can
recover lost ground and restore hope to the people of
South Sudan.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Mogae for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to Council members who
wish to make statements.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Wane and President
Mogae for their briefings.
When it comes to South Sudan, we have heard lots
of promises. We hear promises from South Sudan’s
leaders that they will finally get serious about pursuing
peace. We hear promises that they will allow aid to
reach the starving and the sick, as well as promises that
17-22304

20/07/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

humanitarian workers will not be harassed when they
try to do their jobs. And on the basis of those promises,
the Security Council waits and waits. We wait for things
to change in South Sudan, but nothing is changing in
the country. The violence continues. Horrific atrocities
are reported so often that they become almost routine.
People continue to flee across South Sudan’s borders to
neighbouring countries. United Nations peacekeepers
continue to face obstacles in carrying out their mandate
to protect civilians. And humanitarians are blocked
from delivering life-saving assistance.
For the people of South Sudan life is worse than
ever before. The Council needs to hold the parties on
the ground accountable for their broken promises.
Consider first the violence — the Council has been
calling for a ceasefire in South Sudan since the
fighting escalated more than a year ago. In May, the
Government declared a unilateral ceasefire but, rather
than hold their fire, Government forces have been
opening up new battlefronts. Those military operations
are forcing thousands of people from their homes. The
fighting has forced dozens of humanitarian workers to
be evacuated, leaving even more civilians without any
help. It is a travesty, truly a travesty.
Commitment to a ceasefire is just one broken
promise and the protection of civilians is another. A few
weeks ago, United Nations peacekeepers tried to reach
an orphanage to help get 250 kids out of harm’s way.
The United Nations was doing its job, but authorities
would not allow the peacekeepers to pass. It is hard to
believe, but it is true. Fortunately, the United Nations
was eventually able to get there after a delay, but
thousands of other civilians cannot be reached. They
remain trapped by fighting and are unable to receive
any assistance whatsoever.
Humanitarian aid has eased famine in certain
parts of the country, but the overall trend is getting
worse, not better. Hunger in South Sudan has reached
unprecedented levels. More than 6 million people are
now severely food insecure — half of South Sudan’s
population. A total of 1.7 million people are on the
brink of starving to death because of the inability of aid
agencies to reach them. According to United Nations
statistics, June was the worst month for access by aid
workers so far this year. Despite promising to stop, the
Government is still asking humanitarian groups to pay
high fees just to continue operating in the country. The
humanitarian community is in a position to help, but

S/PV. 8008

the Government and fighters on the ground need to
allow them to get to the people in need.
In short, another month has passed with no
improvement on the ground. In March, the Council
adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/4)
with a number of specific demands. We called on the
parties to stop fighting, commit to a political process
and allow for unfettered humanitarian access — but
virtually none of those steps happened. The Council
must be prepared to hold the parties accountable for
their inaction and for the continued suffering of South
Sudan’s people. The Council must put real pressure
on the parties to change their behaviour. That should
start with additional targeted sanctions and an arms
embargo. Those measures would show that the Council
is serious about pushing for an end to the fighting and a
return to the negotiating table.
The United States appreciates that the region has
appointed a new Special Envoy and will convene a
high-level revitalization forum to support a ceasefire
in a political process. The forum has broad support
from South Sudan’s international partners, including
endorsement from the African Union. Tragically,
the support for a new forum shows that international
partners do not have confidence that South Sudan’s
leaders are taking meaningful steps to live up to their
obligations as signatories to the 2015 peace Agreement.
It is high time for action. The revitalization process
is the last chance for salvaging the peace Agreement.
The United States very much hopes that it will lead to
a realistic and meaningful outcome. If South Sudan’s
leaders do not participate in the high-level forum
in good faith and stick to its deadlines, the United
States will need to review its position and priorities
with regard to support for the peace agreement and its
implementing bodies. The bottom line is that we want
this regional mediation to succeed, and we need to see
South Sudan’s leaders truly engaged in it at long last.
The people of South Sudan deserve leaders who live up
to their promises.
Even facing extreme hardship, the people have not
given up hope of something better. There is one town
a few hours south of the capital where 70 per cent of
the population reportedly fled after fighting broke out.
But a small group of children, including many orphans,
stayed and found shelter at a local Catholic school.
At that school, according to a report from the United

17-223045/17

S/PV.8008

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Nations, 14 teachers are volunteering to help the kids.
The school’s motto is: we cannot surrender.
When those young kids were asked what they
wanted, one child put it very simply:
“I want to beg our leaders, let them bring peace to
South Sudan, so that South Sudanese children will
enjoy their life like the one of long ago”.
Those kids are facing impossible challenges,
and they have not given up on a dream of peace for
South Sudan. Neither can we. We in the international
community can and must act to make the promise of
peace a reality.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the
Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Wane, and President Mogae for their
briefings. Let me take this opportunity to reiterate
the full support of the United Kingdom for their work
and for the work of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan.
I would not normally take the floor before
consultations, but the horrifying and entrenched
situation in South Sudan compels me to speak out.
Two weeks ago, the people of South Sudan
should have been celebrating that young country’s
Independence Day. They should have been celebrating
six years of progress, six years of a country learning to
stand on its own two feet. But six years on, South Sudan
is not standing. It is barely even crawling, stifled by its
leaders, who would rather serve their own ends than
help their country. Six years of their rule has left over
half the population without enough food — 6 million
people dependent on humanitarian assistance just
to survive.
Make no mistake: this is a crisis of human creation,
a crisis that the leaders of South Sudan have had six
years to prevent. But, instead of helping, they have
poured fuel on the fire. We need only look at the
ongoing fighting across the country between the
Government and the opposition forces. In Pagak, for
example, the Government offensive has displaced
thousands of civilians into Ethiopia. Aid workers have
been evacuated. The already desperate humanitarian
situation has been made even worse. Yet when the
Government is asked about Pagak, we hear different
stories from different people. Some say there has been
no violence there. Others argue that the offensive
was for self-defence. Let us be clear: the violence is
6/17

20/07/2017

happening there, and it is not self-defence. It is a blatant
infringement of the ceasefire that President Salva Kiir
declared only a few months ago.
Not content with misleading their people and the
international community, the Government of South
Sudan has systematically clamped down on the media
and on access to information. Last Friday, Internet
service providers in South Sudan were ordered to block
media outlets with which the Government disagrees.
The head of State television was reported to have
been arrested for failing to broadcast President Kiir’s
Independence Day speech.
The Government says it is committed to media
freedom, but its actions speak otherwise. What the
Government of South Sudan says bears no relation to
what it does. In June we saw humanitarian access being
blocked 100 times, the highest number in a month in
2017 so far. In addition, ceasefire monitors have been
blocked on multiple occasions by Government troops
from investigating incidents of reported violence. That
is all in clear violation of the peace Agreement, and all
at the cost of the South Sudanese people.
Until we see the Government’s actions match its
words, the Council has no choice but to take measures
to protect peace and security. For the United Kingdom,
that means returning to the issue of an arms embargo
on South Sudan once again. We must do all we can to
stop the uncontrolled flow of weapons that is driving
this violence.
In parallel, we should continue to work with the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development to
support their high-level revitalization forum initiative.
The first priority for that must be to bring an end to
the fighting. That will require a negotiated ceasefire
or a cessation of hostilities agreement among a broad
and meaningful range of armed actors. It will require
national and local initiatives, and we must be clear that
any actors blocking peace will face consequences.
But, in truth, we have said all of this before. In
this Chamber back in May (see S/PV.7950), I said that
we were not yet fulfilling our responsibilities as the
Council to the people of South Sudan. Two months on,
that is, I am afraid, still the case. The parties continue
to put violence before peace. That cannot continue. We
have a unique window of opportunity before the end of
the rainy season to make meaningful progress in South
Sudan. Should we fail in our efforts, South Sudan will
17-22304

20/07/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8008

enter into a fifth year of conflict. For a country that is
only six years old, that is simply heart-breaking.

renounce violence and urgently take joint steps to cease
all hostilities.

Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Wane, for his briefing, which is, as usual, very
useful, balanced and insightful. We are also very
grateful to President Mogae, the very wise man of our
region, in whom we take great pride, for his remarks
and for his dedicated efforts to carry out difficult
responsibilities in challenging circumstances. We in the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
remain indebted to him.

As IGAD has reiterated, the full implementation of
the 2015 peace Agreement remains the only viable way
forward to bring an end to the conflict and restore peace
and stability in South Sudan. The lack of meaningful
progress in the implementation of the Agreement has
indeed been a source of great concern, necessitating the
reinvigoration of the peace process so as to ensure the
full implementation of the Agreement through greater
inclusivity, forgiveness and reconciliation.

The worsening security situation in South Sudan
is deeply worrying for us in the region. Despite the
declaration by His Excellency President Salva Kiir of
a unilateral ceasefire, which we appreciate, fighting
has continued unabated across several parts of the
country, with devastating consequences for the civilian
population. The recent escalation of the conflict in
Upper Nile state and the declaration of a state of
emergency in four states show the deterioration of
the situation.
The cessation of all hostilities and violence in the
country is indeed a matter of urgent priority if we are
to alleviate the suffering of the South Sudanese people,
who have endured so much for far too long. That would
create an environment in which it would be possible to
address the dire humanitarian situation, including by
facilitating humanitarian access. The high number of
incidents and obstacles faced by humanitarian agencies,
including the killing of humanitarian personnel and
the denial of access for the delivery of humanitarian
supplies, continue to pose serious challenges and should
be of serious concern. We call upon all the parties to
take urgent measures to facilitate unhindered access to
the affected population.
We also call upon the international community
to urgently step up efforts to provide humanitarian
assistance to save lives and support the suffering
people of South Sudan. There have been reported
incidents affecting the ceasefire and transitional
security arrangements that have prevented Monitoring
Mechanism teams from carrying out their duties by
both parties.
As much as we appreciate the effort, it is extremely
difficult to talk about joint and inclusive political
dialogue while there is ongoing fighting throughout
the country. That is why all parties must immediately

It is in that context that the IGAD Summit decided
to urgently convene a high-level revitilization forum
of the parties to the Agreement, including estranged
groups, to discuss concrete measures to restore a
permanent ceasefire, to fully implement the peace
agreement and to develop a revised and realistic
timeline and implementation schedule leading towards
a democratic election at the end of the transition period.
A clear guideline and implementation matrix for
the high-level forum has been approved by the fiftyseventh extraordinary session of the IGAD Council of
Ministers. The IGAD Council of Ministers and Chiefs
of Staff will soon meet in Juba as per the approved
matrix and guideline. The Council of Ministers will be
travelling to Juba next Monday, and it would be proper
for the Security Council to strongly support that effort.
The Council should lend its unreserved support to such
regional efforts and send a strong and unified message
to all the parties in South Sudan to encourage them
to seriously and constructively engage in the peace
process. We reiterate the importance of maintaining the
unity of purpose among IGAD, the African Union (AU)
and the United Nations, including the Security Council,
in the search for lasting peace, security and stability in
South Sudan.
President Mogae has been urging for some time, as
he did a while ago, that the principle of one voice — all
of us the speaking with one voice — should be our guide.
That might in fact be the silver bullet that we need to
make serious progress in South Sudan for peace: one
voice, one action. Sometimes the answer might lie in
the simple, in the manifestly least complicated.
In that regard, I should add that there is no viable
alternative to the efforts being carried out by IGAD
in coordination with the AU and the United Nations.
We in the IGAD region remain as steadfast as ever in
our resolve to cooperate with the African Union and

17-223047/17

S/PV.8008

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

20/07/2017

the United Nations in bringing about lasting peace
in South Sudan. That was reflected in the recent
decision of the IGAD Summit and the Council of
Ministers, which reaffirmed the region’s firm resolve
to work closely with the AU and the United Nations
in its reinvigoration effort. The African Union, at
its twenty-ninth ordinary session of the Assembly,
also endorsed those regional efforts, including the
convening of the high-level revitalization forum of the
peace Agreement. We encourage such coordination and
collaboration efforts on the part of IGAD, the AU and
the United Nations and urge that such efforts continue
to be further strengthened. I am reiterating again the
one-voice principle.

process. What a contrast between some people who are
brave enough to do everything for peace and others who
continue just to wage war and seek strictly personal
benefits. That is truly very sad.

Finally, no matter what we in the region and the rest
of the international community may do, the success of
the reinvigoration process, as we work to address the
enormous challenge that South Sudan is facing, will
depend to a great degree on the willingness of all the
parties. We hope that all South Sudanese parties will
rise to the challenge and work towards the restoration
of peace through genuine dialogue and reconciliation.

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Chinese presidency for organizing this
important meeting. I also wish to thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, and the Chair of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, President
Festus Mogae, for their commitment and enlightening
briefings. I would like to focus on two points.

Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to join other speakers in thanking Mr. Wane and
Mr. Mogae for their respective briefings.

First of all, our mobilization is more necessary
than ever, given the suffering that is affecting more and
more civilians. Despite the rainy season, the fighting
continues in South Sudan, with tragic consequences
for civilians. The recent clashes around Pagak have
led to more people fleeing their homes, thereby further
increasing the flow of displaced persons and refugees.
The humanitarian situation remains catastrophic.
Although the state of famine has been lifted in
certain areas of the country, the spectre of starvation
and malnutrition still hangs over too many civilians.
Women and children are always the first victims.

As was pointed out in this Chamber last month (see
S/PV.7982), it has been six years since South Sudan
declared its independence, but very few celebrations
have been able to take place, given the fact that the
country is still submerged in a deep crisis, with
6 million South Sudanese facing food insecurity and
millions of South Sudanese who have been displaced
from their homes owing to armed conflicts.
I am going to be very brief because some colleagues
who spoke before me have analysed many of the
points that we were going to mention, in particular,
for example, what was said by Ambassador Sison with
respect to the litany of commitments that have not been
fulfilled over the past few months, and the frustrations
over the obstacles that the South Sudanese Government
still imposes on the functioning of United Nations
forces. Also, as was pointed out recently by Ambassador
Rycroft, we are absolutely convinced that this crisis is
strictly the result of a conflict of personal ambitions
between two of the country’s political leaders, who
have placed their own ambitions of attaining power
above the needs of their citizens. What a contrast with
the example of Colombia and its efforts in its peace
8/17

Fortunately, in the midst of all of this, we must
recognize the tireless efforts of the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
in trying to relaunch a political process. However, no
effort by the Security Council, the African Union or
IGAD will be even the least bit successful if the political
leaders of South Sudan do not commit to fulfilling their
people’s needs.

In that context, I would like to commend the
efforts of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS), which has adopted a robust posture so as
to fulfil its mandate to protect civilians. We call on it
to continue working to that end, but the unacceptable
obstacles to its efforts and to that of humanitarian
workers are still too numerous. France vigorously
condemns them.
The primary responsibility to protect civilians rests
with the Government of South Sudan. We therefore call
on it to do its utmost to ensure smooth cooperation
with UNMISS and to facilitate access for humanitarian
organizations and workers. That includes allowing
access to all areas where civilians are at risk.
17-22304

20/07/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Finally, almost a year after its establishment, the
Regional Protection Force must also be allowed to
deploy fully. We welcome the most recent positive
developments in that regard, but there are still many
challenges and bottlenecks that must be resolved.
The Council must also assume its responsibilities.
We must ensure that a cessation of hostilities is
concluded and implemented as soon as possible. We
must also continue to seriously consider ways to reduce
the level of violence in the country; France has long
believed that an arms embargo would contribute to
that goal.
Secondly, the encouraging signs on the political front
must, with our support, be focused on and materialized.
Certain recent political developments offer grounds
for hope that true political progress can take place. We
welcome in particular the establishment, during the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
Council of Ministers held on 2 July, of modalities and
a timeline for the implementation of the high-level
revitalization forum for the peace agreement in South
Sudan. That decision should make it possible to fuel
current efforts to relaunch the political process.
We also welcome the actions taken by various
players in support of the political process. We commend
the efforts of the IGAD Special Envoy, the High
Representative of the African Union, the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General and, of course, yours, President
Mogae, as well as those of Uganda and Kenya, whose
initiatives should help move the peace process forward.
France supports the efforts of all of these players, and it
should be noted that effective coordination among them
is a key condition for ensuring the success of their work.
This mobilization must make it possible to achieve
progress in the implementation of the 2015 peace
agreement, which remains the cornerstone of the
political process. The national dialogue must be truly
inclusive so as to create a positive and lasting dynamic.
Nor must we lose sight of the need to fight impunity
or of the imperative of ensuring accountability for those
who have committed human rights violations. This
means establishing, as soon as possible, a hybrid court,
with the African Union playing a leading role therein.
Summer 2015 was one of hope, with the signing
of the peace agreement. Summer 2016 was one of
disillusion and violence, with the Juba crisis in July.
This summer must be one of sustainable progress; we

S/PV. 8008

owe it to the people of that country, who have suffered
for far too long.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I wish to start by thanking
Assistant Secretary-General Wane and President
Mogae for their comprehensive briefings to the Council
this morning.
The political, security and humanitarian situation in
South Sudan remains deeply concerning. The ongoing
conflict continues to have a profound impact on the
people of South Sudan, with almost 2 million people
having fled the country and half of the remaining
population in need of assistance. As has been said
before, a political solution is the only way to resolve the
conflict and to end the suffering of the people. Efforts
to that end must therefore be redoubled and encouraged.
In this regard, we welcome the recent initiatives
by South Sudan’s neighbours, in particular the decision
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) to convene a high-level revitalization forum
and the approval by the IGAD Council of Ministers
of a detailed timeline to implement this decision.
The forum should help move the parties towards a
permanent ceasefire and a credible political process.
We also welcome the efforts made by Uganda and
President Museveni, as well as by the African Union,
in supporting the process. The commitment of IGAD to
engage all parties, including estranged groups and other
stakeholders, is particularly important. Let me take this
opportunity to also underscore the need to strengthen
the role and participation of women in this process.
At the same time, we are deeply concerned at
the fact that, in spite of these regional efforts and the
repeated declarations by President Kiir of a unilateral
ceasefire, reports of intensive fighting continue. Recent
confrontations around Pagak and Torit are particularly
worrying and show that the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army has launched new offensive operations, calling
into question the political will to find a peaceful
solution. We call on all parties to immediately lay down
their arms and to adhere to the ceasefire, as the Council
has stressed on numerous occasions. While this is first
and foremost a humanitarian imperative, there can never
be a meaningful political process unless the fighting is
brought to an end, as the representatives of Ethiopia
and other countries have emphasized this morning.
In the face of these latest developments, it is
essential that the Security Council remain unified
and reinforce the intensified regional efforts. We have

17-223049/17

S/PV.8008

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

20/07/2017

called for an end to the violence and impunity; for
increased humanitarian access; for the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to be able to do its
work; and for support for the implementation of the
peace agreement. It has to be made clear that we intend
to follow through on our decisions.

out in the very difficult context that we are seeing
today in the youngest country in the world. We also
welcome in particular Mr. Festus Mogae, Chairperson
of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission.
Bolivia reiterates its support for and acknowledgement
of his work.

Our efforts should also continue to be well
coordinated with those of the region. We look forward
to the visit by the IGAD Council of Ministers to Juba
next week. This will be an important opportunity to
engage the parties on the need to immediately adhere to
a ceasefire, facilitate humanitarian access and engage
in a meaningful political process. Today’s meeting
makes clear that the IGAD delegation has our full
support and backing.

In January 2011, more than 98 per cent of the citizens
of South Sudan chose independence; that became a
reality on 9 July that year. Today, unfortunately, six
years after the South Sudanese achieved independence,
the unity that they showed then has evaporated.

The humanitarian situation, particularly in terms
of food security, continues to worsen. Meanwhile,
humanitarian access is becoming more restricted, with
100 humanitarian-access incidents reported in June,
the highest number recorded in one month so far in
2017, as others have mentioned. Further humanitarian
financing is needed, and humanitarian access must
remain a key priority.
We commend UNMISS for responding swiftly to
ensure the protection of civilians in South Sudan. As
outlined in the Secretary-General’s report, women,
girls and children have borne the brunt of the crisis. We
encourage UNMISS to continue to respond proactively
to those who are particularly vulnerable, including
to address sexual and gender-based violence. We
commend Special Representative Shearer for engaging
the Government in operationalizing the proposed
“one-stop shop” to ensure that UNMISS can operate
effectively, and we call on the Government to swiftly
establish this mechanism.
The longer this conflict is allowed to continue, the
harder the road to recovery, reconciliation and peace
will be. The leadership being shown by regional actors
deserves our active support, as a united, proactive and
assertive effort towards peace is long overdue.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the delegation
of China for having convened this open briefing, as
the Security Council must continually follow up the
situation in South Sudan. We also express our thanks
for the information provided today by Assistant
Secretary-General El-Ghassim Wane. We welcome his
work and that of his team, work that they are carrying
10/17

The Republic of South Sudan is tackling an
economic, political, security and humanitarian crisis
that continues to prevent many of its citizens from
seeing the objectives of independence actually take
shape. Bolivia’s desire is for the brotherly South
Sudanese people to enjoy the peace and development
that they deserve and that a country with such potential
could offer them.
We take note of the conciliatory message delivered
by President Salva Kiir on the sixth anniversary of
independence. He stated that war was not an option and
appealed to those who had not yet done so to respect
the ceasefire.
The first step towards achieving peace is the
cessation of hostilities. We must continue to work
towards that, and the international community must
support the efforts that have been made recently in that
respect. However, it is the South Sudanese themselves
who should lead the process, and the full commitment
of all players is vital. Internal divisions and rivalries,
both within the Government and in the opposition,
must be set aside, as must all differences relating to
who governs and who aspires to govern. The wellbeing of the country’s citizens must always be the
main objective.
Restoring momentum to the political process is
only the second step. Ensuring the implementation of
the 2015 Agreement is the way to proceed. Inclusiveness
and genuine dialogue are fundamental ingredients. As
Special Envoy Haysom — to whose efforts we reiterate
our support — mentioned in a previous briefing, there
is some agreement between the opposition groups and
the Government. The Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) has a very important role to play
in that regard. We await the convening of the high-level
revitalization forum on the 2015 agreement. In that
context, we welcome the appointment of Ambassador
17-22304

20/07/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Ismail Wais as IGAD’s Special Envoy for South Sudan
and assure him of our unconditional support for
his work.
Bolivia would like to reiterate its support for
regional efforts in the quest for a solution to the
situation. As the IGAD communiqué of 2 July states,
the African Union, the United Nations and the other
IGAD partners must support the efforts to revitalize
the Agreement. It is therefore important to highlight
President Mogae’s efforts to revive the political process.
His recommendations will be very important for the
forum that IGAD has called for.
We also note that the famine in the country is under
control. We greatly appreciate the tremendous efforts of
humanitarian workers and the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) to that end, but there is still
much to be done. The latest figures from the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs indicate that
6 million people — 50 per cent of the population — will
need food assistance this month. It will be crucial
to ensure that there is unhindered, safe access for
humanitarian aid and for UNMISS.
With regard to the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force, we welcome the progress that the
engineering and rapid-deployment companies have
made, which we hope they will complete this month.
We encourage UNMISS and the Government to work
together to achieve that. The help that the Regional
Protection Force can give UNMISS is essential if it
is to be able to guarantee the protection of civilians.
For example, security improvements in rural areas are
linked to agricultural development, which is important
to increasing economic production, and crop production
in particular, so as to fight famine and improve the
living conditions of the South Sudanese. Lastly in that
regard, we should highlight the significant work being
done by UNMISS, which has ramped up its patrols on
the ground. We appreciate the steps it is taking in order
to improve the effectiveness of its efforts.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I, too, would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Wane and President
Mogae for their briefings today.
The situation on the ground continues to be pretty
terrible. Half of the population of South Sudan needs
food or other aid. The South Sudanese authorities
continue to violate the status of forces agreement,
including in cases of the arrest and arbitrary detention
of the personnel of the United Nations Mission in

S/PV. 8008

South Sudan (UNMISS). Despite the commitments on
allowing unhindered humanitarian access, there has
been an increasing number of attacks on humanitarian
workers. The human rights situation is also worsening,
with 250 children trapped between the clashing parties
and an increase in arrests of journalists, to give just two
examples. Despite the Government’s announcement
of a unilateral ceasefire, the fighting rages on. In
that context, I would like to commend the Sudan for
the one-year deal it has offered to permit the flow of
aid to South Sudanese refugees after the opening of
the humanitarian corridors, in an affirmation of the
constructive spirit shown by Khartoum in this crisis.
We reiterate our firm belief that the only solution
to the crisis is a political one, a position that we have
taken in previous Council meetings, bilaterally and as
co-Chair of the Partners Forum of the 12 June Summit
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD). It is also clear to all of us that, without the
collaboration of the members of IGAD, there can be no
peace in South Sudan. Together with the African Union
and the United Nations, IGAD is the organization that
can and must develop a political track for inclusive
dialogue between the parties to the conflict in South
Sudan. We therefore greatly appreciate the growing
intensity of its diplomatic action in recent weeks.
The communiqué of the IGAD ministerial Summit
on 2 July is an important step in that direction. We also
agree with the Secretary-General that the deployment of
the Regional Protection Force to Juba, which is slowly
proceeding, will help UNMISS to concentrate more
effectively on other areas of the country. We therefore
call on the South Sudanese authorities to facilitate its
rapid deployment.
But that will not be a panacea. It is the South
Sudanese leaders who must negotiate the peace. They
have the responsibility for ending the conflict and to
feed and protect their population, or face accountability
for failing in that. In that regard, the work of establishing
a hybrid court must be speeded up.
In conclusion, Italy will continue to work on two
fronts. At the political level, we will make efforts in
every possible forum to encourage a solution to the crisis,
starting with South Sudan’s stakeholders, including civil
society and regional stakeholders. At the humanitarian
level, we will provide aid and financing programmes
aimed at addressing the country’s emergencies. We also
look forward to hearing from Under-Secretary-General

17-2230411/17

S/PV.8008

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Lacroix, who is currently visiting the region, and we
hope that, at the upcoming IGAD ministerial Summit
on 24 July, the indirect communication channel that has
been reopened between the South Sudanese leaders can
reinvigorate the process.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General Wane
for his substantive briefing. We are also obliged to the
Secretary-General for the balanced assessment he has
given once again in his monthly report, and grateful to
President Mogae for his detailed statement.
We share the view that the situation in South Sudan
can be stabilized only through a sustainable ceasefire
and the start of an inclusive national reconciliation
process. The South Sudan crisis has already had
severe humanitarian consequences. The worst impact
of its escalation has been in the subregion, where it
has resulted in a significant increase in the influx of
refugees into neighbouring countries. In that regard,
we would like to note the constructive attitude of
South Sudan’s neighbours, particularly the Sudan, in
helping to alleviate the humanitarian situation. We
also do not think it fair to blame the ongoing violence
exclusively on Juba, which had already announced a
ceasefire unilaterally. It is crucial to ensure that the
opposition takes similar steps. We continue to believe
that the threatened sanctions will not help to solve
the crisis, and they might in fact make it worse — a
view that coincides with that of the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and other countries of the region.
We note that advance units of the Regional
Protection Force began deploying to South Sudan in
May. We assume that IGAD and the United Nations
Secretariat will continue to work with the South Sudan
authorities on mutually acceptable modalities for that
operation. We would like to point out that Juba has
maintained its constructive position on the issue of the
Regional Protection Force, as the Government’s decision
on providing plots of land for its bases testifies. We
urge South Sudan and its troop-contributing countries
to work together to enable the Regional Force to reach
operational readiness.
We are hoping for success for the national dialogue
initiated in May by President Kiir with the participation
of all ethnic groups, political stakeholders and
population sectors, with the goal of achieving national
reconciliation and an end to the conflict in South Sudan,
12/17

20/07/2017

and we urge everyone to give it their full support. We
would like to note the personal efforts of SecretaryGeneral António Guterres in this area, and we welcome
the coordinated efforts that regional actors are making
to facilitate a settlement in Southern Sudan. Nor should
we neglect to mention the initiative launched at IGAD’s
June Summit for the revitalization of the South Sudan
peace Agreement and the regional stakeholders’ efforts
to implement it.
We trust that the Ugandan-mediated contacts
with South Sudanese parties will also bear fruit.
At the same time, we would like to caution against
excessive optimism. The political process is only just
beginning. There is a great deal of laborious work that
lies ahead if we want to see a convergence of positions
and seek compromises. We hope that the cooperation
among the United Nations, the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development will
demonstrate its effectiveness.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): I would like to join
previous speakers in thanking Assistant SecretaryGeneral Wane and President Mogae for their
comprehensive, insightful briefings. My delegation
would like to make the following observations
and recommendations.
We are gravely concerned that, despite the unilateral
ceasefire declared by the transitional Government in
May, the Sudan People’s Liberation Army continues
to fight.
It is also equally alarming that incidents concerning
humanitarian access and violence against the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and
humanitarian personnel have sharply escalated, which
has led to an increase in internally displaced persons.
Such hostile actions undermine efforts made by the
transitional Government and the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission to facilitate the peace
process, further deteriorating humanitarian and
security conditions.
In that regard we urge that all parties to the conflict
immediately cease hostilities, especially in Equatoria
and the Greater Upper Nile region. We also urge all
parties stop attacks on humanitarian workers, so that
access to famine-affected locations is not impacted.
We also urge that UNMISS staff members not face
arbitrary arrests or detention.
17-22304

20/07/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We welcome the recent decision of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
to convene a revitalization forum, which will include
all parties. It will allow parties to discuss how to
effectively implement the peace Agreement and prepare
for the forthcoming democratic elections. We hope
that the outcome of the forum will lay the necessary
foundations to help build stable State institutions.
Simultaneously, we need to ensure that the national
dialogue launched in May is thoroughly inclusive and
transparent. In order to achieve true political progress,
we urge the transitional Government to demonstrate
political will and engage positively with the United
Nations and regional actors.
There is a need for closer cooperation and
assistance from the United Nations, the African Union,
IGAD, the Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, leaders of neighbouring countries and
other international partners. Only coordinated and
united efforts will bring about the long-awaited peace
and stability to South Sudan. It is our strong conviction
that the Government should speedily allocate personnel
to operate the proposed one-stop-shop, which would
the free up the Mission’s operations and the movement
of UNMISS patrols.
We would like to pay sincere tribute to UNMISS
personnel and Special Representative for South Sudan
Shearer for working in such a difficult environment on
the ground.
To conclude, Kazakhstan fully supports the
concerted efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union and IGAD. We will work with the Council and
key actors to find a lasting solution to the conflict
in South Sudan, which should remain high on our
priority list.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
is not in the habit of delivering a statement following
briefings or consultations. Accordingly, my remarks
will be very brief.
We commend and thank Mr. El-Ghassim Wane,
Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations, as well as His Excellency President Festus
Mogae. We thank them for their clarifying briefings. I
shall limit my remarks to one question.
Given that we have all reached agreement regarding
our own observations of the situation, what is it that we
are to do as members of the Security Council? We have

S/PV. 8008

all said that there is a need for coordination between
the subregion and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, between the region and the African
Union, and at United Nations, particularly the Security
Council. I raise the question because in a few moments
we will meet in informal consultations, when the
Security Council can at last take concrete measures.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I join my colleagues
in thanking today’s briefers for their valuable
presentations. I have three brief points to highlight.
First, the security situation is deeply concerning
to say the least. Ukraine strongly condemns the armed
clashes that took place on Monday in Gogrial state,
which involved local communities. A cattle dispute was
transformed into a full-scale armed battle, during which
a number of people were killed and many more wounded.
That serves to underline the fact that the situation in
South Sudan remains extremely fragile, even in areas
that were previously considered peaceful. We took note
of the fact that, in response to the incident, President
Kiir declared a three-month state of emergency in some
parts of the country. He also ordered the establishment
of an investigation committee. It is important to ensure
that those involved in the killings are held accountable.
We are no less concerned about the recent reports
that Government troops have begun their military
advance towards the stronghold of the position in
Pagak. Armed clashes between the two sides in
neighbourhoods of the city have already resulted in
thousands of civilians fleeing their homes.
As to my second point, on the political process, we
have been closely following the ongoing consultations
in the region on how to advance peace in South
Sudan. We welcome the conclusion of the recently
held extraordinary session of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development Council of Ministers on
South Sudan, which adopted guidelines to spearhead
the revitalization of the Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in South Sudan and the road map towards
the high-level revitalization forum.
It is not the first time that we expect the parties
to demonstrate, once and for all, real goodwill towards
reaching an agreement on the restoration of the
permanent ceasefire and to start preparations, with
a realistic timeline, for the holding of democratic
elections. Unless that process is all-inclusive, it has no
chance of succeeding.

17-2230413/17

S/PV.8008

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

20/07/2017

My last point is with regard to the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). We lament that
obstructions to the work of UNMISS and humanitarian
organizations work are continuing. Those obstructions
negatively affect the Mission’s ability to effectively
implement crucially important tasks mandated by the
Security Council. The Mission and humanitarian actors
must have unhindered access to the affected areas in
order to help those in need, in particular in the areas
affected by the recent armed clashes. Ukraine remains
convinced that the Security Council should speak with
one voice. It has to continue to be engaged with the
Government of South Sudan, both collectively and
bilaterally, in order to remove impediments UNMISS
operations and the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force. We have no doubt that such a
deployment is in the best interests of the Government if
it genuinely seeks peace in the country.

Dialogue Steering Committee, especially its efforts to
reach out to parties outside of South Sudan, as well as
to grass-roots organizations in the country. Dialogue
at the national level requires grass-roots trust-building
and reconciliation activities at the local level. Japan is
working closely with the United Nations Development
Programme in connection with local efforts to enhance
transparency and credibility so as to ensure genuinely
inclusive national dialogue.

Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would also like to thank
Mr. Wane and His Excellency President Mogae for their
comprehensive briefings, which have updated us on the
situation in South Sudan.

Lastly, with regard to the deployment of the
Regional Protection Force, we look forward to an
expeditious completion of its deployment, including
through the prompt resolution of land-allocation issues
and accelerated administrative processes. Further
cooperation among troop-contributing countries, the
Secretariat and the Government of South Sudan is
important for that purpose.

Japan would like to express its deep concern over
the situation on the ground, in particular regarding
the Sudan People’s Liberation Army’s advance
towards Pagak. It undercuts the unilateral ceasefire
declared by President Kiir and contradicts his claim on
Independence Day that war is not an option. We call for
restraint from both the Government and the opposition.
It is also worrying that residents and aid workers are
again evacuating from Upper Nile state due to the
advance on Pagak. An effective use of the humanitarian
high-level oversight committee mechanism is urged in
order to enhance humanitarian access.
Japan is encouraged that the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) is currently
working with the African Union, the United Nations
and the international community to revitalize the 2015
Agreement by engaging with previously excluded
groups. The Government of South Sudan is also
preparing for an upcoming IGAD ministerial meeting
for that same purpose. The Council should unite in
urging all parties to constructively engage in the
process so that, based on those collective efforts, the
revitalization forum, slated for September, will yield
positive results.
The recently launched national dialogue is equally
important. We commend the work of the National
14/17

The national dialogue also requires an environment
conducive to its ends, including through an immediate
cessation of hostilities and the release of political
prisoners. Japan’s Ambassador in Juba has also
emphasized those points to President Kiir directly, First
Vice President Taban Deng Gai and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs. Japan renews its call on all parties to
stop fighting.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of China.
China thanks Assistant Secretary-General Wane
and Chairperson Mogae for their respective briefings.
Recently, thanks to the joint effort of the South
Sudanese Government and the relevant parties, progress
has been made in the country’s political process. At
the same time, however, the overall situation in the
country remains complex and serious. It is facing
serious challenges in the political, security, economic
and humanitarian areas.
A political solution is the only way out of the current
situation. To achieve that requires, on the one hand,
stepped-up efforts on the part of the Government and
the people of South Sudan, and, on the other, increased
support from the international community. There has to
be synergy on both fronts. A settlement must be based
on the actual conditions of the country. It must tackle
the root causes of the situation and should aim at broad
support for a settlement.
17-22304

20/07/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8008

First, priority should be given to speeding up the
political process in the country and maintaining its
stability. The South Sudanese Government has made
commendable efforts to maintain internal peace
and stability. President Kiir formally launched the
national dialogue in May and announced a unilateral
ceasefire, thereby establishing favourable conditions
for facilitating the political process.

should enhance the targeted and coordinated nature of
its assistance, with priorities given to and focus on areas
involving critical infrastructure, such as agriculture,
irrigation and roads, so as to improve the conditions for
economic and social development as soon as possible
and raise the living standard of the local people to
promote a national reconstruction so as to gradually
resolve the root causes of the current conflict.

At present, the South Sudanese Government has
reached an agreement with some of the opposition
groups, for which China expresses its appreciation.
China hopes that the international community will
continue to fully support the leading role that the South
Sudanese Government has assumed in addressing
internal matters; strengthen its communication and
coordination with the Government; and, at the same
time, continue to enhance its engagement with the
parties concerned and urge them to abandon the
military option and return to the political track. At the
same time, it is important to enhance the inclusiveness
of the national dialogue and resolve their differences
through dialogue and negotiations so as to enhance
mutual trust.

China commends the efforts of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) in discharging its
mandate and for the important role that it has played in
maintaining peace and stability in South Sudan. We hope
that the Secretariat and UNMISS will strengthen their
communication with the South Sudanese Government,
properly resolve issues related to their cooperation and
enhance the functionality and effectiveness of UNMISS
so as to better respond to complex situations.

Secondly, it is important to continue to support the
leading role of regional and subregional organizations in
carrying out their good offices. Regional organizations,
including the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), have brought to bear their unique
advantages and have intensified their good offices.
Recently, IGAD held a special summit and a meeting of
the Council of Ministers of South Sudan during which
they had constructive discussions on how to facilitate
the implementation of the Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, and
came up with ideas and proposals. China expresses its
appreciation in that regard. China welcome’s IGAD’s
holding of the high-level revitalization forum and hopes
that regional organizations will continue to strengthen
exchanges, communication and coordination with the
Government, send out a unified message to the outside
world, and work in synergy towards a political solution.
Thirdly, it is necessary to enhance humanitarian
and economic assistance to South Sudan. As a result of a
protracted conflict, South Sudan’s social and economic
foundations have been seriously damaged, and
economic development has been beset by difficulties
as a result of a long and protracted drought and other
extreme weather conditions. The country is now facing
the serious risk of famine. The international community

The Chinese Government has all along supported
the peace process in South Sudan and provided
assistance to the country, within its ability, through
bilateral and multilateral channels. Several days ago,
through the World Food Programme, China provided
food assistance totalling $5 million to South Sudan, and
through bilateral channels, China has provided food
assistance totalling 8,750 tons and a total of ¥5 million
worth of anti-malaria medicine so as to help the South
Sudanese people respond to famine and that disease.
Recently, China dispatched more than 1,000
peacekeepers to South Sudan. Three hundred and thirtyone rank and file members of the Chinese engineering
battalion and of the medical teams deployed in South
Sudan were awarded the United Nations Peace Medal of
Honour. China will continue to play a constructive role
to help the country achieve durable peace and stability
and sustainable development.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mogae to respond to
comments and questions raised.
Mr. Mogae: As I did not understand the question
asked by the representative of Senegal, perhaps he
could repeat it.
Mr. Seck (Senegal): Members of the Security
Council asked what, in your opinion, the Council
should do now when everyone agrees that the region
and the subregion, with the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the African Union and the

17-2230415/17

S/PV.8008

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

20/07/2017

United Nations, which is the universal body, must align
their approach to help South Sudan get out of this very
difficult crisis. We asked our question with ourselves
in mind because we will be conducting consultations
in a few moments. As we are about to embark upon
consultations, the President thought that you might
have some thoughts pertaining to my question.

shop, as Council members well know, is intended to
resolve impediments to the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) operations, including
facilitating equipment and supply clearances. The
Government of National Unity has the political will and
desire to continue to work closely with UNMISS and
the humanitarian actors to address any pending issues.

The President (spoke in Chinese): Mr. Mogae, can
you clarify this point?

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
humanitarian organizations for their large-scale and
sustained mobilizations since the onset of the crisis,
and for their continued commitment to working with
the South Sudanese people under the challenges they
face. Despite the lifting of the famine alert on South
Sudan, signifying an improvement in food security,
the humanitarian situation continues to be dire. We
continue to urge the friends of South Sudan and the
international community to honour the pledges they
made so as to meet the humanitarian gap being faced
by various humanitarian organizations.

Mr. Mogae: If it is a question of asking what
my wishes are, I wish that the United Nations, the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) would speak with one voice. That
is what I want them to do. At present, their approaches
are not quite the same, and the South Sudanese will
continue to take advantage of differences in approach.
Also, I think that the authorities — the African Union,
IGAD and the United Nations — could maybe warn the
South Sudanese much more firmly that these entities
mean what they say.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): I am pleased and
honoured to address the Security Council under your
presidency, Sir. Allow me to begin by congratulating
you and your delegation on assuming the presidency
of the Council during the month of July and for your
sound management of the Council this month. I would
like to assure you of the full support and cooperation of
my delegation in your endeavours for the few days left
of your presidency.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, and former
President Festus Mogae, the Chairperson of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, who is joining
us from Juba.
I would like to reiterate the Government of National
Unity’s commitment to the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force. We are happy to report that there
have been positive developments with regard to the
deployment of the Regional Protection Force, with some
of the units and contingent’s equipment already in Juba.
Moreover, we are happy to inform the Council that on
18 July, just two days ago, the Government of National
Unity made welcome progress on the proposed one-stop
shop by appointing the national staff. The one-stop
16/17

As reported in last month’s briefing (see S/PV.7982),
the national dialogue has started its work and is
progressing well. It is imperative to report here that the
co-Chairs of the Steering Committee have begun their
efforts to reach out to the other stakeholders who are
in and out of South Sudan in an effort to bring them
on board to the national dialogue initiative. One of the
co-Chairs of the Steering Committee led the delegation
to South African to meet with the Mr. Riek Machar,
who, unfortunately, declined to give him and his
delegation an audience. That is indeed unfortunate as
the national dialogue is intended to be a forum for the
people of South Sudan to air their views and grievances,
including Mr. Riek Machar’s.
The Government therefore urges Mr. Riek Machar
and other armed opposition groups to reconsider their
positions regarding the national dialogue. The national
dialogue can be inclusive only with their participation,
but its success does not depend on their participation.
So it would be prudent if they put aside their personal
bitterness and embraced initiatives that seek to bring
about a lasting peaceful solution to the people of
South Sudan.
In conclusion, the Transitional Government of
National Unity continues to be grateful for the role
being played by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), the African Union, the United
Nations and the international community at large in
trying to find lasting peace, stability and prosperity for
17-22304

20/07/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

South Sudan. The Government of the Republic of South
Sudan agrees with the international community that this
can be achieved only through a political process that is
embraced and accepted by the South Sudanese people.
It is in that spirit that the Transitional Government
of National Unity accepted the recent IGAD Summit
resolution to hold a high-level discussion with the aim of
revitalizing the implementation of the peace agreement
in South Sudan. As a result of the mentioned resolution,

S/PV. 8008

we are happy to note that the IGAD Ministers of Foreign
Affairs will meet in Juba in the next few days and we
would like to wish them a successful deliberation.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

17-2230417/17
