7’ H’ I R 7’ Y - F I R S 7’

YEA R

CONTENTS
.. .. .. .. ,.. ... .. ... ..,. .. ... .. ... ... .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia . . . . . . . . , . . , , . . . , . , . , . , . . . . , , , . . . , . . . . . . . , . , , . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l963)

S/PV. 1963

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~lpplr~~e~rts of the Qfjricial R~cortls of ‘the Secrrrity Corrncil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given,
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Hesolrrtious and
Decisions
o.f’ the Security Co/o~i/. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1963rd MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 19 October 1976, at 3 p.m.
President:

(Pakistan).

Mr. Iqbal A. AKHUND

P~sent: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional
I,

Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/l963)

of the agenda

MS. Komknmtne

(Sri Lmtlin),
Mr. &r//or77
( Ye/jle/lJ,
(Y7~goslmio)
~17cl Mr. Mnqc7le (Zcr/l7/li(()
took the places resewed for the177 nt tl7e sic{e qf fllC
Cmncil ~han7ber.
Mr.

Petri6

‘2. The PRESIDENT:
The Councjl has before it the
seven-Power draft resolution [S//XII]
introduced
yesterday by the representative of Guyana [/962r1d
/77eetir7g].

3.

Mr.

LECOMPT
(France) (inteipr.ctlltion
.fh77
Mr. President, it is a pleasure for the French
delegation and an honour for me to be able to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council. Your remarkable qualities, your
competence and your sense of what is appropriateguarantee that our work will be conducted to a
successful conclusion with wisdom and efficiency.

Fre17d7):

2.

The situation
Tl7c meetit7g

in Namibia

w7.s cnlled

to order

crt 3;45 p.177.

Adoption of the agenda

The situation in Namibia
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions previously taken by the Council [I954th cr/7cI
IWhth
to /96/s!
777eetir7g.s], I shall now invite the
President and other members of the United Nations
Council for Namibia,
and the representatives of
Algeria,
Bangladesh,
Botswana, Burundi,
Cuba,
Democratic Kampuchea,
Egypt, Ethiopia, German
Democratic Republic, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Liberia,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Niger, Nigeria, Poland, Saudi Arabia, Sierra
Leone, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Yemen, Yugoslavia and
Zambia to participate in the Council’s discussions
without the right to vote.

4. I should also like to express to the outgoing
President, Ambassador Kikhia,
the thanks and
profound gratitude of the French delegation for the
outstanding manner in which he discharged his duties
last month.
5. The French delegation has followed this new
debate on Namibia with the greatest attention. It
wishes to pay a tribute to the high level which the
speakers have maintained in expressing their positions
and that of their Governments. The presence among
us of many Ministers for Foreign Affairs has emphasized the scope of our work and the importance
of the role of the Council-in
a word, the responsibilities which are ours. These responsibilities, of which
each one of us is aware. are everi more important
when the Council is considering the situation in a
Territory having international status, like Namibia,
where the presence of South Africa no longer has a
legal foundation.
6. The efforts of the world community to induce
South Africa to comply with its obligations are Of
long standing. France has participated in these efforts.
On a number of occasions it approahced the Government of Pretoria, bilaterally orjointly with the Government of the United Kingdom and the United States.
It also associated itself, as a member country. with
the positions taken by the European community.
1 wish merely to recall the most recent relevant
dates: the joint dkmarche of 26 January [S/119451*
the declaration of 23 February and that addressed on

26 August last to the Secretary-General
sion of Namibia Day.

o’n the occa-

10. The only new elements that we have at hand are
those contained in a statement by the Constitutional
Committee of the Windhoek Conference [8/1218U,
NL~I~CX]. As we said in our last statement [1883,d
17?eeting],
that conference cannot be recognized as
representative. Limited as it is to ethnic groups and
excluding the political groupings, in the full sense of
the word, it does not guarantee the democratic
character that we are entitled to expect of any process
of self-determination,
The proposals which the conference has formulated cannot therefore meet my
country’s concerns.

7. The policy of my country on the question of
Namibia is clear. It has already been presented here
in the Council. Mr. de Guiringaud recalled it a gain,
as Minister for Foreign Affairs, before the General
Assembly.
1 should like to quote that part of his
statement which was devoted to the subject:
“It is a matter of urgency that Namibia should in
accordance with United Nations resolutions accede
to sovereignty and independence under the supervision of our Organization
after a constitutional
process in which the political groups, the principal
one being SWAP0
[South West Africcr People’s
Ol:~~rrrlizarion], should participate.“’

11. Having thus drawn attention to our basic objections to the composition
and functioning of the
Windhoek Conference, I must add that the material
it provides by way of information
is in any event
particularly
disappointing.
No information is given
concerning the date and organization of general elections, concerning the place to be given to the political
groupings, particularly SWAPO, concerning the role
of the United Nations, or concerning the electoral and
constitutional process. The only new facts relate to the
indication of a date-in
the far distant future-for
independence, and the recognition that negotiations
will have to be undertaken directly with South Africa
on a certain number of questions, including that of
Walvis Bay.

I would add that Mr. de Guiringaud also took a stand
on one of the problems which are of particular interest
to the Council in view of the close interrelation of the
general affairs of southern Africa, the problem of
arms sales. He said:
“The French Government’s
condemnation
of
racial discrimination
and other aspects of the policy
followed by Pretoria led it to adopt an increasingly
restrictive policy with regard to the delivery of arms
and ultimately
to prohibit any new contracts or
further sales.“2

12. I readily agree that none of that is satisfactory.
But does that mean that there is no longer any
hope that the situation may improve? That is not the
opinion of my delegation. Prospects were opened up
last summer when the United States Secretary of
State proposed to the interested Governments in
southern Africa, including that of Pretoria, certain
ways of approaching the problems in the region. Our
Foreign Minister indicated, when he spoke before the
General Assembly on 29 September last, that that
difficult undertaking had our encouragement’. I repeat
that encouragement here, for the benefit of the United
States delegation.

8. My country’s position on the question of Namibia
is based directly on the provisions of resolution 38.5
(1976) which the Council adopted on 30 January this
year. My delegation
continues to feel that “it is
imperative”,
to use the words of paragraph 7 of that
resolution, that “free elections under the supervision
and control of the United Nations be held for the
whole of Namibia as one political entity”. I would
recall that that proposal to hold free elections was put
forward for the first time by my delegation during the
debate held in June 1975 on the question of Namibia.
My delegation then expressed the opinion that

13. The progress that now seems possible should
induce the Council to use the language of urgent
appeals rather than that of sanctions. We must &gin
emphasize the principles on which any settlement mast
be based, in particular, the cardinal principle of aV
democracy: the rapid and unswerving acceptance of
the rule of the majority, through the intermediary,
in Namibia, of free elections under the control and
supervision of the United Nations.

“one of the most appropriate
means to attain
[the independence
of Namibia with respect for its
territorial
integrity and unity] lies in the organization, under international
supervision, of general
elections throughout the Territory on the basis of
universal suffrage”~[1824th
II)c~~~/I,Y, prrrvr. 102.1
That proposal, which the Council endorsed, appears
to us to be just as relevant now. In our opinion there
is no alternative
to the free expression of the will of
the peoples.

14. While it is not for the Council to go into details
concerning a negotiation that falls within the framework of quiet diplomacy, it seems to be its duty to
encourage a peaceful evolution in every way possible
whenever chances for progress seem to exist along that
path and whenever there is the beginning of cll:n@e~
as seems to be the case now. That evolution, however
fragile it may be-and 1 say this all the more freely
because my country is not associated with the present

9. What has been South Africa’s reply to these
repeated demands of the Council and to the questions
put by Member
States. ‘) Many speakers here have
already deplored
the silence of the South African
Government,
and we in turn must note that silence.
2

negotiations, because it has had no special information
concerning any progress that may have been made, and
because the Council itself has been kept in ignorance
ia this respect-should
prohibit us from resorting to
Chapter VII of the Charter. In the present state of
affairs, we must simply note that there is no situation
which is a threat to peace.

troops from Namibia
elections.

or towards the holding of free

19. On the con&y,
the South African Government
has tried further to strengthen its hold on Namibia
by arranging so-called constitutional talks with some
of the various groups in Namibia while excluding
SWAPO,
the principal
representative
of those
Namibian forces seeking independence in a unitary
Namibia. Those talks have rightly been condemned by
the international
community.
South Africa has
intensified its military build-up in Namibia and has
also staged outright aggression against Angola from
Namibia.

15. The fact that my delegation at present prefers
the diplomatic path does not mean that it no longer
condemns South Africa’s attempt
to settle the
Namibian question by artificial procedures, without
8WAP0, the principal political group, and without the
United Nations, which in respect of this Territory has
a paramount reponsibility that has been affirmed here
for many years. My delegation strongly disapproves
of this refusal to take into account the political facts
and the legal requirements.
We fully associate ourselves with the ‘solemn warnings that have been
addressed in this respect to South Africa by the
majority of speakers. We cannot rule out the possibility
of further restrictive measures to demonstrate our
condemnation of South Africa’s policy in Namibia if
the hoped-for progress does not come about because
Pretoria is once more dragging its feat. A settlement
in Namibia must not be delayed any longer. The South
African authorities must understand that.

20. In its resolution 366 (1974), the Council had
already decided to consider appropriate measures
to be taken under the Charter in the event of noncompliance with that resolution by South Africa. When
South Africa’s response to resolution 366 (1974) was
considered by the Council in June 1975, none of the
Council members was of the opinion that South
Africa had complied with it. However, because of a
triple veto, it was not then possible for the Council
to take a decision on mandatory sanctions against
South Africa for flagrantly neglecting to comply with
the resolution. For its part, Sweden voted in favour of
a mandatory arms embargo.

16. Mr. RYDBECK
(Sweden): First of all, I should
like to ask the delegation of the Libyan Arab Republic
to convey the thanks of the Swedish delegation to
Ambassador Kikhia for the efficient, objective and
pleasant way in which he conducted our deliberations
last month.

21. The South African Government has refused to
respond to resolution 385 (1976). In paragraph 12
of that resolution the Council decided that it would
remained seized of the matter and that in the event of
non-compliance by South Africa it would meet to
consider appropriate measures under the Charter. The
Council is now confronted with repeated flagrant
non-compliance with its unequivocal demands. South
Africa’s repeated refusal to heed those demands gives
the Council little alternative but to take action in
accordance with the Charter. This is the logical consequence of resolutions 366 (1974) and 385 (1976) and
of developments during the last two years.

17. Our congratulations go also to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the office of President. You have
already had ample opportunity
to display the great
persona1 qualities and the very wide range of
experience which you bring to your task. We pledge
you our full co-operation and support.
18. Council resolution 385 (1976), which was adopted
unanimously, contained a strong and clear demand
that South Africa use the time given-up
to 31 August
last-to comply with the provisions of that resolution.
The Council demanded of South Africa a solemn
declaration that lit would accept the provisions of
that resolution concerning the holding of free elections
in Namibia under United Nations supervision and
control and also an undertaking by South Africa that
it would comply with all other resolutions and decisions
of the United Nations and with the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice of 21 June 19714
and recognition by South Africa of the territorial
integrity and unity of Namibia as a nation. However,
no declaration has been made by South Africa in
response to resolution 385 (1976) and no measure has
been taken by South Africa towards ending its illegal
occupation, towards abolishing its discriminatory and
repressive laws in Namibia,
towards releasing
Namibian political prisoners towards withdrawing its

22. It can hardly be questioned that the situation in
southern Africa, including Namibia, constitutes a
threat to international peace and security. The continued occupation of Namibia and the military buildup in the Territory, together with the tension in the
area as a whole, which is the result of South Africa’s
policies with regard to Namibia and in South Africa
itself, has served further to aggravate the dangerous
situation. Last week, in the General Assembly,5 the
Swedish Foreign Minister stated that the situation in
southern Africa must be characterized as a threat to
peace.
23. In August of this year the Nordic Foreign
Ministers agreed on certain guidelines for the policies
of the Nordic Governments with regard to Namibia.
The Ministers adopted, i/tter n/is, the following
principles:
3

condemnation
of the continued occupation of
Namibia by the Republic of South Africa, which is
in violation of the opinion handed down by the
International
Court of Justice, and of South Africa’s
refusal so far to comply with the demands set out by
the Security Council for, among other things, the
holding of free elections. In view of the desire for
peaceful development in the area, it is crucially
important
that the SWAP0 liberation movement
fully take part in the independence talks.
‘L

.,*

I‘ . . . making use of all opportunities to work for an
effective sanctions policy within the framework of
the United Nations. Especially, the Ministers would
welcome a decision by the Security Council on a
compulsory arms embargo against South Africa.”
The necessary criteria for a decision on mandatory
sanctions are at hand. Therefore, the question now
confronting
the members of the Council is the
following: could sanctions support the effort to reach a
peaceful solution of the Namibian problem?
24. Although South Africa’s reaction has been far
from encouraging, the Swedish Government supports
efforts from all sides to create momentum towards a
negotiated solution of the question of Namibia. We
listened attentively to the statement by the President
of SWAPO, Sam Nujoma, in the Security Council on
28 September [195&h mc,@tin~]. In his important and
constructive declaration Mr. Nujoma stated the basic
conditions under which SWAP0 would be prepared
to negotiate the future of Namibia. SWAP0 is prepared
to talk directly with South Africa regarding the
modalities
of transferring power to the people of
Namibia.
Any talks between South Africa and
SWAP0 must be held under the auspices of the United
Nations. As a precondition for talks, SWAP0 demands
the release of all Namibian political prisoners, and
also demands a commitment by South Africa to withdraw its armed forces from Namibia, In the view of the
Swedish Government those demands are reasonable
and they must obviously be considered important
elements in the search for a negotiated solution.
25. South Africa has recently made Some concessions as a result of efforts by third parties. The South
African Government does not, however, appear to
be prepared to give up its resistance to talking
directly with SWAPO, a necessary element in any
process towards a solution.
26. The people of Namibia has long patiently awaited
a change of mood in Pretoria, but so far in vain.
Against the background of the diplomatic efforts to
achieve a solution through peaceful means, the Council members must now, before any vote is taken, very
carefully consider the best way to proceed. For its
part, the Swedish delegation considers that the
history of southern Africa and the attitude so far
adopted by the South African Government are strong
arguments in favour of a policy of strong diplomatic

and political
the uparthcitl
progress.

pressure. So far, a lenient attitude towards
rCgime has not resulted in any significant

27. Support from all members of the Council for
mandatory sanctions against South Africa would amply
demonstrate the isolation of the Pretoria Government
and assist in pressing South Africa towards makingthe
concessions which would be necessary to get proper
negotiations under way. All States Members claim to be
observing a voluntary arms embargo, and it is therefore
difficult to see how anyone could be negatively affected
by transforming that embargo into a mandatory arms
embargo. On the other hand, a’n embargo would
represent a considerable political and diplomatic setback for South Africa and would contribute towards
pressing it to enter into meaningful negotiations,
28. The Swedish Government therefore appeals to 811
members of the Council to support the draft resole.
tion [S//22//]
before us. A decision to do so would
represent an important element in support of efforts
to find a’negotiated solution leading to our common
goal: a free, independent and unitary State of Namibia,
29. Mr. ABE (Japan): Sir, I should like first of all to
congratulate you on your assumption of the high office
of President of the Council for the month of October.
Being assured of the great competence, diplomatic
skill and wide experience for which you are so well
known among us, my delegation believes that the
Council, under your presidency, can achieve meaningful results in regard to the problems of which it is
seized this month.
30. It is also my pleasant duty to express the thanks
of my delegation to the President of the Council for the
month of September, Ambassador Kikhia of Libya,
for what he accomplished so brilliantly
during that
month.
31. Since the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 385 (1976) in January this year, it has watched with
vigilance and anxiety to see how the South African
Government would respond to that resolution. BY
31 August last, which was the deadline for compliance
with the resolution, we had seen no development
that would indicate what one might call.the result of
serious consideration
by that Government.
We
reiterate our deep disappointment
and regret.
32. According to press reports, however, it seems
that the Government of the United States, taking an
initiative, and certain African countries, responding
to that American initiative, have been in negotiation
with the Government of South Africa with a view to
working out a solution along the lines bf resolution 385
(1976). We are not very well informed about the
negotiations but, again according to press reports, it
seems that negotiations are still under way in spite
of many difficulties. My delegation feels it is regrettable
that the Council, which is seized of this matter, is not

sufficiently provided with information on the ongoing
negotiations, while some of its members are themselves
directly involved in the negotiations. But we understand that this is because of the consideration that the
negotiations are at too delicate a stage for it to be
disclosed how they stand. In any event, if the negotiations have not failed and if there is still room for their
continuation, I believe that the Council should refrain
from taking drastic measures at this stage.

engaged or involved in any nuclear collaboration with
that country. My delegation has made this clear on
various occasions, including the session of the General
Assembly last year. Secondly, with regard to the
Rossing uranium mine, I should like to state that my
Government has prohibited investment by Japanese
nationals or corporate bodies in any field in Namibia,
As a result, there is no Japanese national taking part
in the management of fhe Rossing uranium mine; there
is no Japanese national or firm which has a mining
concession in the Rossing uranium mine. While
Japanese industries purchase uranium entirely from
abroad, the Japanese authorities have been taking
measures so that the industries should make maximum
efforts to diversify further the sources of uranium
supply and pay regard to the proclamation
by the
United Nations Council for Namibianh

33. It is true that South Africa has continued its
illegal occupation of Namibia and persistently defied
the responsibility of the United Nations for the Territory for many years. I share the frustration and
irritation which African countries may most justifiably
feel over the failure to produce meaningful results
on the Namibian problem all these years, but I still
appeal to our African friends for further patience and
moderation, as I believe that our purpose is to solve
the problem in a peaceful manner, and not with
bloodshed.

39. Mr. VINCI (Italy): Mr. President, since this is the
first time I am speal$ng after a long silence, let me
first of all congratulate you most warmly on behalf of
my delegation
also, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. We feel
confident that under your experienced guidance the
Council will continue its work both constructively and
effectively. Allow me also to express my personal.
pleasure at seeing our meetings presided over today
by the representative of Pakistan, a country with which
Italy enjoys most cordial and fruitful relations.

34. My delegation appeals to the Government of
South Africa to appreciate that our patience and
moderation are barely maintained by’ hope for the
success of these negotiations. We also appeal to it to
give serious thought to the possibility that the present
negotiations may prove to be the last chance for a
peaceful solution and to achieve a negotiated settlement at the earliest possible date for the benefit of all
-the people concerned-namely,
the people of Namibia,
the people of South Africa and the peoples of Africa
at large.

40. I wish to take this opportunity
to voice my
delegation’s appreciation,
as we11 as my own, to
Ambassador Kikhia, who led the work of the Council
during the month of September with competence and
skill. I also wish to extend my personal gratitude and
that of my delegation to Ambassador Abe for the wise
leadership he provided and the expeditious mannet
in which he carried out our business during his
presidency in August. I should like also to convey my
sincere thanks to him and to all my other colleagues
who have been so generous in their references to my
term of office as President.

35. My delegation is afraid that since the negotiations
are still under way so drastic a decision as that
foreseen in the proposed draft resolution [S/122111
might adversely affect the delicate process of the
negotiations.
My delegation
considers that the
currently proposed step would not be instrumental
in an effective solution of the problem. Therefore, my
delegation will have to abstain if the draft resolution
is put to the vote.

41. We have heard the very interesting and revealing
statements delivered in this chamber by many Foreign
Ministers of African countries, by the leader of
SWAP0 and by several delegations. From the way
this debate has been developing and from recent events
in southern Africa, my delegation is indeed convinced
that the Council took the right decision last January
when, in a heartening show of solidarity, it adopted
resolution 385 (1976). We were-all
the members of
the Council-unanimously
moved by the same feeling
that we were undertaking a timely and well-inspired
action. May I be allowed to recall that that resolution
came about as the reflection of the bitterness, the
and the determination
for action
disappointment,
which all 15 members of the Council felt when
considering the policy of the Government of South
Africa towards Namibia.

36. In this connexion, however, I should like to make
it clear that the Government of Japan has for years
effectively enforced, and will continue to enforce, an
arms embargo against South Africa.
37. 1 should like to take this opportunity to deal with
certain points raised by the representative of Mauritius
at the 1956th meeting of the Council. He stated that
the Organization of African Unity had called upon
several countries, including Japan, to terminate all
nuclear collaboration with South Africa, and also that
certain countries, including my own, were deeply
involved in promoting the exploitation of the Rossing
uranium mine
38. First, with regard to the so-called nuclear
collaboration with South Africa, 1 can assure the
representative of Mauritius that Japan has never been

42. When we adopted this text, I believe that we all
shared the distinct feeling which I then felt myself.
5

that is to say, the feeling that the Council effectively
exercised its rights and duties in presenting the Government of Pretoria with an ultimate time-limit for the
fulfilment of its obligations.
What I mean is that last
January we all felt that the pace was indeed set, that
patience and acceptance of the wrongdoing was
definitely over. To sum up, independence for Namibia
was definitely
decided upon and, failing complete
adherence, Pretoria would have to be confronted with
an adequate response. A time-limit
had indeed been
set, and in accordance with the decision then taken
we have been meeting since 31 August in order to
consider what next to do after that date. And here
1 share to a certain extent the views expressed by
Ambassador Rydbeck just a few minutes ago.

departure from traditional policies of prevarication
as regards the populations mainly concerned. In short,
there should be such a substantial modification as to
allow us to believe in the quick change which would
foreshadow the prompt accession to independence of
the Territories in question. We believe that, should
we be able to spot a change in political philosophy,
this would apply to both Rhodesia and Namibia, where
the racial and political set-up is basically the same.
46. For this purpose the Italian delegation has most
carefully considered the very recent events in southern
Africa. In particular, we believe that the acceptance
by Mr. Ian Smith of majority rule in Rhodesia is an
event of paramount importance. We feel, at the.same
time, that the instrumental
role played by Prime
Minister Vorster to this effect should not be underestimated. Whether big or small, it is in turn indicative
of a change, if not of heart certainly of policy.

43. Although what has occurred since January is far
from meeting our expectations
and although the
South African Government has not ceased its obstructive manceuvres, it is only fair to acknowledge that
some changes have taken ,place. I refer to changes in
the area close to the international
Territory, changes
in the Territory itself and changes, however slim, in
+Pretoria which at least indicate that the ruling circles
in South Africa are beginning to have some second
thoughts.

47. I should like to elaborate a little more on this
topic. In our view the acceptance of majority rule in
Rhodesia by the white leaders, under the concurrent
pressure of many countries, including my own and,
more recently and more spectacularly,
the United
States, the United Kingdom, the five front-line States
and South Africa, marks a turning point in the future
of the whole area. We believe that its impact extends
far beyond local boundaries and in fact has far-reaching
consequences with regard to Namibia also.

44. In our view, what is really at stake is something
broader than the issue of Namibia itself. Besides the
international Territory, another land is involved; the
whole area is involved in a struggle against time and
against history because of some white minority regimes
which are trying to perpetuate their racial supremacy,
resorting to all sorts of repressive measures, including
the use of force. We speak not in anger but in sadness,
stated Ambassador Kanakaratne at our 1960th meeting.
We could not agree more with our colleague from Sri
Lanka. In fact, only someone out of this world
could not be aware of two simple truths: any fight
against the right of self-determination
is hopeless;
in the long run, the repression of freedom, national
or individual,
is bound to fail. Actually, the more
recent trends in southern Africa itself are the best
evidence of how fast history runs. Let us just recall
the liberation of the Portuguese colonies, the consolidation
of the freedom-fighters
and the growing
resistance in areas still under the old racist rulers.

48. The messages exchanged between the Secretary
of State of the United States and the Presidents of the
front-line States.and the meetings with the leadership
of SWAP0 are all common knowledge in their general
outlines, if not in detail. We do not fail to note some
promising, even if so far uncertain,
moves within
Namibia itself.
49. Given the situation
as described,
we ask
ourselves seriously whether at this stage it is politically
wise to take a decision, however well founded in
principle, such as the one suggested by the seven
sponsors of the draft resolution submitted yesterday to
the Council [S//22//].
Ambassador
Jackson of
Guyana, in introducing the text, very clearly and
correctly summarized the main chapters of a long and
sad history of the attempts and failures of the United
Nations in dealing with the question of Namibia. But
are we to conclude out of despair that since previous
attempts have failed a new attempt would have 110
better chance? This is my first question. My second
question, which is connected with the first one, is
whether we should not suspend our judgement until
we know a little better what has been going on
behind the scenes and how far and how consistent
is South Africa’s apparent move in the direction that
we all advocate and favour.

45. I should like to stress that in our opinion the
problem of Namibia should be viewed in the context
of a geographical area currently subject to a serious
reassessment of the many forces at play, subject to theii
substantial readjustment
to the realities of our own
times. At the centre of these two processes of
reassessment and readjustment is the contest between
racial supremacy and majority rule, between racial
predominance
on the one side and self-determination,
freedom, equality and democracy on the other. Given
such a set-up, what we should really investigate at
this stage in the Council is whether or not there has
been since last January a departure by South Africa
from its well-known
and outdated positions, a

50. I have no hesitation in acknowledging
that the
Council would have had no other choice than to adopt
measures under Chapter VII of the Charter had the
6

situation in southern Africa been the same as it was
last January. At this stage, however, we feel doubts
about the timing and the appropriateness
of the
proposed
measures. In our opinion they could produce
effects contrary to those we have in mind: on the one
hand, they might introduce a disturbing factor in a
complex and intricate process of negotiation covering
the whole region; on the other hand, they might
strengthen the hard-liners and encourage them-to break
their silence, raise their voices and work again in favour
of a collision course rather than of talks in Rhodesia,
Namibia and South Africa. That is why, in full fairness, we are not in a position to support at this stage
the draft resolution,
not because of its contents,
which raise no problems for my country, but, I repeat,
because of the timing.

in a form which is still unclear, at least to me,
Anyhow it shows that ideas, even if they take a very
long time-too
long-and
go in retrograde circles,
finally get across. .
55. This leads to my last question and the conclusion
of my statement: have we used our imagination to the
utmost? I personally feel that we have not. The reason
for this, as I see it at the end of this debate, is that
there is an increasing reluctance to leave the old
paths and try a new one. I personally believe we
should fight against such a trend, which reflects a
sort of bureaucratic way of thinking and acting. At
the same time, we should not be afraid to consider
new ideas and work on them if they can provide shortcut solutions. We can still try. All we need is cbnfidence in the United Nations and in our own
convictions.

51. I need hardly, in fact, reiterate here the position
of my country in regard to Namibia. For that purpose,
I would simply refer to the 1884th meeting of the
Council, at which I spoke at length on the subject.
So far as the provision on the arms embargo against
South Africa is concerned, I can assure the Council
of the fullest compliance of Italy with the provisions of
resolution 31 I (1972). My Government-and
I emphasize this point-long
ago took such a decision of
its own free will, and I had the privilege of voting
in favour of that resolution in 1972.

56.

Mr. ILLUECA

(Panama)

(interpretaticuz

,fkm

Spanish): Yesterday we had the opportunity

of hearing
a statement of great depth made by Mr. Jackson of
Guyana [/Y62& meeting]
as spokesman for the
delegations of Benin, Guyana, the Libyan Arab
Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania and the United
Republic of Tanzania, which jointly sponsored the
draft resolution contained in document S/12211. In
essence, his dramatic presentation referred to the
crisis existing today in southern Africa. As Mr. Jackson
said, it is a crisis affecting human dignity. It is not only
a crisis that concerns all the States that have pledged
themselves to abide by the standards of the United
Nations Charter but is also one which is a physical
threat to international peace and security in the area.
In our opinion, it is a matter of urgency that the
Council should perform its functions and take
immediate and effective action to put an end to this
situation, which is as reprehensible as it is intolerable
from every point of view.

52. Before concluding, I should like briefly to cite
another personal recollection. It goes as far back as
1967, when the meetings of the Ad Hoc Committee
for South. West Africa were held. I had something to
do with the setting up of the Committee.
Italy was
a member of that body and at one point in the
deliberations
my delegation took a stand that had
something in common with and something different
from that of the majority. I personally submitted a
plan containing a proposal that went beyond the one
that eventually led to the establishment of the United
Nations Council for Namibia. I did this on 15 March
1967, on behalf of my own delegation and the delegations of Canada and of the United States, which was
represented on the Ad Hut Committee by William
Rogers, who shortly afterwards became Secretary
of State.

57. Within the United Nations system the people of
Namibia have the right to independence and to the
exercise of their right of self-determination politically
and economically.
The statements made yesterday
in Pretoria by the Prime Minister of South Africa,
Mr. Vorster, reported in today’s issue of The NL’IV
York Times, show, for the benefit of international
public opinion, that South Africa continues to be an
obstacle to the liberation and genuine national independence of Namibia, and .that the spokesmen of
SWAP0 were right when they asserted that no real
progress had been made on the question of Namibia.
Those statements also show that at this stage there is
no consensus among the three main parties to the
conflict, that is, the United Nations, SWAP0 and
South Africa.

53. The document
we submitted7 contained the
following main proposals, consistent, in our view, with
resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2145 (XXI) of the General
Assembly: a,United Nations Council for South West
Africa would be established and a Special Representative of the Secretary-General
would be appointed;
the Special Representative would be entrusted, inter
n/in, with setting up, in close co-operation with the
Council, an interim governing body assembling al1
sections of the local population,
thus enabling the
people themselves to administer
the Territory in
accordance with their own expressed wishes.

58. In Mr. Vorster’s statements there may be found
the most shocking contradictions.
He says, for
example, that South West Africa-that
is, Namibia“does not belong to South Africa and that the Government of South Africa does not claim that Territory as

54. This last idea has apparently been resumed now,
nearIy 10 years later, by the South African authorities
7

to be optimistic-I-and
how I envy them!-despite
Mr. Vorster’s arrogant, absurd, arbitrary and defiant
attitude, an attitude which gives no hope or sign of
‘reaching an eventual understanding.

its own.” However, the Government of South Africa
does not withdraw its illegal administration
from
Namibia. In the same statement, Mr. Vorster says that
Namibia, which he calls South West Africa, belongs
to the “various peoples of South West Africa”, and
he adds: “Our attitude all along has been that it is
for those peoples whose land it is to decide their own
future”. That is nothing more nor less than a flouting
of the United Nations and an insult to one’s intelligence, for the Pretoria regime has in fact repeatedly
side-stepped the demand of the United Nations that
free elections be held in Namibia under the supervision and control of the United Nations.

63. Not only does Vorster refuse to recognize Sam
Nujoma, the President of SWAPO, as the true spokesman of the Namibian people-as the Council has done
officially-,
he persists in making all sorts of totally
unfounded claims which have no connexion whatevet
with reality, such as this statement, which he made
yesterday in Pretoria:
“South Africa, is not, as has often been stated,
the colonial Power I%ir-I+ South West Africa. We
are also not an occupation Power. We are an
administrative
Power, and our powers of administration were conferred upon us by the League of
Nations.”

59. Mr. Vorster goes on to say: “The peoples”-for
him they are not one but several peoples, in Namibia“are now gathered in a conference, mostly through
elected and properly elected leaders”-he
says they
are properly elected under a state of siege and a
savage colonial war- “and, in a few cases-the
minority-by
their natural leaders”. One wonders
what, in Mr. Vorster’s mind, “natural leaders” may
be. Those leaders, anyway, as Mr. Vorster goes on
to say, “will decide on their own procedures and
their own venue, without any interference-on the part
of the South African Government”.

That is already part of the political history of our era,
and it gives us some indication of the mentality of
the leader of the Pretoria regime. Obviously, he is not
on the same wave-length as the Council, and-so there
can be no agreement, no communication
between us.
64. Do Mr. Vorster’s words have more weight or
more force, than the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 21 June 1971?4 That advisory
opinion not only said the exact opposite of what
Mr. Vorster says but let to the conclusion
in that
South Africa was under the obligation
to withdraw
its administration from the Territory of Namibia, which
it was occupying illegally owing to the reprehensible
action of the South African Government.

60. Can there be democFatically
elected leaders
under a racist regime which openly defies United
Nations resolutions, where the people have suffered
the devastation of a savage colonial war waged against
them by South Africa, where the Namibian people are
virtually in a state of siege, and the electorate there is
subject to action by military forces against the civilian
population and also to the use of torture and intimidation by the military forces of the opn~theid regime
against the people of Namibia? I repeat, can there
be, in there circumstances, democratically
elected
representatives?

65. Under Article 25 of the Charter, when South
Africa became a Member of the United Nations it
agreed to accept and carry out the decisions of the
Security Council. Now that the Council has adopted
resolutions 264 (1969), 269 (1969), 366 (1974) and 385
(1976) demanding the withdrawal of the illegal administration that South Africa maintains in Namibia, how
is it possible for’ Vorster to say the following: “We
will end that administrative task if and when requested
to do so by the peoples of South West Africa through
their rightful representatives.” And he adds: “All over
the world it is recognized that the peoples have the
right to decide their own future”. Then he goes on
to say, with a cynicism which is unprecedented in the
history of mankind and which I doubt can be matched
by future generations: “I fail to understand why this
same right-the
right to decide their own future, the
right of self-determination-cannot
be granted to the
peoples of South West Africa”.
We are really in
another world here.

61. I think it can safely be said that Mr. Vorster’s
position is very clear and very cynical. That statement
is an indication of what, in his own political dictionary,
the term “elections”
means,
62. Mr. Vorster’s defiance of the United Nations
was made manifest once again when he said-and again
I quote directly from his statement-:
“I have nothing
to talk to SWAP0 [about] at all. Nujoma is neither a
natural nor an elected leader of any’of the peoples of
South West Africa.” Persisting in his attitude of open
defiance, he continued: “I don’t recognize his rights
[Nujoma’s
rights] or the right of his organization
[SWAPOJ to be the only representative of South West
Africa, as has been decided by various world bodies.”
That means that Vorster realizes that the Council and
the General Assembly recognize SWAPO-and
therefore Nujoma-as
the authentic
representative and
legitimate spokesman of the people of Namibia, but he
says that Nujoma is neither a natural nor an elected
leader and so he has nothing to say to him or to
SWAPO. And yet there are people here who continue

66. The efforts made by South Africa to destroy the
national unity and territorial integrity of Namibia by
means of its bantustan and so-called homelands policy
and by the supposed constitutional
conference of
Turnhalle are abominable and perfectly obvious. That
8

is why all that Vorster’s statements have done is to
make clear to the Council and to world public opinion
that the regime in Pretoria wants to place itself above
the authority of the Council, above the authority of
the General Assembly, above the authority of the
International
Court of Justice and, indeed, above
world public opinion, and to maintain its colonial
domination over Namibia and its harmful influence
in southern Africa.
67. With those profound convictions,
Vorster was
moved to say the following-and
I think this is an
insult to the Council-which
is published in today’s
New York Time. Asked whether he thought the United
Nations might impose sanctions on South Africa
since a group of third world countries is calling for
measures to force it to abandon npdzeid,
Mr. Vorster
said “I don’t see that as a possibility at all.” In other
words, he is not at all afraid of any thing the Council
may do, and that is for reasons of his own, reasons
that I would hardly venture to try to analyse here
-because they are too insulting to the intelligence of
the members of the Council. Furthermore,
he got
hogged down in contradictions
which are too absurd
to be offensive to anyone, however insulting they may
appear when they are read.
68. It is therefore understandable that Prime Minister
Vorster should have said that South Africa was not
prepared to participate in an international conference
to deal constitutionally
with the independence of
Namibia to be held at a neutral location under the
auspices of the United Nations. But in response to
a question from a newspaperman,
he said that, if
South Africa was invited as an observer, he would
give serious consideration to that possibility. But if
he accepted, that would be tantamount to inviting an
accused man to witness the autopsy of his victim
without having to answer questions or to assume any
responsibility,
confident that among his judges he
would find allies to ensure his acquittal.
69. Prime Minister Vorster said the following about
what he called Mr. Kissinger’s peace efforts, according
to the report in today’s issue of The NW* York Tiu~cs:
“His peace efforts., . were motivated by a common
desire to halt the spread of Soviet influence in the
area.” And he added:
“Part of the world domination
aspect is the
Soviet’s aim to dominate southern Africa. If the
world ignores this, they will do so at their own
risk. Not only will a bastion of the West be lost”-if
Vorster and his men represent Western culture,
1 hardly wish to belong to “Western culture”“but the sea route round the Cape and through the
Indian Ocean will be at the mercy of the Soviets.”
70. It is obvious that what Mr. Vorster wants to do
by making statements of this kind is to divert world
attention from the colonial problem of Namibia and to
find political allies elsewhere in the world by reviving

the cold war and conflicting ideologies. His methods
are familiar. He is trying to fish in troubled waters
and delude the unwary. However, the problem of
decolonization
in Africa, as in Latin America and
elsewhere, does not brook any delay for the exercise
of the right of self-determination
can never be subordinated to conflicting ideologies, whether rea] or
imaginary. Much less can decolonization and selfdetermination be subordinated to unilateral claims by
any Power wishing to control the great shipping
routes of the world. That belongs to the past. Mr. Vorster, in his absurd outbursts, now wishes to involve the
Western Powers and set them against certain other
Powers in order to satisfy his desire to control the
shipping route round the Cape and through the Indian
Ocean. For this purpose, he is trying to stir up
hostility against the Asian and non-aligned countries
which wish, as was stated at the Fifth Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries in Colombo a few weeks ago, the Indian Ocean
to be a zone of peace free from Great Power rivalry.
In the political declaration of the Conference the right
is asserted of ships of all nations:
LL. . . to free and unimpeded use of the Indian Ocean
by their vessels in conformity with international law
as long as such vessels pose no military or strategic
threat to the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the littoral and hinterland States.“x
71. That system, which doubtless will apply to all
international shipping routes and waterways, is valid
for the Cape route as for the Suez Canal, the Panama
Canal, the Kiel Canal, the Bosphorus, the Dardanelles
or any other maritime transport route. There is nothing
new about that. At the Potsdam Conference, the
President of the United States, Mr. Harry S. Truman,
suggested, that to safeguard future peace and world
security international
waterways should be open to
free and unrestricted use by all the nations of the world.
72. We repeat, the right of self-determination and the
process of decolonization cannot be stopped in Africa
or anywhere else in the world because of the desires
of a colonial Power to control the territories of other
peoples or nations on the pretext of national security.
which has no place in this discussion and which has
no relation in our world of nuclear.,interspatial
and
other technology. Claims with respect to the Cape
route and access to the Indian Ocean cannot be
used as an excuse to oppose the liberation of Namibia,
and the same applies to using that excuse with respect
to the Panama Canal as a pretext for not ending the
colonial enclave under the jurisdiction of a foreign
Power on the sovereign territory of Panama.
73. History is on the side of decolonization. The
Suez Canal has been under the sovereign control of
Egypt, with the support of the major Powers, since
1956, and the Canal Zone in Panama should as soon
as possible be under the full sovereignty and
jurisdiction of the State of Panama.

regards the growing threat to international peace and
security posed by South Africa’s brazen attitude, the
delegation of the Republic of Panama, with all due
respect, insists that we adopt the draft resolution
sponsored by Benin, Guyana, the Libyan Arab
Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania and the United
Republic of Tanzania, which recommends that the
necessary measures be taken under Chapter VII ef
the Charter to put an end to the tragic suffering
of
the Namibian
people and to restore peace and
tranquillity in the area.

74. Mr. Vorster, in his absurd efforts to assert what
cannot be upheld, tries to play the role of the advocate
of an ideological war for his own interests. From time
to time we hear about ideological aggression and the
need to protect oneself against that type of attack, the
results of which do seem to hurt not the body but the
minds of people. Can there be ideological aggression
on the part of those who advocate respect for the
principle of equal rights, on the part of those who
advocate the exercise of the right of self-determination
as a means of promoting among nations those very
friendly relations which serve to create a climate
favourable to universal peace? On the contrary, we
believe that there can be genuine international COoperation, as the Charter states, unless we promote
development
and respect for self-determination,
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, without
distinction as to race, sex, language or religion.

80. The PRESIDENT:
There are no further speakers,
If no other representative wishes to speak at this stage,
I should like to make a statement. in my capacity
as the representative of PAKISTAN.
81. During the Council’s consideration of this qnestion in January this year, I made a statement ea
Pakistan’s position [I88316 meting]
on the substance
of the issue. I shall confine myself on this occasion
to stating the views of my delegation on the develop.
ments which have taken place since the.meetings in
January.

75. Those who advocate those ideals, the ideals set
out in the Charter, are not committing
ideological
aggression. Those who advocate the defence of tran+sitory political interests are accomplices in acts of
colonial exploitation
and usurp the riches and the
natural wealth of other countries. As a matter of fact,
they are committing ideological suicide, eroding their
national image and undermining their ability to have a
positive influence on world events.

82. Council resolution 385 (1976) in its principal
demand called upon South Africa to withdraw from
Namibia and to transfer power to the people of the
Territory with the assistance of the United Nations.
The Council has been meeting now to consider whether
South Africa has complied with those demands and, if
not, what appropriate measures it .might take under
the Charter to bring about such compliance.

76. The facts show that the Pretoria regime is not
prepared to put an end to its colonial domination of
Namibia. It is well known that the United Nations
Council for Namibia has reported that South Africa
has granted further mining concessions to a number of
Western companies from the United States, Canada,
France and the United Kingdom, and the same reports
estimate that foreign investments in South Africa
amount to $10,000 million and represent primarily
interests in the United States, the United King#om
and West Germany. Furthermore,
South Africa,
according to reliable data, is continuing to try to
attract further foreign investment to explore the
resources of diamonds, copper, lead and uranium in the
Territory of Namibia,

83. It is suggested that the so-called constitutional
talks which are taking place at Windhoek on the
initiative of South Africa somehow constitute a step
towards compliance with the Council resolution. In
support of this contention, it is pointed out that the
declaration of intent issued by the Constitutional
Committee of the South West African Constitutional
Conference [S/12180, ~~/t/tes] has in fact set a date
-3 I December
1978-f-r
the independence of
Namibia,

77. The General Assembly has proclaimed in resolution 1314 (XIII) that: “,,. the right of peoples and
nations to self-determination,, , includes ‘permanent
sovereignty over their natural wealth and resources’ “.
The General Assembly has stated also that it believes’
that no people can be considered independent if its
economic order is subjected to foreign domination.

84. ,, As regards the constitutional talks, the position of
my delegation is that they have ho legal validity in
view of the Council’s own unanimously
adopted
resolutions. Why otherwise should the Council have
declared it to be imperative
that the people of
Namibia be enabled freely to determine its own future
in elections held for the whole of Namibia and that
those elections be held under the supervision aad
control of the United Nations’?

78. It is the duty of the Security Council to support
the inalienable right of the weak nations of the world
over their resources and to protect that right from.
interference and usurpation by individuals, corporations or foreign States.

85. Furthermore, in order to put matters in persPe0
tive, to evaluate the real significance of the Wlndhcek
talks and of South Africa’s policies, we are entitled
to ask a series of specific questions about the situation
in the Territory. Has South Africa lifted the racially
discriminatory
and repressive laws and practices
applied to the Territory’? Have political prisoners and

79. In summary, both as regards South Africa’s
violation of the rights of the people of Namibia to
political
and ecnnomic self-determination
and as
IO

“Counsels for patience no longer carry conviction with the Namibian people. A regime which has
so clearly manifested its cruel features in the massacres of Sharpe%lle and Soweto and in wanton
aggression against its neighbours can hardly be
expected to bring justice to the people of Namibia,
Their freedom will have to be achieved through
militant struggle and further sacrifice.

those detained under so-called internal security laws
been released? Has South Africa facilitated the return
of Namibians in exile?
86. The situation prevailing in the Territory was
succinctly described by the leader of SWAP0 in his
address to the Security Council on 28- Septembet
[/Y5156t/t nlrc/i/i,y]. Mr. Nujoma gave the Council a
graphic account of South Africa’s continuing repression of the indigenous people of Namibia,
of its
stepped-up military presence and activity, of the
proclamation
of martial law in northern Namibia, of
the uprooting of whole communities from their homes
and their transfer to concentration camps, and of the
use of Namibia as a springboard for attacks against the
neighbouring States of Angola and Zambia. In short,
far from taking measures to withdraw from Namibia,
South Africa has tightened its grip on that Territory
and turned it into a virtual police State.

“Political
manoeuvres cannot succeed in subverting this struggle. The so-called constitutional
arrangements promoted by the Pretoria regime are
neither legal nor acceptable to the people of Namibia. South Africa’s obligation is to withdraw forthwith from the Territory. It is only under the auspices
of the United Nations that the people of Namibia
will be able to institute a free and representative
Government.”
90. This morning’s press contains a restatement by
Mr. Vorster of South Africa’s policy towards Namibia.
Mr. Vorster concedes that South West Africa does not
belong to South Africa and that the future of the
Territory must be decided by its people. He disclaims
the idea that South Africa is a colonial Power or,
indeed, that it is occupying Namibia. The powers of
administration
which Mr. Vorster considers his
country still continues to enjoy-despite
the categorical opinion to the contrary given by the International Court of Justice more than five years ago4-will
be laid down, Mr. Vorster tells us, only when and if
a request to that effect is made by the people of South
West Africa through their rightful representative;.
However, these rightful representatives are apparently
not to be elected in a free election, but selected under
the aegis of South Africa itself.

87. The Council has on this occasion heard the views
of no less than 40 countries, many of them having
been represented here by their Ministers for Foreign
Affairs. This attests to the importance the whole world
attaches to the question of Namibia and the crucial
stage which it has now reached. Nor can the Council
overlook the significance of the fact that the representatives of so many countries, coming from all parts
of the globe, have been unanimous in their analysis
of the situation and in their expectations regarding
action by the Council.
88. Since the passage of Council resolution 385 (1976)
at the beginning of this year, the question of Namibia
has been debated in many international conferences
which have without exception expressed their full
support for the people of Namibia in its struggle for
independence
and territorial
integrity.
During the
seventh Islamic Foreign Ministers’ Conference, held in
May this year in Istanbul, the Islamic countries adopted
a decision, which my country had the honour to
propose, reiterating their commitment to the struggle
against racism in South Africa, Namibia and Zimbabwe. The Conference called upon all member States
and the international community to implement fully
the United Nations resolutions on the elimination of
racial discrimination
and to decide to expand and
intensify support for those peoples and recommend
. applicatibn
of sanctions under Chapter VII of the
Charter in order to secure implementation
of the
resolutions on this subject. The Conference of Heads
of State’or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries,
held in Colombo in August this year, similarly
declared its unreserved support for the cause of the
Namibian
people ‘in its just struggle for freedom and
independence and called for similar action.

93. To ask the people of Namibia to exercise further
patience, to ask the Council to hold its hand, amounts
in the circumstances to a plea to allow South Africa
to set the pace and direction of events.

89. Pakistan’s position on this issue is unequivocal
and has been consistent from the very beginning. In
his message on the occasion of Namibia Day this
year the Prime Minister of Pakistan, Mr. Zulfikar
Ali Bhutto, observed, inter alia, that

94. The draft resolution before the Council [S/l221 I]
speaks for itself. In the circumstances
prevailing in
Namibia today it can be described as limited in its
aim and the least that the Council can do at this stage.
My delegation hopes that the draft resolution will be

91. South Africa refuses to recognize that SWAP0
is an organization representing the people of Namibia.
Mr. Vorster says he has nothing to discuss with
SWAPO.
Instead, South Africa continues to keep
SWAP0 leaders in gaol or exile.
92. Mr. Vorster’s
views could be considered
ingenuous if they did not so grotesquely distort the
truth. The most charitable description of Mr. Vorster’s
utterances is that they are an exercise in self-delusion.
At any rate, they dash the expectations which were
aroused by the recent effort to bring about a peaceful
settlement in Namibia, negotiated between its illegal
occupants and Namibia’s rightful representatives,

11

adopted. We consider that those who have uttered
warnings about the danger of a prolonged guerrilla
war in the Territory will nevertheless stand in the
way of a decision to prevent the means of war from
reaching the party which, by its defiance of international law and the will of the international
community, bears the responsibility for the violence which
prevails and the conflict which looms. Failure by the
Council to act will affect its own authority
and
prestige; it cannot prevent the ineluctable course of
history.

Substantial progress has been made toward reaching
a peaceful settlement to the Namibian problem in.
consultation with South Africa and the interested
African parties. We have in sight the possibility of
independence for Namibia, which the Council has
sought so persistently for so many years. We do not
feel that the measures called for in the draft resolution
before us will improve the chances to gain a free and
independent Namibia. In fact, they could do just the
opposite. It would be tragic if the delicate fabric of
negotiations were to be torn asunder by any precipitate
move at this time. For those reasons my delegation
will vote against the draft resolution.

95. Speaking as PRESIDENT,
I take it that the
Council is ready to proceed to a vote on the draft
resolution in document S/1221 1.

100. At this point I want to cover very briefly one
element of the draft resolution. The United States
has continued to enforce its own arms embargo against
South Africa. We initiated this embargo in 1962, even
before the Council called for a voluntary embargo
the following year.

96. I shall now call on those representatives who
wish to speak in explanation of their vote before the
voting.
97. Mr. SCRANTON
(United States of America):
We rejoice, Sir, in your presidency, with its marked
evidence of sterling leadership. We are grateful, also,
to Ambassador Kikhia for his presidential guidance
of the Council during the month of September.

101. Inclosing, I want to emphasize, and emphasize
strongly, to the Council that the United States has
made clear to South Africa the urgent need for
unqualified independence for Namibia. We are keeping
the Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim, informed of the
progress of our negotiations and shall continue to do
so, and we are in regular contact with the front-line
Presidents. The United States, I pledge to the Council, will not flag in these efforts.

98. The United States’ concern with the Namibian
problem has been demonstrated dramatically by the
continuing efforts of Secretary of State Kissinger to
assist the parties involved in finding a peaceful solution
to the problem. As the Council knows, Mr. Kissinger
outlined the United States position on the Namibian
and the Rhodesian negotiations in a speech two weeks
ago to the General Assembly. On the question of
Namibia he said:

102. Mr. MURRAY
(United Kingdom):
Let me
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. You bring to the office
wide experience of the chairmanship of international
bodies and sensitive diplomatic skill. I should like
also to associate myself with the tributes paid to
Ambassador Kikhia for the competent and goodhumoured way in which he presided over our deliberations last month.

“In recent months, the United States has
vigorously sought to help the parties concerned
speed up the process towards Namibian independence. The United States favours the following
elements: the independence of Namibia within a
fixed, short time-limit; the calling of a constitutional
conference at a neutral location under aegis of the
United Nations; and the participation in that conference of all authentic national forces, including
specifically SWAPO. Progress has been made in
achieving all those goals. We will exert our efforts to
remove the remaining obstacles and bring into being
a conference which can then fashion, with goodwill
and wisdom, a design for the new State of Namibia
and its relationship with its neighbours. We pledge
our continued solicitude for the independence of
Namibia so that it may, in the end, be a proud
achievement of this Organization and a symbol of
international co-operation.“g

103. I should like briefly now to explain the attitude
of my delegation to the draft resolution before us.
104. My Government stands unequivocally for the
achievement of independence by Namibia as a single
State with its territory intact and within the shortest
possible time, We have said so on many occasions,
both publicly and in private to the South African
Government and other interested parties. While we
believe that the Windhoek Conference has served to
demonstrate the need for rapid ‘change both to the
South African Government and to the white population of Namibia, we have said often that we do not
regard the Conference as representative, nor can we
agree that its decisions represent the full exercise by
the people of Namibia
of their right of seifdetermination.
We have consistently
urged that
SWAP0 should be brought into any discussions which
may be held on an early transfer of power from South
Africa to the elected representatives of the Namibian
people. We therefore support any discussions between

99. It is my firm belief that while the sensitive
process of consultation is going on it does not serve
a useful purpose for the Council to take new initiatives
on the Namibian
question. After many years of
frustration in trying to bring Namibia to independence,
we have now for the first time the prospect of results.
12

South Africa, SWAP0
to that end.

and the other interested parties

105, We continue to support the important provisions
of resolution 385 (1976), and in particular its call for
free elections in the Territory under United Nations
supervision and control. We also believe that free
elections require the fulfilment
of certain other
measures, such as those specified in paragraph 11 of
resolution 385 (1976), which are reproduced in
operative paragraph 10 of the draft resolution before
us, We call particularly upon South Africa to release
all political prisoners at an early date, so that they
can participate in the political life of Namibia and in
any further negotiations or constitutional discussions
that may take place.
106. There is no doubt that South Africa has disregarded the provisions of resolution 385 (1976). We
deplore that because we believe that that resolution
set out a series of steps for the achievement of independence which were and remain both just and
realistic. South Africa must realize that Namibia is an
international problem, whatever view one may take
of the way in which South Africa’s Mandate came to
an end. It follows that some form of United Nations
involvement in the steps leading to independence is
indispensable if the world community is to be satisfied
that the people of Namibia have freely exercised their
right of self-determination.
107. At the same time, we should not ignore the fact
that some progress has been made. Important discussions have been going on with a Siew to bringing
together the parties most immediately concerned, and
in particular SWAP0 and the South African Government. We unreservedly support those efforts since we
believe that the discussions envisaged may pave the
way for the peaceful and democratic implementation
of resolution 385 (1976). We believe that a great deal
can still be achieved by quiet diplomacy.
108. It is for this reason above all that my delegation
believes that the draft resolution before us is inappropriate both in timing and in substance. We recognize
the feelings of impatience
and frustration which
prompted the presentation of the draft. The question
of Namibia has been before the United Nations fol
some 30 years, and it is only in the last year or two
that there have been any signs of progress towards
the goal of independence. Now that progress is being
made, however, and now that there is some hope of
substantive discussions on a transfer of power, we
believe that the Council should not be asked to vote
for a determination
that the situation in Namibia
constitutes a threat to international peace and security
under Chapter VI1 of the Charter. We made out
position clear on this to all concerned at the outset of
our deliberations here, It is well known that we do not
supply arms to South Africa, and we have taken pains
lo ensure that our exporl licence system is effective.
We are not prepared, however, to support a Chapter VII determination.

109. My delegation wanted a constructive resolution
built upon the foundations laid in resolutions 366 (1974)
and 385 (1976) which could have been adopted
unanimously and which could have served to increase
the pressures on the South African Government. For
the ‘reasons I have explained we cannot regard the
present text as constructive in this respect, and my
delegation will vote against it.
110. Mr. LECOMPT
(France) (jnte,p~~~totio/z $YH~Z
French): It is with great regret that the French delegation will have to oppose the adoption of the draft
resolution submitted for our consideratioh.
111. As is clear from the general statement I made
at the beginning of this meeting, we are not opposed
to the substance of the text, most of the provisions
of which my delegation is prepared to accept. Nor are
we opposed to the request for an embargo on weapons.
The reason for our vote concerns the application of
Chapter VII of the Charter, which we consider to be
inappropriate.
We would have preferred a text that
could have been adopted unanimously.
112. My Government hopes there will be an early
settlement of the Namibian question. It is ready to
renew the pressures it has exerted upon the Government of South Africa on numerous occasions, and it
is ready to make them more effective still. We merely
consider that under the present circumstances, the conditions justifying
the application of the measures
provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter are not
present. At present discussions are taking place the
purpose and scope of which are important and perhaps
decisive for the future of southern Africa. We should
let them take their course and promote peaceful
solutions when they are possible. That is one of the
roles of the United Nations and of the Council.
I 13. France, I would again repeat, does not intend to
protect South Africa. In condemning the policy of
that country it expects, on the contrary, that as a
result of the efforts and pressures now being exerted
from various quarters the Government of Pretoria will
cease to persist in its negative attitude and will soon
shown the necessary realism..
114. The PRESIDENT:
1 call on the representative
of Panama on a point of order.
1 15.

Mr.

I LLU ECA (Panama) (i/rt~‘/p/‘c’/c;lit111 ,fi*cjl?~
1 have listened very carefully to the statements that have been made in explanation of vote,
and I note that according to rule 32 of the provisional
rules of procedure,
Spcrnish):

“Parts of a motion or of a draft resolution shall
be voted on separately at the request of any representative, unless the original mover objects.”
I think that the preambular
be voted on separately, and
the operative part.

par1 of the draft should
we should then vote on

116. A number of representatives
have expressed
great concern at the situation. I think separate votes
would make it very clear that the Council is concerned
at the situation, and those who are not in favour of
the measures could vote against them. But if we are
in favour at least of the considerations contained in the
preambular part, I think that that would constitute a
clear message to world public opinion.

Ahstdning:

Italy, Japan.

The result of the vote w0s 10 in fiwour, 3 rrgnirlst,
NIR/ 2 abstentions.
The cimft resolution
IWIS riot
dopted, the negative votes being those of pemanetlt
members of the Council.

122. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call on those
members of the Security Council who wish to speak
in explanation of vote.

117. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
of the Uriited Republic of Tanzania, who wishes to
speak on this point of order.

BOYA
(Benin)
(intrrpretntion
fiwn
On 28 September, Comrade Michel Alladaye,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of the
People’s Republic of Benin, speaking in the Council
on the question of Namibia, stated inter nlia:
123.

Mr.

French):

118. Mr. SALEM (United Republic of Tanzania):
My delegation will have something to say concerning
tlie statements of the United States, the United Kingdom and others in explanation of vote. But at this
time I should like to address an appeal to my colleague
of Panama-much
as I understand the spirit in which
he has made it-not to insist upon his proposal.

“If the imperialist West sincerely wants peace to
be restored to that part of the world, without further
pointless bloodshed, we are certain that the peoples
of southern Africa are ready to study with it the conditions for that restoration of peace. But, first and
foremost, NATO [North Atlmtic
Treaty Orgmiznticm] and the States members of that organization
must stop supplying war material to the Fascist
and racist Vorster rkgime;
France must stop
delivering nuclear reactors to South Africa; the
United Kingdom
must stop supplying military
electronic material to the Fascist and racist Vorster
rCgime.” [1956th meeting, paw. 46.1

119. For very obvious reasons, the main thrust of the
draft resolution before the Council-and,
in fact, the
pu,rpose of the draft-is
contained in its operative
paragraphs. The many preambular paragraphs of the
text have already been voted upon by the Council
on a number of occasions in one form or another.
, In view of the importance we attach to the situation as
a whole and the nature of the text itself, we would
hope that the draft will be voted upon as a whole.
120. It is rather embarrassing for me to have to
address this appeal to the representative of Panama
because, first, Panama’s commitment
to the struggle
of our brothers in Namibia is well known; secondly,
my delegation is aware of Ambassador Illueca’s own
personal commitment and efforts which have led to the
presentation of the draft; and, thirdly, Panama is one
of the sponsors of the draft. For the reasons I have
cited I am sure my friend, colleague and brother the
representative
of Panama
will understand
and
appreciate my appeal to him and respond to it, so
that we need not proceed to vote separately upon
the parts of the draft.

124’. The result of the vote which has just been held
is very clear: those who, by their veto, have just
blocked the adoption of the draft resolution of which
the People’s Republic of Benin was a sponsor have
indicated unambiguously their unshakable determination to support, economically
and, above all,
politically, Vorster’s Fascist and racist rCgime. Those
who, by their veto, have just prevented the adoption
of this draft resolution
have shown that their
clamouring for a peaceful settlement and for an end to
bloodshed in South Africa is nothing but pure
hypocrisy.

121. The PRESIDENT:
I gather that the representative of Panama, one of the sponsors of the draft,
does not insist on his motion. Accordingly,
I shall
now put to the vote the draft resolution sponsored by
Benin, Guyana, the Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania and the United Republic of Tanzania
contained in document S/ 122 11 I

125. However, the vote has also shown that the
support for the struggle of the people of Namibia by
the peoples af the world that cherish peace and justice
is constantly increasing. How could it be otherwise,
for the cause of the Namibian people is a just cause?
Freedom fighters throughout the world, especially in
southern Africa, will not be at aII surprised by the
result of the vote. Freedom fighters in southern Africa
have come to understand that it is only by persisting
in their armed struggle and by making enormous
sacrifices that they will eliminate all the monster’s and
all evil influences. It is only by persisting in a long
struggle that the people of Namibia will finally win thei
freedom and independence, The people of Namibia are
well aware of the fact that theirs will be a long, hard
struggle, but that victory is certain. Therefore the
struggle will continue.

In ,firr*o,r,*: Benin, China, Guyana, ,Libyan Arab
Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Republic of
Tanzania.
~,~oin,sr: France, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
14

126. Mr. SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania):
My delegation very much regrets the triple veto
imposed today by the delegations of the United States,
the United Kingdom and France. This is a sorrowful
repetition of the 1975 performance. Perhaps the only
new element to be noted is that this time some of
those who have found it prudent to block the decision
of the Council have come out with a new rationale to
justify their veto. And yet, one would have thought
that events in southern Africa, as well as the Council’s
own previous actions on this matter, would have
dictated wiser counsels.

vote [lc)Ohth meeting:]. For the first time in the history
of this Organization a Member State was specifically
condemned as an aggressor. And as if that were not
sufficient, the Council also specifically condemned
South Africa’s aggression against the Republic of
Zambia. This was as recently as July this year.
131. And yet there is one common factor in both
condemnations and in both situations, and that is that
in the perpetration of the aggression the South African
regime used the Territory of Namibia to mount such
aggression. Yet we are told today by responsible
spokesmen that the situation in Namibia does not
constitute a threat to international peace and security,

127. We have listened with the utmost interest and
attention, as always, to the statements explaining the
respective voles of the delegations which have once
again abused-and
I emphasize the word “abused”
-their right of veto. I do not intend to dwell at length
on any of the exposes that have been given here,
but it is essential, if only for the purpose of the record
and for the benefit of world public opinion, to put the
situation in its proper perspective.

132. I also need hardly repeat what is obvious, and
that is that the South African Government has
proceeded with an incredible military build-up in
Namibia itself, thus not only continuing its role of
repression against the people of Namibia but-of no
less importance and concern particularly to us in
Africa-posing
a constant threat to the sovereignty,
territorial
integrity
and independence of African
States. Yet we are told that the situation does not
pose a threat to international peace and security.

128. I must say, first and foremost, that I was amazed
and astonished to hear in the Council a repetition of
an argument which must amaze everyone who wishes
to view the situation in southern Africa with the
seriousness that it deserves. I refer to the argument
that the situation in Namibia does not constitute a
threat to international peace and security. Of course,
there is nothing new in that assertion, but what is
disturbing is that such an assertion could be made
today after all that has happened in southern Africa.

133. I should really like to be educated by those who
have made such statements as to what in their judgement would constitute a threat to international peace
and security. A full-scale, bloody racial war in the
region? An all-out confrontation? Or is it, in their
judgement, only when a situation threatens certain
areas or certain States that it can be presumed that a
situation threatens international peace and security?

129. The argument that the situation in Namibia does
not constitute a threat to international
peace and
security was advanced in June 1975, when the representatives of three permanent members of the Council vetoed the then very reasonable draft resolution
[S/11713] presented to the Council.
But in the
intervening period, both by the many statements
made by responsible leaders of those very countries
and by the evolution of events, one would have
thought that that argument had been put to rest. I need
hardly go over the grounds. which have been so
eloquently explained by my colleague, friend and
brother, the representative of Guyana who introduced
the draft resolution on our behalf [1962ncf meetirzgl.
But is it really seriously asserted that the situation in
Namibia does not pose a threat to international peace
and security? Do those who make this assertion
seriously believe that to be the case? Let us examine
very briefly what has happened since June last year.
In fact, I do not see the need of going back as far as
June of last year; let us just examine the situation
since the beginning of this year.

134. Some have found it wise, in explaining and
rationalizing their non-support of the draft resolution
before this Council, to allude to press reports to the
effect that the United States Government is taking
some initiatives. I do not have to deal at length with
this argument because those who read press reports
should also find it convenient to read today’s press
reports.
135. The representative of Panama, with his characteristic wisdom and attention to the subject, has
done the necessary homework and has briefed the
Council on what the state of play is so far as the South
African position is concerned. But a more important
element is involved here. Even granted that a member
of the Council or a Member of the United Nations
is involved in some sort of an initiative, what has that
to do with the Council’s fulfilling its responsibilities?
To my knowledge-and
I must admit that my delegation was actively involved in the formulation of the
draft resolution which was adopted in January of this
year-there is nothing in resolution 385 (1976) which
says that the Council will meet on or about 31 August
to determine the appropriate measures to be taken,
but will not do so in the event that one member
decides to take some initiative. In fact, I find this
logic particularly pathetic, especially when I remem-

130. The spurtheid regime in South Africa, utilizing
the international Territory of Namibia, mounted naked
aggression against the People’s Republic of Angola,
a point which was also rightly stressed by the representative of Sweden when he explained his delegation’s

15

of the height of arrogance on the part of the rulers in
Pretoria.

ber that in the course of the discussion last January
on the question of Namibia we were informed by none
other than the representatives
of the European
Economic Community (EEC) that they, on their own,
were also taking initiatives, that they had made an
approach to South Africa, that they would continue
to take some initiatives in respect of the necessity for
South Africa to comply with the decisions of the
Council. At that time, we were not informed that
because of such initiatives the Council should not
adopt any resolution or should not fulfil its responsibilities.

139. The fact remains that since the Council adopted
that resolution the South Africans have continued to
do everything they were doing before in Namibia and
in fact to make things worse in that Territory, The
Council has called upon South Africa to cease the
repressive measures. Rather than ceasing those
measures, the South Africans have intensified their
repressive measures. The Council has called upon
South Africa to stop the bantustanization
of the
Territory. The South African response has been to
proceed with further bantustanization.
The Council has
called upon South Africa not to evade its clear call
in respect of the holding of free elections under United
Nations supervision and control. The South Africans
have proceeded to the puffing up of their puppets in
the Territory with a view to trying to give them a
semblance of legitimacy. In short, none of the demands
made by the Council have been complied with by the
South African authorities.
What is perhaps even
worse is thal the South African regime, with its usual
characteristic contempt for the Organization, has not
even bothered to reply to the Council or to state
anything to the Council in respect of its demands.

136. I am even more disturbed by the explanation
given by the representative of the United States, who
seemed to have rationalized his country’s opposition
to the draft resolution as being partly because of
the continuing consultations that Secretary Kissinger
and his Government are having with a number of
front-line States. I am disturbed because, if consultations or contacts between a particular Governmenf
and other Governments are being used as a justification for inaction or for blocking action, ‘then a time
may come when people will be sceptical or overcautious about indulging in any consultations.
137. At any rate, I submit to the Council that whatever consultations the United States may undertake
with respect to Namibia, whatever consultations the
EEC may undertake with respect to Namibia, whatever pressure they may put on the Government of
South Africa, the fact remains that the Council has
a clear responsibility
to undertake and to fulfil,
notwithstanding such consultations.

140. This is the situation we are confronted with.
Yet, instead of the Council’s assuming its responsibilities, as it should, we have the spectacle of a repetition of the triple veto. What does the veto imply?
I have said before, and I wish to stress again, that we
do not make it a point to doubt the motivations and
the sincerity of Governments.
But there can be no
doubt that this triple veto is yet another demonstration
Of their insensitivity to African aspirations. There can
be no doubt, despite claims to the contrary, that the
veto cannot but give comfort and support to the South
African Government, There can also be no doubt that
the veto cannot but serve to erode further the credibility of the United Nations. For it is quite clear, and
in fact it is only logical, that the South Africans
cannot be expected to take Council seriously, to take
this Organization seriously, if every time we discuss
a problem in relation to South Africa we,end up with
a formulation which threatens, warns, gives ultimatums
collectively agreed upon; but when it comes to final
action, that action is blocked by those who consider
it prudent to block it,

138. When the Council adopted resolution 385 (1976)
it did so in the hope that more time would be given
to the South Africans so that they might yet see the
light, Some have talked in the Council of the need for
moderation and patience. I do not know to whom this
appeal for moderation and patience is addressed. All
the members of the Council were members of the
Council in January and they know what patience and
moderation were demonstrated by-to begin with-the
aul.hentic representative of the people of Namibia,
SWAPO, and the representatives of the Group of
African States, as well as the African representatives
in the Council, which in fact led to the resolution
that was adopted in January. That type of moderation,
that type of patience, was demonstrated as another
sign of goodwill, particularly on the part of the African
members of Council, to those who kept telling us that
there would be movement on South Africa and that
they would try to do their utmost to change the
situation and to ensure that South Africa complied with
the decisions of the United Nations. However, since
that resolution was adopted more’than eight months
ago it is clear that the South Africans have remained
as intransigent as ever, as reca!citrant as ever. Those
who still entertain any doubts I would advise to read
again The New Y& Times to see whether what
Mr. Vorster has to say is not a clear demonstration

141. There is one more aspect which particularly
worries the Tanzanian delegation in respect Of Yet
another demonstration
of solidarity-unfortunatelYl
for a wrong cause-by
the United States, Prayce
and the United Kingdom, To veto a draft resolution
on an arms embargo against South Africa at a time
when the people in South Africa are subjected to the
most inhuman brutalities, whether it be in Scwctc Or
in other places, at a time when the South African
aggression against African States has become more a
rule than an exception, at a time when South Africa’s
defiance of United Nations decisions has become
16

legendary, is, I submit, to give tacit support to the
South African authorities. In our opinion, to provide
a situation in which South Africa can depend on the
continued inflow of arms not only is contrary to the
proclamations of moralities and principles expounded
by those countries but, above all, does tremendous
damage to their own reputation.

to the African and other States whose representatives
have spoken in the Council in favour of the immediate
granting of independence to the people of Namibia,
The Ministers for Foreign Affairs and representatives of more than 30 countries have spoken out
unconditionally
in favour of the earliest possible
implementation
of the provisions that are clearly set
forth in the seven-Power draft resolution submitted
to the Council.

142. Where do we go from here? As my brother, the
representative of Benin, rightly pointed out, we, the
African members of the Council, have no illusion
that it is the Council’s decisions which will bring
independence to Namibia. We have no doubt that,
in the final analysis, it is up to the people of Namibia
themselves to continue their struggle until final
victory is won. However, the veto does a few things.
It enhances the degree of frustration and indignation
of the people of Namibia. It encourages and promotes
cynicism on the part of those who would really wish
to see a less violent solution to the problem of Namibia. It certainly provides additional ammunition
to
the South Africans in their war of aggression against
the people of Namibia. Therefore those who have
found it prudent once again to impose their veto would
be well advised to consider the consequences of their
action. They would be well advised to understand that,
as a result of their action in thus preventing the Council taking meaningful action, they are preparing the
ground for more bloodshed and more frustration in
Namibia and, for that matter, in southern Africa.

147. That draft resolution did not appear yesterday
for the first time; it was submitted to all members
of the Council some time ago. It would have been
possible to introduce amendments to the draft resolution to enable us to adopt unanimously a new decision which would speed up Namibia’s liberation from
the racist colonial yoke of South Africa. Nevertheless.
no one expressed a wish to add anything in order to
achieve such a decision. We felt that the draft resolution was the minimum that the Council could adopt
after such a lengthy discussion: it should have been
adopted unanimously; in that way, the Council would
have contributed to the solution of that problem which
is so pressing not only for the peoples of Namibia
and South Africa but for the whole of Africa,
148. What teasons did those who voted against and,
those who, regrettably,
abstained-as
mentioned
by the representative of Tanzania-put
forward in
explanation of their positions’? They said that they
would not want to interfere in the negotiations. that
we should not endanger the tenuous contacts that had
taken place. They claimed that some pl’ogress had been
made in the situation in Namibia and that something
positive was happening in Namibia. The representatives of Panama and Tanzania told us in detail what is
taking place today in southern Africa, where the
Namibian people have been oppressed worse than
since the events of January. Not only has the position
not become better, it has grown worse: not only has
the ruthless exploitation of Namibia by transnational
corporations, which are fermly established there. not
stopped, it has been intensified; not only have the
South African troops not been withdrawn. they have
been so strongly reinforced that their numbers are a
threat to the independent States of Southern African
the whole African continent, which are rightly concerned for their own safety. I am convinced that if
that draft resolution had been adopted today it would
have been correctly understood not only here in the
United Nations but also throughout the world.

143. I cannot conclude
my statement without
expressing our regret that the delegations of Japan and
Italy saw fit once again to abstain in the vote on the
draft resolution. Again, we do not doubt their sincerity,
but we believe that their action too, in the present
circumstances, can only be helpful to the illegal South
African occupiers of Namibia.
144. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (inf~rprettrtion ,fkonl Russitrn): After the
two previous statements by members of the Council,
that by the representative of Benin and the clear,
convincing statement
by the representative
of
Tanzania, I have very little to say; but in this situation
1 must give the position of my delegation.
145. The delegation of the Soviet Union deeply
regrets that the lengthy and comprehensive consideration of the question of Namibia did not lead to the
only legitimate and positive result: a solution of that
question in the interest of the people of Namibia.
The Council’s decision was blocked by those States
which, in accordance with the Charter, bear, along
with other States, the major responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security and fol
promoting the principles
of equality
and selfdetermination for all peoples.

We are surprised at the attitude of those delega149.
tions which have prevented the Council from taking
a useful decision today. It cannot be regarded as
anything but an attempt to sabotage the application Of
the principles of the Charter [o Namibia, an attempt
to perpetuate the illegal and shameful occupation of
that African territory and to prevent the people of
Namibia from achieving real freedom and independence.

146. Today, once again, we have witnessed a flagrant
injustice done to the Namibian people as they struggle
for their freedom and independence and an injustice
17

150. The intentions
behind high-sounding
phrases
in favour of freedom and independence
for, the
Namibian
people are becoming increasingly
clear.
Actions show that we are not speaking of the liberation
of Namibia or of South Africa but of a strengthening
of the existing colonial domination.
Here is a map of
Namibia.
It shows convincingly
what Vorster wishes
to do: the same thing as Hitler wanted to do to the
whole world--establish
a state of slavery and nothing
else.

to the question of Namibia. Speaking on 7 October
at a reception in the Kremlin in honour of the President of the People’s Republic of Angola, the General
Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union,
Comrade Brezhnev, stated:

I5 I. The fact that we have not been able to adopt
a resolution today shows that the Council hasgone back
on its earlier resolutions. Paying lip service to freedom
and justice, some Western States are really plotting
with the South African authorities against the African
peoples in order to perpetuate the colonial domination
of Namibia and to maintain in South Africa the racist
yoke inherited from the past colonial empires. That, in
fact, explains their refusal to support the draft resolution.

“As regards southern Africa, our position is very
clear: as we have stated on many occasions and as
we state again, we have no special interests either
in the south or in the north or in any other part of
Africa. We are not seeking any advantages there for
ourselves. We want recognition of the sacred right
of every people to determine its fate, its right to
determine its own deve!opment.
That is an immutable principle from which our Party and the entire
Soviet people have never swerved.

152. The course of events on the African continent
avd the discussion of the question of Namibia in the
Council have shown that the African countries, more
than ever before, have adopted constructive positions
and shown flexibility.
The draft that was submitted
is, 1 repeat once again, the very minimum that could
be proposed. Its sponsors had shown tolerance and
wisdom, and they expected positive results from the
Council. But even that minimum of very just demands
was rejected.

-“We proceed on the premise that a free people
must support freedom for other peoples and the
struggle of real freedom fighters, and we are certain
that if all the peoples of Africa and all oppressed
peoples without exception achieve freedom and
independence, peace and security on earth will
thereby triumph.”

153. This attitude is surprising but it is not a new
departure. We saw what took place once before in
the Council when these was a triple veto. We are
convinced that such actions undermine the prestige of
the Council and of the United Nations, not only here
but also beyond the United Nations. An overwhelming
majority of the Member States have recognized their
responsibility
for the fate of the peop,le of Namibia,
as the logical result of a Council decision. That is
why all States that are sincerely interested in preserving
peace on the African continent and in eliminating the
remaining
hotbeds of colonialism
and racism must
promote the adoption ofeffective measures against the
regime of’ South Africa, which is illegally occupying
Namibia.
There can be no proposals based on
expediency in this case.
154. The Soviet delegation for its part has set forth
its position quite precisely and clearly. The delegation
of the Soviet Union fully supports the just demands
made here by the representatives of African and other
countries and it feels that they represent the minimum
that should be done to achieve the earliest possible
solution the problem.
155. The Soviet Union will continue,
as it always
has done, to support the just cause of the African
peoples struggling for freedom and independence and
it will not slacken its efforts to achieve a just solution

“We now hear voices which are demanding an
end to colonial and racist domination
in Southern
Africa, voices which are ever louder and more
insistent. This is dictated by the times in which we
live.

156. The delegation of the’ Soviet Union is deeply
convinced that no attempts to interfere in the efforts
of the Council to solve the problem of Namibia will
impede the struggle of the people of Namibia for
full freedom and independence. We are convinced that
the just cause of the Namibian people will triumph.
157. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call on the
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia.
158. Mr. KAMANA (President of the United Nations
Council for Namibia): Another disappointing chapter
in the efforts of the United Nations to support
the struggle of the Namibian
people for selfdetermination and independence has just been closed.
The negative votes of the United States, France and
the United Kingdom reveal their support for the
racist and colonialist policies of South Africa. Those
countries underestimate
the commitment
of the
African and other peace-loving peoples to the eradication of racism and colonialism from the continent.
159. Africa has, on innumerable
occasions, reaffirmed its support for the armed struggle until independence and majority rule are fully achieved in
southern Africa. The world will witness the intensification of the armed struggle by Namibian patriots
who have fully accepted the fact that their freedom
and independence can be won only through the selfless sacrifice of thousands of men, women snd
children, for their birthright, a free and independent
Namibia.

160. In the United Nations, the United Nations
Council for Namibia will continue to exercise its
responsibilities in support of the self-determination
and independence of Namibia. No manoeuvres and no
sophistry will be able to deter the Council from the
discharge of the mandate established by the General
Assembly in resolution 2248 (S-V) of 1967. In spite of
the negative votes of France, the United States
and the United Kingdom,
an increasing number of
countries have recognized the legitimacy of the struggle
of the Namibian people and are giving material and
moral support for their struggle. The United Nations
Council for Namibia
will continue to devise and
promote all forms of programmes
in support of
Namibian patriots in the certainty that the legitimate
and just cause of the Namibian people will prevail.

no one could improve. Neither could anyone improve
on the logic with which he treated this question,
especially with respect to the,expected veto that was
exercised by three-major Powers of the Council. Of
course, we should not blame the representatives of
those countries, since they have received their instructions from their leaders back home. We are reducing
ourselves, as I have said on previous occasions, to
peddlers of words without action, We are losing our
credibility
with the people who have- pinned their
hopes on the United Nations, and particularly on
the Security Council.
166. It behoves me to make a few remarks not so
much in a spirit of criticism as for the purpose of
posing the question, to put it in Latin, y~rtl VL~C/~,S
-whither
goest thou?

161. The current discussions in the Council abound
in lessons for the leaders of the liberation struggle and
for all those who support the just cause of the
Namibian
people.
The enemies
of the selfdetermination,
freedom and independence
of the
Namibian people have shown themselves capable
of resorting to stratagems to mislead Namibian patriots
and to confuse the supporters of the cause of
Namibian independence. It is clear that the leadership of SWAPO, the liberation
movement of the
Namibian people, by firmly standing on principle
has unmasked the treacherous manoeuvres of the
Pretoria regime. The recent public statements by
Mr. Vorster show again his racist and colonialist
ambition to promote his hand-picked tribal puppets and
defenders of rrpcrrtheid as spokesmen for an independent Namibia.
Vorster persists in his delusion
that the world will be so naive as to accept such
false shadows, when the sacrifice of Namibian patriots
is paving the way for the fulfilment of the legitimate
aspirations of the Namibian people.

167. The draft resolution which some gentlemen here
have vetoed happens to be the thirtieth or fortieth on
the subject, counting all those that were submitted to
the General Assembly-whether
in plenary meetings
in 1966 or in the Fourth Committee-and
to the Council. Where shall we go from here?
168. As my colleague from the United Republic of
Tanzania said, those who cast a veto have probably
succeeded in enhancing the frustration and bitterness in the hearts not only of Africans but of all
those who support the freedom and liberation of
peoples still suffering under a foreign yoke.
169. South West Africa was a Mandated Territory.
I remember when in 1922 many of us rebelled against
mandates, knowing full well that they were nothing
but colonialism
in disguise, the Mandatory Powers,
faced by our protests, assured us that their presence
in the Mandated Territories was meant to prepare the
indigenous peoples for self-rule and ultimate freedom.
All the Mandated Territories have been liberated. Why
does South Africa still cling to that Mandate? It is
because those in the Council who exercise world power
support it-neither
more nor less.

i62. In the name of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, I declare that, by reason of their negative
votes, France, the United States and the United Kingdom must assume full responsibility for the inevitable
escalation of the war of liberation by the Namibian
patriots in their struggle for self-determination,
freedom and national
independence
in a united
Namibia.

164. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President,
I must thank you for the arduous efforts that you have
exerted in presiding over the Council during the discussion of this nettlesome question.

170. I should no like to go so far as to say that this
is hypocritical,
but it amounts to being hypocritical.
All the members talk about freedom and democracy
in the Council and in the General Assembly, and here
they are the trustees of democracy, liberty and freedom. What are they doing about it? I was not here
when the vote on the draft resolution was taken.
I anticipated that it would be vetoed. I heard that one
or two who cast a veto said that this question does not
endanger or threaten world peace. But I say that it is
paving the way to a threat to world peace. Should
we wait until we are confronted with war before
we act? There is already guerrilla warfare.

165. I should have liked to see different results. I am
not going to go into the genesis of the question.
I believe my good brother or if I may call him so,
my son from Tanzania presented an analysis on which

171. Some of the Western Powers are supporting
another Western Power in its submission of an item
before the current session of the General Assembly
dealing with terrorism and the taking of hostages.

163. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Saudi
Arabia has expressed a wish to address the Council
at this stage. 1 invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

19

and Mirabeau became heroes. They were revel”.
tionaries. When in 1917 the aristocracy of Russia was
gallivanting in the capitals of Europe-Vienna,
Paris
London-hobnobbing
with the other aristocrats, anci
their foremen were using the Russian people Iike
slaves, there was a revolution. Had there not been a
revolution,
they would still be slaves. But the+,
liberated themselves. Now do not tell me that they are
not democratic. Democracy has become a ritual-1 say
this parentheticallyeverywhere.

I ask: what else can the peoples which are denied theil
freedom do? Must they just submit’?
172. I once said, and I repeat it from experience
-and I would not want the Council to misunderstand
me or the outside news media to misinterpret methat had it not been for Hitler many of those Mandated
Territories would still be under a foreign yoke. It was
when empires tottered and fell, it was when those
peoples which ruled others could no longer foot the
bill that the process of ceding those Territories to
their inhabitants was put into motion. We should not
have to have another Hitler in order to liberate
Namibia.

178. I ask those of you who have vetoed this dnlft
resolution:
What alternative
are. you offering the
Council?
179, And now I have a question to put to my African
colleagues on the Council, to my colleagues fro~~l
what is called the non-aligned or third world: Why did
you not ask for an alternative draft resolution’?

173. Why, not very long’ ago, was there a great
deal of commotion about the Cubans having gone to
Angola and having been financed by the Soviet Union?
1 do not know if that was so; I was not there to
witness it. Well, somebody I do not know who, should
now do the financing. If I held the purse strings
and owned the moneybags, I would not finance
mercenaries but I would finance every freedom-loving
person to go to Namibia and subvert South Africa.

180. I ask those who vetoed the draft resolution why
they did not submit amendments here in the Council,
in public, not behind closed doors. I do not know
what goes on behind the doors of the Council. They
“consultations”.
I say “abortive consultations”,
WY
These are not consultations.

174. Some of the Council’s members said that there
was no threat to international peace. But what about
justice? Why do they not mention justice’? Forget
about international peace. Is it just that after some
50 years South Africa should still be lording it over
the indigenous people of Namibia? On what basis?
There is no basis whatsoever. Even those so-called
head-hunters in Papua-or wherever it was-are now
free and sitting among us. They are human beings.
Who prepared them? Extensions of those Western
Powers-Australia
and New Zealand-and
I raise my
hat to them. Why should southern Africa be treated
differently?

181. The United States has stood for the liberty of
colonial peoples since the days of the late President
Woodrow Wilson. Wilson came back from Europe a
sad man because the British and the French had told
him to mind his own business and not talk about
libemting peoples. I ask this question: Has the United
States forgotten its high ideals and principles? The
Americans had to fight the British to gain independence. Are they not now celebrating the Bicentennial
of their liberation from the British?
182. Why has the United States adopted this position?
Because it buys gold in South Africa‘? Why does it not
mine gold here? Does it buy diamonds there? Today
there are zircons being sold that look like diamonds.
Diamonds are for the rich and the super-rich, so that
they may look like aristocrats.

175. All right, I ask those who vetoed the draft
resolution: what have you done’? Did you reach in to
your pockets and present an alternative draft resolution aimed at solving the problem? Come out with it,
I tell them; you merely want to protract the situation,
to maintain the status yuo. But remember that history
has no .st~rt~/syl/o. That is but a Latin phi,ase. Nothing
remains the same.

183, I ask my friends in the British delegation here:
What are your leaders waiting for? You are in the
throes of a recession nncl you should improve Your
relationships with the third world-with
the African
world, with the Asian world. Have you been blinded by
the glory of centuries past? All that is finished. And
it is a good thing, because you have become more
reasonable, more human. Actually,
there are no
people more reasonable than the British. But what
happened? There must have been some quirk in the
minds of those who formulated the policy that caused
this veto today.

176. We want peace: but you are encouraging the
Africans to RO to war; not against you, because you
exercise world power and the Africans cannot beat
you. But there are ways and means. There is guerrilla
warfare; there is terrorism and the taking of hostages,
which we all abhor. You are playing into the hands
of those who would seek to take hostages, and perhaps
justifiably.
177. What are the causes of revolution? Injustices,
To my French colleagues I would say that if the people
in the streets of Paris had been able to reform the
Bourbons before 1789 there would have been no
revolution.
They had to revolt. Danton, Robespierre

184. France always stood for liberty, for revolution
against the tyrants. What does France consider the
South Africans to be‘! Philanthropists?
Has South
Africa prepared the people of Namibia for self-rule?
20

What has South Africa done? Nothing, What has
happened to France’s tradition? Its leaders are acting
like politicians. They base their policies on expediency,
rather than hoisting the flag of freedom and liberation
as France always used to do.

Namibia or do you want to maintain the so-called
sraf~rs quo? Of course, there is no stcrt~ts qrm.
191. Well, this question will be discussed-I believe
soon-in
the Fourth Committee of the General Assembly. I promise that I will submit a draft resolution
there and, shall ask that the Council be convened,
if possible to approve it. I promise those who vetoed
the draft resolution today that my text will mention
nothing about any threats to international peace. My
text will say “on the basis ofjustice”. Either the majol
Powers will help to liberate Namibiaor they will choose
to continue the partnership for the domination ok the
indigenous people of Namibia. If they choose the latter
course, God help them. For I shall come out with
certain facts that will make the hair of some representatives here turn white overnight. .

185. And I would say to my good friends from Italy
and Japan that I am reminded of an Arabic proverb
which, in English, would go something like this: “You
are neither believers nor heathens; you are in
between”‘. Why do you not come out and help to
liberate these people? What is your excuse?
186. Is world peace threatened? What about justice?
Again and again I must refer to the justness of this
cause. Are we to keep on going round in circles?
187. I have always said that Namibia could in the
future have good relations with South Africa, could
trade with South Africa, because of South Africa’s
experience. I know of many Mandated Territories
which after liberation did business with those who
at one time had ruled them. If it makes good economic
sense, I do not see why South Africa should not have
a privileged position because of its experience in the
area.

192. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to inform members of
the Council that I have received a letter from the
representatives of Benin, the Libyan Arab Republic
and the United Republic of Tanzania [S//X/6] which
reads as follows:
“We have the honour to request that in the course
of the consideration
by the Security Council of
the question ‘The situation in Namibia’, an invitation under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Council be extended to Mr. TheoBen Gurirab of the South West Africa Peoples’
Organization (SWAP01 of Namibia.”

188. Are we to be told that there are strategic
reasons for the position that has been adopted today’?
If so, we can only say this: Strategic reasons in the
days of intercontinental
ballistic missiles! The large
nations can destroy each other without having bases
anywhere. Is there fear that the Russians might
establish a base there? We read in the papers these
days that the Russians have more than twice as many
ships as the Western nations. Come out with it,
instead of leaking these stories to the newspapers and
fomenting suspicion and perhaps hatred between
countries. Do not talk about ditente. It is all so
theatrical. We do not believe these things any more.
You have lost your credibility.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
accedes to that request.

193. The PRESIDENT:
1 invite Mr. Gurirab to take
a place at the Council table and to make a statement.
194. Mr. GURIRAB:
I want to state here before this
Council for the whole world to hear that SWAP0 of
Namibia condemns in the strongest terms the infamous
and undemocratic
act just committed in the Council
by the three imperialist Powers. Those three Powers
-namely,
the United States of America, the United
Kingdom and France-have always acted. in word and
in deed, as the collaborators and defenders of the
illegal racist and colonialist rCgime of South Africa in
Namibia.
We have pointed this out time and again
here and elsewhere, They have tried to deny this and
have offered all kinds of flippant and deceptive
excuses. Their action today goes a long way in
demonstrating
the extent to which they are prepared
to go in order to defend their vested interests in
Namibia as well as in southern Africa in general. It
also assures their kith and kin there of their continued
commitment
to maintaining
the domination
and
exploitation.ofour
people and o’four natural resources.

189. But I have a responsibility
as a human being,
apart from my responsibility as the representative of
a Member State thnt signed the Charter. We are all
human beings. The major Powers that exercise the
veto should assume their responsibilities
and not
make laughingstocks of us all before the people of the
world.
190. It is too’ late now for me to submit a draft
resolution. Perhaps my friends from Africa remember
the occasions when I have submitted one-page draft
resolutions. I am not criticizing the wording of the
draft resolution that has now been vetoed; but I would
say that some of my colleagues here gave the majol
Powers an excuse to veto that text. I would have called
their bluff. I would have submitted a very simple,
one-page draft resolution that they could not have
vetoed. I would have put them on the spot. I would
have asked them: Do you want to help liberate

195. This is the second time in the last 16 months
that those Powers have combined in the arrogance of
21

their power in the Council to block the wishes of the
democratic majority on the question of Namibia.

We see here the element of duplicity despite all the
false promises, unfounded claims and double-talk
about progress regarding the question of Namibia.

1%. The Council has been meeting this time pursuant to resolution
385 (1976) which was adopted
unanimously
early
this year. That
resolution
demanded of South Africa a solemn declaration
in
which that rCgime would accept the authority of the
United Nations and make a firm commitment
to withdraw
its illegal administration
from Namibia. That was
yet another opportunity
for that rCgime to accept a
basis for a peaceful settlement in Namibia. As always,
the South African r&gime stubbornly remained intransigent. Once again, the illegal r@gime of Pretoria has
posed a direct challenge to the United Nations. Once
again it has posed a direct challenge to the Council.
What is at issue here is the question of morality,
justice and human rights, on the one hand, and, on the
other, the selfish, narrowly
conceived,
national
interests of those Powers. It is a question of human
life, on the one hand, arid profits and a greed for
dominance,
on the other. What is oppression and
exploitation
to us is wealth and prosperity to those
greedy capitalists.
197.
The issue of Namibia
is clear and straightforward, particularly here at the United Nations. South
Africa’s presence in Namibia is illegal. The United
Nations has assumed direct responsibility for Namibia.
The struggle of the people of Namibia is legitimate.
SWAP0 represents the interests and aspirations
of
the people of Namibia for freedom and genuine national
independence. We are therefore all agreed that South
Africa must get out of Namibia forthwith.

1%. We expected the Council to proceed logically
this time and adopt punitive measures to compel the
occupation rkgime of South Africa to withdraw from
Namibia. As a matter of fact, that was the logic and
purpose of the draft resolution so comprehensively,
eloquently and convincingly
introduced yesterday by
Ambassador Jackson of Guyana on behalf of the
sponsors.

201. I want to declare here that the capacity of the
Africans-indeed,
of the Namibians-to
be patient
must
not be insulted and abused with empty
diplomatic rhetoric.
202. The position of SWAP0 was stated clearly by
our President, Sam Nujoma, the national leader of our
people, when he addressed the Council on 28 September [195&h meeting]. Therefore there is no need
to elaborate further on our position.
203. The issue is very clear. I want to say this to the
three States I mentioned. They can veto resolutions
now and in the future, as they have in the past, but
they cannot veto the will and the determination of
the people of Namibia to achieve liberation in our
country. Equally, veto our no veto, Namibia remains
a direct responsibility of the United Nations. We shall
therefore continue to utilize all the options that exist
in the United Nations system, within the other
competent
organs of the United Nations, until
liberation
and national independence are achieved
in Namibia.
204. We take this opportunity also to express OUI
thanks and appreciation to you, Mr. President, and to
the other members of the Council who sponsored and
voted in favour of the draft resolution and also to the
other representatives who have always supported our
struggle in other forums here and elsewhere.
205. SWAPO, as a liberation movement engaged in
a struggle to liberate OLII- country, will for ever remain
committed
to waging that struggle until its logical
conclusion. To this we are committed: to this we are
dedicated. A /Utahw~linrrr/.
206. The PRESIDENT:
There are no further names
on the list of speakers. The Council ahas therefore
concluded its consideration of this item at this stage.

199. WC were not surprised by the triple veto cast
in moment ago, because, for one thing, we were
threatened with this by those same Powers all along
during the consultations
on the draft. But, most
important, the decision to cast vetoes was, it appears
to us, agreed LI~OII in advance between those Powers
and
the racist Vorster rCgime.
200, 1 should like to illustrate this point by quoting
item from today’s Nr~s Ye/*/i Ti/rzes to which YOU,
have
Mr.
President,
and other representatives
already referred:
an

“Asked whether he thought the United Nations
might impose sanctions on South Africa since a
goup
of third-world
ccuntries
is calling
fol
measures to force it to abandon rrl~rr~hei~/, M!. . . .Vors..
ter said ‘I don’t see that as a possibility at all‘.
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00400

83-60801-April

198%2,200
