VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Commillcc

Recalling also ,its resolutions 3424 (XXX) of 8 December 1975 and 31/56 of 1 December 1976,
1. Reaffirms th~ inalienable right of the people of
Brunei to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Brunei;
3. Notes once again that no progress has been
achieved so far in the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 3424 (XXX) and 31/56;
4. Calls once more upon all parties concerned to
work towards the early implementation of resolutions
3424 (XXX) and 31/56;
5. Calls again upon the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, consistent with its responsibility as the administering Power,
to take all steps within its competence to facilitate expeditiously the holding of free and democratic elections
by the appropriate goVTernment authorities in Brunei,
in consultation with and under the supervis,ion of the
United Nations, in accordance with the inalienable
right of the people of Brunei to self-determination and
independence, and further calls, prior to the elections,
for the lifting of the ban on all political parties and for
the return of '111 political exiles to Brunei so that they
can participate freely and fully in the elections;
6. Notes that the administering Power has so far
not participated in the Special Committee's consideration of the Territory;
7. Calls upon the administering Power, in conformity with the provisions of the relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly, to extend full co-operation to
the Special Committee;
8. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
keep the situation in Brunei under review and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-third
session.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977
32/28.

Question of Guam

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Guam,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,20
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and all other resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations relating to Guam, in particular General Assembly resolutions 3429 (XXX) of 8 December 1975,
3481 (XXX) of 11 December 1975 and 31 /58 of
1 December 1976,
20 Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
23/Rev.l ), vol. I, chaps. III and V, and vol. HI, chap. XXII.

165

Conscious of the need to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to Guam.
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 21
Noting the opinion expressed by the representative
of the administering Power concerning the presence
of United States military bases in the 'fterritory,
Considering that the policy of maintaining military
bases and installations in Non-Self-Governing Territories which inhibit the right of self-determination of
peoples is incompatible with the relevant resolutions
of the United Nations,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved
as a consequence of previous visiting missions to colonial Territories and reiterating its conviction that the
dispatch of such missions is essential for securing
adequate and first~hand information in regard to the
conditions prevailing in those Territories and to the
views, wishes and aspirations of the peoples therein with
respect to their future status,
Mindful that Guam requires the continued attention
and assistance of the United Nations in the achievement by its people of the objectives embodied in the
Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of Guam, and
stressing the necessity of diversify,ing its economy as a
matter of priority in order to reduce its dependence on
fluctuating economic activities,
I. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Guam; 22
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peopk of
Guam to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to the 'fterritory;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United States
of America, as the administering Power, in consultation with the freely elected representatives of the people, to continue to take all the necessary steps to ensure
the full and speedy attainment of the goals set forth
in the Declaration with respect to Guam;
5. Reaffirms its strong conviction that the presence
of United States bases on Guam should not prevent the
people of the Territory from freely exercising their
right to self-determination in accordance with the Declaration and the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations;
6. Calls upon the administering Power to take all
possible steps to diversify the economy of the Territory
and to work out concrete programmes of assistance
and economic development for Guam;
7. Takes note of the attitude of the Government
of the United States regarding visiting missions and
21 lbid., Thirty-second Session, Fourth Committee, 17th meeting, paras. 47-50.
2 2 Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
::3/Rev.1 ), vol. III, chap. XXII.

166

General As1embly-Thirty-1econd Session

requests the Chairman of the Special Committee to
conitnue his consultations with a view to gaining access
for such a mission to the Territory;
8. Urges the administering Power, with the cooperation of the Government of Guam, to safeguard
the inalienable right of the people of the Territory
to the enjoyment of its natural resources by taking
effective measures which guarantee the right of the
people to own and dispose of those natural resources
and to establish and maintain control of their future
development;
9. Requests the administering Power to continue
to enlist the assistance of the speciaJ.ized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national
life of Guam;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue
to seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to Guam, including the
possible dispatch of a visiting mission in consultation
with the administering Power, and to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977
32/29.

Question of Bermuda, British Virgin
Islands, Montserrat and Turks and Caicos
Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Bermuda British
Virgin Islands, Montserrat and Turks and C~icos Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 23
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and all other resolutions and decisions of the United
~ations relat,ing to the Territories listed above, in particular General Assembly resolutions 31 /52 and 31/54
of 1 December 1976,
Taking into account the statement of the administering Power relating to the Territories listed above, 24
Noting the continued readiness of the administering
Power to grant independence to the peoples of the Territories under its administration on the basis of their
express wishes and aspirations in that regard, and its
declared policy of fostering the growth of free and
democratic political institutions in those Territories,
Cons~ious of the need to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to the Territories concerned,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved
a_s a consequence of the United Nations Visiting Miss10n to the Cayman Islands in April 1977 25 and reiterat23 Ibid., vol. I, chaps. III-V, and vol. III, chaps. XXIV
and XXV.
• 24 Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Fourth Committee, 12th meetmg, paras. I 2-21.
25 Ibid., Thirty-Second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
23/Rev.l), vol. IV, chap. XXVI, annex.

ing its conviction that the dispatch of such missions to
colonial Territories is essential for securing adequate
and first-hand information ,in regard to the political.
economic and social conditions in those Territories and
to the views, wishes and aspirations of the peoples
therein,
Mindful that those Territories require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achievement by their peoples of the objectives embodied
in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of the Territories
concerned, and stressing the necessity of diversifying
and strengthening further their economies as a matter
of priority in order to promote economic stability and
to reduce their dependence on fluctuating economic
activities,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
~ndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples rclatmg to Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Montserrat and
Turks and Caicos Islands; 26
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
those :rerritories to self-determination and independence m accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
~- f!..eafjirms its conviction that questions of tcrritonal size, geographical isolation and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the Declaration with respect to the Territories concerned;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United Kinodom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland as the
administering Power, in consultation with tJ{e freely
elected representatives of the peoples, to continue to
tak~ all the necessary steps to ensure the full and speedy
attamment of the goals set forth in the Declaration
with respect to the Territories;
. 5. Calls upon the administering Power to expand
its pro~rammc of ?udgetary aid and to take all possible
steps,. m consu_ltat1C?n with the local authorities, as appropnate, to d1vers1fy and strengthen further the economies of the Territories listed above and to work out
concrete programmes of assistance and economil: development for those Territories;
6. Urges the administering Power, with the cooperation of the Governments of the Territories concerned, to saf~gu~rd the inalie~able right of the peoples
of those Terntones to the enJoyment of their natural
resource~ by t:1king effective measures which guarantee the nghts of the peoples to own and dispose of those
natural resources and to establish and maintain control
of their future development;
. 7. Requests the administering Power, in consultat10n with the Governments of the Territories concerned
to pay particular attention to the training of qualified
local personnel;
8. Welcomes the positive attitude of the administerir.tg Po~~r. with . re~pect. to the receiving of United
Nat10ns v1s1tmg m1ss10ns m the Territories under its
admini~tration and ~equest~ the Chairman of the Special
Committee to contmue his consultations with a view
to the dispatch of such missions, as appropriate;
26 lbid.,

vol. III, chaps. XXIV and XXV.
