S/2006/935

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 December 2006
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission to Afghanistan,
11 to 16 November 2006
I. Summary
1.
The Security Council mission to Afghanistan was its second since 2003 in
support of the Afghan people (see S/2003/1074). It found that the Afghan
partnership, begun in Bonn, Germany, in late 2001, was largely on track. The first
milestone of the Bonn Agreement (see S/2001/1154) was achieved with the
convening of the Emergency Loya Jirga in June 2002. This was followed by a
Constitutional Loya Jirga in January 2004, presidential elections — won by Hâmid
Karzai — in November 2004 and parliamentary and provincial council elections in
34 provinces in September 2005. The Bonn Agreement was successfully concluded
in December 2005 with the opening of Afghanistan’s bicameral National Assembly.
The following month, the Afghanistan Compact (S/2006/90, annex) — a new fiveyear blueprint for cooperation between the international community and the
Government of Afghanistan — was launched at the London Conference on
Afghanistan on 31 January and 1 February 2006. The successful establishment of
functioning democratic institutions and efforts to improve the welfare of the
population since 2001 now required consolidation to ensure that Afghanistan
embarked on a period of genuine stability and development.
2.
The mission noted the significant efforts undertaken by Afghans and the
international community to achieve these goals. Among the major achievements in
2006, the mission noted: (a) the launch of a democratically elected National
Assembly and provincial councils; (b) continuing high rates of economic growth
and increasing per capita income; (c) expanding trade and investment, principally
with regional partners; (d) significant infrastructure projects in road-building, power
generation and transmission and watershed management; and (e) successful national
programmes in education, health, rural development and the development of new
Afghan security institutions.
3.
Nevertheless, progress in 2006 towards realizing the vision of the Afghanistan
Compact has not been as rapid as had been hoped. The past year has been
characterized by uneven efforts to improve governance and establish the rule of law,
intensification of the Taliban-led insurgency, an upsurge in illegal drug production
and trafficking, widespread insecurity in the south and east of the country and
continued impunity for criminals, corrupt officials and commanders of illegal armed
groups. These factors — countered only partially by fragile State institutions —

06-63138 (E) 051206

*0663138*

S/2006/935

have tempered the legitimate hopes of Afghans with signs of despondency and
disillusionment. The mission noted that the confidence of the Afghan public in its
new institutions and processes was being tested. Growing insecurity in parts of the
south and south-east was disrupting rehabilitation and reconstruction work by
Afghans, the United Nations and other international partners.
4.
Faced with these realities, the mission stressed two cardinal messages: firstly,
that the firm and unyielding commitment of the international community in support
of the Government and people of Afghanistan and their country’s transition was
unwavering; and secondly, the Afghanistan Compact, owned and led by Afghans,
remains the central, strategic framework for cooperation between the Government of
Afghanistan and the international community. The Government of Afghanistan, with
the support of the international community, must ensure its steady and faithful
implementation.

II. Mission statement
5.
In his letter dated 9 November 2006, the President of the Security Council
informed the Secretary-General that the members of the Council had decided to send
a mission to Afghanistan (S/2006/875). The mission was conducted from 11 to
16 November 2006. The primary message of the mission was to give assurance of
the continued commitment by the international community to the Afghan process
and to underscore the Council’s support for the Afghan efforts for security,
governance and development. The mission was directed to review progress on
counter-narcotics, the disbandment of illegal armed groups, human rights protection,
public sector reform, justice sector reform and rule of law issues. It was also tasked
with reviewing the status of international assistance. The full terms of reference,
composition and programme of the mission are set out in annexes I and II to the
present report.
6.
The mission left New York on 9 November and returned on 17 November.
During that period, the mission visited Kabul, Qalat and Mazari Sharif. The mission
met with the President of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, Hâmid Karzai, the
First Vice President, the Second Vice President, the Deputy Chairman of the Senate,
the Attorney General, cabinet ministers, the National Security Council, governors,
members of the Meshrano Jirga and the Wolesi Jirga as well as civil society, the
non-governmental organization (NGO) coordinating body, the Agency Coordinating
Body for Afghan Relief, the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and United Nations
agencies. It also received statements from Human Rights Watch (9 November) and
Amnesty International (10 November). Owing to security concerns, the mission was
advised not to visit Kandahar city. In Pakistan, the mission met with the Foreign
Secretary, Riaz Mohammad Khan.
7.
The members of the mission express appreciation to the Governments of
Afghanistan and Pakistan, ISAF and UNAMA for their support and assistance
during the visit.

2

06-63138

S/2006/935

III. Key issues
General security situation
8.
The mission took place against a backdrop of nine months of growing
instability. Security was the dominant concern in Afghanistan. Many of the
mission’s interlocutors expressed apprehension about the rise in violence in
Afghanistan, especially in the south, south-east and east of the country. President
Karzai contrasted the intensity of the fighting in 2006 — between Afghan and
international security forces and insurgent and terrorist elements — with the relative
calm of 2003 and 2004. The insurgency appeared more or less confined to one third
of the country. The remaining two thirds of Afghanistan (west, north and central
regions) were considered comparatively stable. However, limited factional tensions
were emerging in the north and trends towards rearmament had been detected. The
security situation in general remained precarious throughout the country, with the
threat of suicide attacks and other forms of terrorism by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and
other extremist groups posing a serious threat to the nation-building process.
9.
After a worrying upsurge in the number of security-related incidents in the
country throughout the spring and summer of 2006, there were signs that insurgentand terrorist-related violence, which had plagued the country for much of the year,
might be subsiding. The mission was told by ISAF and President Karzai’s National
Security Council that armed clashes between insurgents and Afghan and
international military forces had decreased in October and November. ISAF
Commander General David J. Richards noted that Operation Medusa in Kandahar
Province in September 2006 had dealt the Taliban-led insurgency a heavy blow. He
predicted that this and other recent operations by Afghan and international military
forces had set the stage for a more stable winter and 2007. On the last point,
however, more cautious views were expressed by UNAMA, the United Nations
country team and civil society members. In any case, if there are medium-term
gains, they would be dependent on the swift delivery of reconstruction, development
and improved governance in insurgent-affected areas.
10. The Afghan leadership observed that the growth of the insurgency had been
fed by the failure of the Government of Afghanistan and the international
community to provide basic services, governance and security to rural communities.
A number of interlocutors highlighted the weakness of the Afghan National Police
and the rule of law as major factors contributing to the rise in instability. The
President drew attention to the continued presence of unqualified former
commanders in several positions of authority as a source of significant popular
frustration. The National Security Adviser, Zalmai Rassoul, said that the narcotics
industry was the number one problem for national security.
11. The President, a number of his senior aides, as well as parliamentarians and
representatives of civil society underscored that the failure of the international
community to address the issue of Taliban sanctuaries had allowed the insurgency to
re-emerge. The mission took note of the Afghan view that the insurgency in
Afghanistan cannot be brought to a halt with the existence of sanctuaries for
insurgents in neighbouring countries. Minister for Foreign Affairs Rangin Dâdfar
Spantâ underscored the importance of providing a clear, unmistakable message to
the population that the international community would stay the course in
Afghanistan, as rumours to the contrary fuelled insecurity. To them and all other

06-63138

3

S/2006/935

interlocutors, the mission gave strong assurance of the continued commitment by
the international community to the Afghan process and underscored the Council’s
unchanged support.
12. UNAMA noted that the list established pursuant to Security Council resolution
1267 (1999) contained some inaccuracies and observed that an updated list would be
an important tool in the international fight against terrorism and for stability in the
region.

International security forces
13. The mission paid tribute to the leading role that ISAF, led by the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), had assumed in contributing to security in
support of the Government of Afghanistan. On 5 October 2006, ISAF assumed
command of international forces in eastern Afghanistan, completing the process of
expanding the ISAF area of responsibility to the entire country. The mission
welcomed this newly unified command structure and commended ISAF efforts and
sacrifices in the face of challenging circumstances. The mission took note of the
continuing need of ISAF for adequate forces and resources to ensure the continued
success of the ISAF operations. ISAF would continue to maintain its current role
until Afghan national security forces and Afghan ministries no longer required
assistance to provide security throughout the country.
14. The National Security Adviser, Dr. Rassoul, noted that despite unfortunate
incidents such as civilian casualties, culturally insensitive raids on houses and the
arrest from time to time of innocent people, there was still overwhelming support
for the presence of international security forces inside Afghanistan. The Deputy
Speaker of the Meshrano Jirga, Sayed Hamed Gailani, said that international
security forces would need to respect the culture and religion of Afghanistan in
order to retain the support of the population. It would be critical to base all
operations on solid, accurate information and ensure that trustworthy elders were
adequately consulted. Afghan ministers and parliamentarians called for better
coordination and increased information sharing between international security
forces and the Government of Afghanistan.

Security sector reform
15. The mission saluted the performance of the Afghan National Army under
exceptionally difficult circumstances and in the face of heavy losses. The Secretary
of the Wolesi Jirga Defence Commission noted that despite commitments to develop
an army of 70,000, the Afghan National Army remained poorly equipped and
understaffed. President Karzai listed strengthening the Afghan National Army as his
second highest national priority. ISAF Commander General Richards raised
concerns about the pressure the war had placed on the development of the Afghan
National Army and noted that only 14,143 combat troops were present and available
for duty earlier this fall. At the same time, he praised the strong contributions of the
Afghan National Army, especially to Operation Medusa.
16. President Karzai and other Afghan interlocutors expressed frustration with the
state of the Afghan National Police. The President faulted Afghanistan’s
international partners for inadequate and belated efforts to develop the Afghan

4

06-63138

S/2006/935

National Police, a failure which he claimed was partly to blame for the insecurity on
the Afghanistan-Pakistan border. The Minister of Interior, Zarar Ahmad Muqbil,
observed that the Afghan National Police had been designed to provide public order
in peacetime and was no longer appropriately structured given current levels of
conflict, insecurity and criminality. Proposals had been made to the international
community to support expansion of the Afghan National Police to meet the latest
challenges of insurgency and deteriorating security in some regions.
17. The mission visited the Provincial Reconstruction Team in Qalat, Zabul
Province, where it was briefed on the importance of strong recruitment, vetting and
monitoring procedures for the new Afghan National Auxiliary Police. The Afghan
National Auxiliary Police was intended to provide both enhanced community
policing and facilitate local job creation. The Minister of Interior emphasized the
importance of creating an ethnically balanced force with no ties to former
commanders or illegally armed groups.

Impunity and corruption: the need for the rule of law
18. Throughout the mission, interlocutors cited corruption and the perpetuation of
a culture of impunity as the root causes of popular Afghan disaffection and unease.
Several international interlocutors pointed to the weak and corrupt Ministry of
Interior as a key reason for the failure of the Afghan National Police. Sima Samar,
the head of the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission, and others pointed
to widespread corruption in law enforcement and judicial institutions as central to
the population’s decreasing trust in the Government. Perceptions, however
inaccurate, that the Taliban was less corrupt were undercutting government authority
in some rural areas where access to formal justice remained limited. It was also
pointed out that the continued tolerance of positions of authority given to the former
commanders and warlords was contributing to instability.
19. The Afghan leadership acknowledged that the continued presence of warlords
in government structures contributed to insecurity. The Government’s efforts to
diminish the authority of those figures would require international support. As in the
case of building an effective police force, this support had not been forthcoming,
despite repeated warnings and demands by the Afghan people. UNAMA noted that
the Government’s strategy to disband illegally armed groups was a key vehicle for
dismantling the power base of those commanders who had retained the capability to
have recourse to violence without official sanction. The continuing presence of
some in public office with links to these groups had served to perpetuate a climate
of impunity. Implementation of the programme had slowed in 2006 and a farreaching review was now under way. It was recognized that high level international
and Afghan political commitment would be the key to re-energizing the programme
to disband illegally armed groups.
20. First Vice President Ahmad Zia Massoud identified the fight against corruption
as central to any effort to bring tangible improvements to the lives of people. In
Mazari Sharif, a member of civil society cited corruption as a major source of
insecurity in his region. In his presentation to the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board, Afghanistan’s Chief Justice Abdul Salam Azimi noted that corruption was
pervasive throughout line ministries and Government departments. President Karzai
had established an anti-corruption commission two months earlier, which was now

06-63138

5

S/2006/935

working to identify the nature and scope of the problem. Solutions, however,
remained elusive. Support and expertise would be required from Afghanistan’s
international partners. The report on the third meeting of the Board, attended by the
mission, cited corruption at all levels of the public sector as increasing the general
sense of dissatisfaction experienced by many Afghans.
21. Interlocutors stressed that any effort to confront the twin challenges of
impunity and corruption would require robust rule of law institutions. The Attorney
General recalled that when he had first assumed his job, tackling corruption had
been his primary objective. However, he had soon discovered that the weakness,
even absence, of rule of law in the provinces was the principal obstacle to change.
Without functional, honest institutions or high-level political backing, the fight
against corruption and impunity — no matter how popular — could not be won. He
would continue his efforts to reform prosecutorial capacity in Afghanistan and to
obtain convictions for corruption and other serious crimes in all parts of the country.
The Chief Justice’s principal message to the mission was that, in the race to
establish the rule of law, time was of the essence. Visible results were required to
build momentum and gain the trust of the public. The Chief Justice had removed 21
corrupt or incompetent senior justice officials and his five-year reform plan had
been approved by the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board. Funding for the
latter, however, remained as yet unsecured. UNAMA underscored that international
support for rule of law would be a long-term endeavour. Detailed reform strategies
were under development even as progress on physical infrastructure continued to be
made and legal aid expanded across the country.

Governance: the need to build capacity and institutions
22. President Karzai identified restructuring the civil service and strengthening its
capacity as the top priority for Afghanistan and its international partners. The
country was in desperate need of training for professionals — doctors, lawyers,
accountants and engineers. The emergence of democratic systems had raised the
expectations of the Afghan people. In the long term better primary and secondary
education would be the key to strengthening both the public sector and society as a
whole. Representatives of NGOs and major donors echoed the call for more
resources and new strategies to build the capacity of the Government of
Afghanistan, in particular outside Kabul. A premium was placed on enhancing
human capital at all levels as a precondition for an effective public sector and
sustained progress towards development goals.
23. Many Afghan interlocutors emphasized the benefits of channelling a greater
proportion of international assistance through Afghanistan’s core budget. Donor
representatives in Kabul agreed in principle but pointed to the lack of capacity in
Afghan public sector institutions to disburse funds effectively. During the mission’s
meeting with the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board and later with Afghan
development ministers, interlocutors observed that “parallel administrations” had
emerged — one international and one Afghan. Each had its comparative advantage,
but over the long term, the latter would have to succeed if the Afghan State was to
retain legitimacy and accountability. A careful balance would need to be struck
between international efforts to facilitate delivery of urgently needed assistance and
the longer-term imperative to strengthen the capacity of central and local
government, civil society and the private sector to meet the needs of Afghan people.

6

06-63138

S/2006/935

First Vice President Massoud urged the international community to invest in the
Government of Afghanistan. At least one major donor called for a tough and
thorough assessment and reappraisal of the international community’s technical
assistance strategies to date.

Human rights and protection of civilians in armed conflict
24. The United Nations country team stated that following the ousting of the
Taliban in 2001 space had opened for human rights and gender equality, including
access to education and political posts. However, the country team was concerned
that this space had recently begun to close: schools had been attacked and burned;
conservative elements within the Government had failed to uphold equal rights in
law; and public discourse had been restricted. The mission noted with concern
suggestions that the Ministry of Women’s Affairs might be abolished. It was
encouraged by the statement of Meshrano Jirga’s Deputy Speaker, Sayed Hamed
Gailani, that any such attempt would be rejected by the parliament’s Upper House.
25. Sima Samar, the head of the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission,
commended the Government for its endorsement of the Action Plan for Peace,
Justice and Reconciliation and stressed the importance of reaffirming Governmental
commitment to transitional justice by finally launching the Action Plan. The United
Nations country team and NGOs expressed concern over the severe impact of the
conflict on civilians who have been displaced, denied their right to education,
wounded or killed. Dr. Samar observed that when civilians were killed as a result of
the military operations by the Government or international forces it could encourage
their relatives to join the Taliban. ISAF pointed out that 8 out of every 10 people
killed by suicide bombers were Afghan civilians. Representatives of Afghan civil
society, the country team and NGO representatives emphasized the importance of
ensuring that all parties to the conflict uphold and promote international human
rights law and international humanitarian law. An NGO representative stressed that
human security should be an overriding concern for the Government of Afghanistan
and the international community.

Development and humanitarian assistance: the challenge
of coordination
26. The mission participated in the third meeting of the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board on 12 November. Afghan ministers and donor representatives
noted that the Board enjoyed the trust and confidence of both the Government of
Afghanistan and the international community as an oversight mechanism for the
Afghanistan Compact. The Board had demonstrated a growing capacity to monitor
progress and address bottlenecks hindering the implementation of Compact
benchmarks. The mission welcomed the efforts of the Board and noted with
encouragement that this mechanism had begun to move beyond questions of process
into matters of substance. However, for the Compact to deliver visible change to the
Afghan people, Government-led coordination efforts, including those of the
military-led provincial reconstruction teams, would need to be strengthened and
integrated under the overall Afghanistan National Development Strategy. Cabinet
ministers and the United Nations country team alike emphasized the importance of

06-63138

7

S/2006/935

improving coordination between national level actors and those at a provincial and
district level.
27. All members of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board agreed that
pervasive unemployment was one of the central factors contributing to instability.
The first Vice President said that the creation of employment opportunities would
further development and would help prevent disenchanted youth from joining the
Taliban. He recognized the importance of attracting private sector investors, but
noted that the lack of security deterred those whose investments were likely to
generate jobs. While it was critical to accelerate the delivery of employment
programmes and indeed all forms of assistance to the south and east of the country
where youth are being drawn into the insurgency, interlocutors in the north noted
that assistance should be extended to all 34 provinces in the country’s transition
from conflict to development. The Minister of Education stressed the need for
education, increased rural development and longer term employment opportunities,
including the reintegration of fighters into civilian life, or where appropriate into
Afghan security forces, notably the Afghan National Auxiliary Police.
28. Insecurity, drought, flooding and combat operations have all combined to
displace larger population groups inside Afghanistan in 2006, generating fresh
vulnerabilities and new humanitarian needs. Government officials, development
actors and military stakeholders all agreed that increased efforts would be needed to
ensure the delivery of assistance to people living in more remote areas of
Afghanistan. NGOs requested an increase in the capacity of civilian actors to
coordinate the delivery of humanitarian assistance in 2007. They argued that
civilian-led delivery mechanisms would allow for assistance to be better aligned to
the needs and priorities of the communities affected. While accepting the need to
protect humanitarian space and aid neutrality, the mission noted that insecurity or
other adverse conditions meant that the military might be better placed at times to
deliver basic assistance.

Counter-narcotics efforts
29. Afghanistan’s burgeoning narco-economy was identified by the vast majority
of the mission’s interlocutors as a primary threat to stability. National Security
Adviser Rassoul stressed that the narcotics industry was fast becoming the number
one problem in Afghanistan. One interlocutor described it as a “cancer” that would
spread and kill Afghan society over the long term. President Karzai acknowledged
the severity of the threat, indicating that he would consider the use of ground
spraying, but not aerial spraying, to eradicate the next poppy crop providing that
international military forces provided security. The Minister for Counter-Narcotics,
Habibullah Qaderi, informed the mission that in 2006 cultivation of opium poppy
represented 60 per cent of the gross domestic product and that although eradication
would help, poppy could only truly be countered by increased assistance to farmers
and improved governance. Together with Foreign Minister Spantâ, he underscored
the importance of regional and international cooperation in combating drug
trafficking. President Karzai characterized the spectacular growth of poppy
cultivation as a sign of desperation in the Afghan people, which would only be
remedied through stronger governance as well as reconstruction and economic
development.

8

06-63138

S/2006/935

Regional cooperation
30. A number of interlocutors underscored the importance of regional cooperation
in resolving Afghanistan’s challenges. At the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board, the mission received briefings from neighbouring States on their
contributions to Afghanistan, as well as reassurances of their commitment to the
Afghanistan Compact. The representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran noted that
his Government had invested $200 million in road construction and power supply
but voiced concern over the regional drug trade. India had provided $650 million in
economic assistance. Pakistan highlighted its $250 million in assistance to
Afghanistan and noted that it continued to host over 2.6 million Afghan refugees.
The mission welcomed the Second Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan, subsequently held in New Delhi on 18 and 19 November, as a means
of facilitating development and integration.
31. Issues of security were similarly dependent on regional cooperation. Many
interlocutors stressed that the existence of sanctuaries in Pakistan for the Taliban,
the Hezb-I-Islami party led by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar and other insurgent groups
must be addressed by law enforcement and other means. The cross-border
dimension to the insurgency was also emphasized by ISAF, which cited the impact
of the recent peace deal in North Waziristan, Pakistan. Over the past few months,
ISAF had detected a 70 per cent and 50 per cent increase, respectively, in security
incidents in the Afghan provinces of Paktika and Khost, which neighbour North
Waziristan.
32. Pakistani Foreign Secretary Khan, pointing out his country’s burden of
accepting a large number of refugees, stressed that a stable Afghanistan was
essential to his country’s security. He said that Pakistan was doing its best to
improve the security in the border area through the deployment of 80,000 troops
having suffered casualties in the operations, while admitting the difficulties in
placing effective control over the long-stretched border with many crossing-points.
He stressed that the cooperation among his country, Afghanistan and international
forces was ongoing at various levels, including through the tripartite commission.
As regards the impact of the peace deal in North Waziristan on border security, the
Foreign Secretary pointed out that the assertion that the peace deal had resulted in
increase in incidents did not reflect the fact on the ground. The mission encouraged
Pakistan to monitor the North Waziristan agreement with a view to ensuring that the
cross-border impact of this or any future agreements are positive for security and
stability. The mission was encouraged by the Foreign Secretary’s briefing on
Pakistan’s attempts to tackle terrorism and prevent Talibanization, including recent
arrests in Baluchistan and plans to reinforce border security. The mission expressed
concern regarding the humanitarian implications of possible contingencies to
employ, even if selectively, landmines along the border to control cross-border
movement.
33. The mission was encouraged by President Karzai’s commitment to improving
relations with Pakistan and by reassurances from Pakistani Foreign Secretary Khan
that a stable Afghanistan was essential to his country’s security. It was briefed on
plans by Presidents Karzai and Musharraf to hold cross-border jirgas on security.
These were presented as an opportunity to engage tribal leaders and build
confidence and stability in the region through “people to people” contact. For his
part, President Karzai expressed his hope that the entirety of Afghanistan’s ethnic

06-63138

9

S/2006/935

and geographic diversity be represented in the jirgas. Pakistani Foreign Secretary
Khan observed that the jirgas should remain “workable” in size and put a premium
on the participation of communities living in regions neighbouring the border shared
by the two countries.

United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
34. In Kabul, Zabul and Balkh Provinces, Afghan interlocutors strongly praised
the work of UNAMA. This was particularly notable in Zabul, where the Governor
and others welcomed the recent opening of the UNAMA sub-office in the provincial
capital, Qalat. Donors similarly welcomed the expanded UNAMA presence,
describing it as a “huge plus”. NGOs and United Nations agencies called for
UNAMA to play a greater coordination role between them and the military. The
mission was briefed on the difficult circumstances under which UNAMA and the
rest of the United Nations family operate in Afghanistan. Of particular note was the
challenging security environment in which national and international staff members
operated. Finally, the members of the mission highly commended the tireless efforts
and leadership of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Tom
Koenigs, and the dedication of UNAMA and other United Nations personnel,
especially those international and national staff who serve in highly insecure
environments.

IV. Findings and recommendations
International commitment to Afghanistan in the face of
renewed challenges
35. The mission found that the spread of insurgency, and terrorist activity by the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist groups, linked with the illegal drug trade,
coupled with corruption and failures of governance and the rule of law, collectively
pose a grave threat to reconstruction and nation-building in Afghanistan. However,
the mission is convinced that the Government of Afghanistan and the international
community have established a sound strategy to overcome these challenges. The
Security Council will undertake to ensure that the international community’s support
for Afghanistan and its commitment to this shared strategy remain firm and
enduring.

Afghanistan Compact
36. The mission welcomes the achievements of the Bonn process and reaffirms its
support for the Afghanistan Compact as the best framework for cooperation between
the Government of Afghanistan and the international community. The Compact
should now move to serious action and consistent implementation efforts under the
overall guidance of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board. The mission
applauds the Government’s ownership of the political and development process and
encourages it to transform its ownership into further action with a view to striving
towards the benchmarks laid out in the Compact. At the same time, Afghanistan
needs additional and sustained support from the international community, both for

10

06-63138

S/2006/935

quick gains and for sustained progress over the long term. The mission strongly
urges the international community — especially the participants in the London
Conference on Afghanistan — to continue their financial and political underpinning
in support of the Compact’s benchmarks and the overall goals of security, good
governance and economic development.

International military forces
37. The mission urges NATO and other countries to maintain and, where possible,
increase their commitment to ISAF to meet the challenge of the current security
environment in Afghanistan. International military forces should enhance their
cooperation with the Government of Afghanistan, remain committed to respecting
international human rights law and international humanitarian law, avoid civilian
casualties and respect local culture and traditions.

Afghan security forces and security sector reform
38. The mission affirms the importance of establishing a strong and sustainable
Afghan National Army and urges donors and the Government of Afghanistan to
redouble their collective efforts to establish a trusted and effective Afghan National
Police throughout the country. The mission also noted the central importance of
reforming the Afghan Ministry of Interior. The mission concluded that considerable
investment would be required before the security benchmarks in the Afghanistan
Compact could be achieved. In addition, the deployment of the new Afghan
National Auxiliary Police must be properly funded and monitored to ensure that the
new forces are fully representative of the relevant communities, responsibly led,
accountable to central authorities and capable of upholding human rights. The
mission calls upon the international community to revitalize its support to the
increased efforts of the Government of Afghanistan to implement the programme to
disband illegally armed groups.

The rule of law and good governance
39. As a matter of highest priority, the mission urges the Government of
Afghanistan with the support of its international partners to establish rule of law and
good governance throughout the country. To this end, the mission encourages the
Government to take immediate steps to strengthen justice sector institutions and
provincial government, including through the replacement of corrupt officials and
local power brokers. In these efforts, the Government must enjoy the united support
of the international community and adequate resources. More effective mechanisms
for strategic planning, funding and coordination of rule of law programmes among
international donors and agencies at the national and provincial levels are required.
There is also a need to address the problem of endemic corruption within the
judiciary and for a comprehensive review of judicial service. The mission calls upon
donors to increase the coherence and scale of assistance in the development of
Afghanistan’s human capital, with special priority to be given to the reform of the
country’s civil service. An assessment of technical assistance efforts should be
undertaken with a view to the realization of maximum use of such assistance.

06-63138

11

S/2006/935

Human rights and protection of civilians
40. The mission urges the Government and international community to sharpen
their focus on human rights and protection of civilians, including through increased
monitoring of adherence to international humanitarian and human rights law. The
mission encourages the Government to reinforce its commitment to human rights
and reconciliation through increased support to the Afghan Independent Human
Rights Commission and the implementation of the Action Plan for Peace, Justice
and Reconciliation in Afghanistan as required by the Compact, without prejudice to
the fulfilment of the measures introduced by the Security Council in its relevant
resolutions. The mission urges the Government and donors to make the
empowerment of women a true cross-cutting priority and to actively defend the
provisions for the rights of women that are enshrined in the Constitution of
Afghanistan.

Coordination and delivery of humanitarian and
development assistance
41. The mission recognizes that, where possible, humanitarian and development
assistance should be delivered by skilled and experienced civilian actors and notes
that the capacity for civilian coordination of humanitarian assistance should be
strengthened in 2007. It also recognizes that given the prevailing circumstances in
Afghanistan, assistance will need to be provided by those best placed to deliver in
the framework of their respective mandates. The focus should be to extend
development to the provinces, strengthen accountability and reduce impunity at the
community level, and achieve tangible and visible results. The international
community and the Government of Afghanistan are particularly encouraged to
implement programmes that generate employment given that the dearth of such
opportunities contributes significantly to recruitment of insurgents. To promote such
coordination, the coordination mechanism of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board should be further improved and focused on delivery.
42. Government-led coordination efforts need to be strengthened and streamlined,
in particular among national Afghan institutions and all actors at the provincial and
district level, with the help of UNAMA and United Nations country teams.
Coordination among the Afghan leadership in government departments, the
international development community and the Provincial Reconstruction Teams
should be enhanced and local mechanisms strengthened to ensure that Provincial
Reconstruction Team assistance programmes can be led by the Government and are
delivered in line with community priorities and the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy.

Counter-narcotics
43. The mission urges the Government and the international community to further
their efforts to strengthen and diversify legal livelihoods so that rural communities
are able to move away from the illegal cultivation of opium poppy and pursue
legitimate economic opportunities. The mission underlines the importance of the
enhanced fight against the illicit trafficking in drugs and precursors within

12

06-63138

S/2006/935

Afghanistan and in neighbouring States and countries along trafficking routes,
including increased cooperation among them to strengthen anti-narcotic controls to
curb the drug flow. The Government, with support from the international
community, is also called upon to step up activity to arrest and prosecute major drug
traffickers regardless of their position or status, and to proceed with energetic
implementation of all elements of the National Drug Control Strategy.

Regional cooperation
44. The mission reaffirms that fostering trust and cooperation between
Afghanistan and its neighbouring and regional partners is of crucial importance for
peace, security and development in the region. The mission welcomes efforts made
by the Governments of Afghanistan and Pakistan to fight against terrorism and to
reinforce border security. The mission urges both Governments to increase dialogue
and collaboration in the face of a growing threat to their shared security. This will
continue to require political commitment and sustained practical cooperation at all
levels. The mission looks forward to the outcome of plans by the two countries to
hold jirgas to improve security and stability.

Terrorism and stability
45. The mission recommends that the list established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1267 (1999) continue to be updated as necessary and on the basis of the
most up-to-date information, as envisaged by the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
46. The mission reaffirms the central and impartial role of the United Nations in
promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan. The mission supports the ongoing
expansion of UNAMA into the provinces with a view to strengthening Government
and donor coordination of assistance at the provincial and local levels. In this
context, the mission encourages the Secretary-General to consider measures to
promote the coordination role of UNAMA both in the capital and in the country and
to make recommendations in his next report. The mission recognizes the extremely
difficult circumstances under which UNAMA and the rest of the United Nations
family operate in Afghanistan and calls on Member States to provide all the
necessary support to allow the United Nations to carry out its mandate in such a
challenging environment.

06-63138

13

S/2006/935

Annex I
Terms of reference and composition of the Security Council
visit to Afghanistan
1.
The members of the Security Council have decided to send a mission to
Afghanistan. The visit will take place from 9 to 17 November 2006.

Terms of reference
2.

The mission has the following objectives:
• To give assurance to the Afghan society of the continued commitment by the
international community to the Afghan process based on the Afghanistan
Compact and Security Council resolution 1662 (2006) under Afghan
leadership
• To demonstrate the Council’s support for the Afghan efforts for security,
governance and development by the Government, Parliament, local
governments, civil society and other Afghan parties
• To review the progress in the Afghan efforts in the above areas, with particular
emphasis on counter-narcotics, security sector reform, including disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, the disbandment of illegal armed groups,
human rights protection, public sector reform, justice sector reform and rule of
law issues in the efforts to foster regional cooperation as well as in the Afghan
and international efforts in combating terrorism in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions
• To review the status of international assistance, in particular the activities of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, including United
Nations provincial offices and the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board
and the operation of the International Security Assistance Force, including its
cooperation with the Afghan Security Forces and the Operation Enduring
Freedom coalition

Composition
Kenzo Oshima (Japan), Head of mission
Martín Garcia Moritán (Argentina)
Lars Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark)
Jean-Pierre Lacroix (France)
Adamantios Th. Vassilakis (Greece)
Abdulla Al-Sulaiti (Qatar)
Vadim Smirnov (Russian Federation)
Peter Burian (Slovakia)
Nicholas Williams (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland)
Jackie Wolcott Sanders (United States of America)

14

06-63138

S/2006/935

Annex II
Programme of the Security Council mission to Afghanistan
(11 to 16 November 2006)
Saturday, 11 November
1745-1810

Security briefing by the Department of Safety and Security

1945-2130

Dinner with United Nations heads of agencies and senior staff
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA)

Sunday, 12 November
0815-0915

Meeting with the Head of the Afghan Independent Human
Rights Commission

1000-1030

Meeting with President Hâmid Karzai, at the Presidential
Palace

1130-1300

Participation in the morning meeting of the Joint Coordination
and Monitoring Board, at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs

1315-1410

Lunch with members of the Joint Coordination
Monitoring Board, at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs

1415-1445

Meeting with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Rangin Dâdfar
Spantâ, at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs

1450-1550

Joint press conference with the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs

1600-1655

Meeting with the First Vice President and Cabinet Ministers
on development and finance, at the Sedarat, Office of the First
Vice President

1700-1730

Meeting with the Second Vice President, at the Sedarat

1745-1830

Briefing with Commander General David Richards of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and the Senior
Civilian Representative of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) in Afghanistan, Dan Everts, at ISAF
headquarters

2000-2130

Dinner in honour of the members of the Security Council
hosted by General Richards at ISAF headquarters

and

Monday, 13 November

06-63138

0800-0900

Meeting with the security management team, at the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) conference room,
UNDP compound

0900-1000

Meeting with the United Nations country team, at the United
Nations Development Programme conference room, UNDP
compound

15

S/2006/935

1030-1115

Meeting with the Deputy Speaker of the Meshrano Jirga,
Sayed Hamed Gailani, at Parliament House

1345-1430

Meeting with Attorney General Abdul Jabar Sabet, at the
Serena Hotel

1445-1600

Meeting with Cabinet Ministers on security, at the
Presidential Palace, Office of the National Security Adviser

1630-1800

Meeting with representatives of the Agency Coordinating
Body for Afghan Relief at the UNAMA Office of
Communications and Public Information conference room

1900-2100

Reception in honour of the Security Council members hosted
by Minister for Foreign Affairs Spantâ

Tuesday, 14 November
0830-0850

Greetings by the United Nations regional team and move to
ISAF headquarters, at Kandahar Airfield

0900-0930

Regional Command South briefing to Security Council
members and the media, at Kandahar Airfield

0945-1035

Flight from Kandahar to the Provincial Reconstruction Team
compound, at Qalat, Zabul Province

1040-1120

Tour for Security Council members of Qalat Provincial
Reconstruction Team compound, and the Afghan National
Auxiliary Police Training Centre, including computer
training, medical training facilities

1120-1220

Meeting with the Governor of Zabul Province and the Council
of Elders, at the Governor’s guest house

1300-1340

Flight from the Qalat Provincial Reconstruction Team to
Kandahar Airfield

1715-1900

Meeting with UNAMA staff, at the office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General

1930-2130

Reception in honour of the Security Council members hosted
by the Japanese Ambassador to Afghanistan at the Serena
Hotel

Wednesday, 15 November

16

0800-0900

Meeting with the Wolesi Jirga, Professor Burhanudin Rabani,
Chairman of the Legislative Committee, at Parliament House

1000-1100

Flight to Mazari Sharif

1130-1230

Meeting with civil society, at the UNAMA office

1245-1345

Working lunch hosted by Governor Mohammad Atta, at the
Governor’s office

1530-1630

Flight to Kabul

06-63138

S/2006/935

1715-1815

Press Conference in the Office of Communications and Public
Information conference room

1830-1945

Meeting with Ambassadors, Palace 7

2000-2130

Informal dinner, Palace 7

Thursday, 16 November
1500-1700

06-63138

Meeting with the Foreign Secretary, in Islamabad

17
