A /67/PV.71

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-seventh session

71st plenary meeting
Tuesday, 2 April 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: I now invite the attention of the
General Assembly to a report by the President of
the Final United Nations Conference on the Arms
Trade Treaty on the outcome of the Conference, to be
considered under agenda item 94, entitled “General and
complete disarmament”, and to document A/67/L.58,
circulated under the same item.
Members will recall that, at its 2nd plenary meeting,
on 21 September 2012, the General Assembly allocated
agenda item 94 to the First Committee. In order for the
Assembly to proceed expeditiously on this item, may
I take it that the Assembly agrees to consider agenda
item 94 directly in plenary meeting and to proceed
immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 94 (continued)
General and complete disarmament
Draft resolution (A/67/L.58)
The President: The General Assembly will now
hear a report by the President of the Final United Nations
Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty on the outcome
of the Conference, in accordance with paragraph 7 of
resolution 67/234, of 24 December 2012, and to take
action on draft resolution A/67/L.58.

In resolution 67/234, the General Assembly decided
to remain seized of the matter of the arms trade treaty
during the sixty-seventh session. Last week, the Final
United Nations Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty
came within reach of a consensual text, but regrettably
was not able to finalize an agreement.
Today, we meet in this Hall to take action on
draft resolution A/67/L.58, entitled “The Arms Trade
Treaty”, under agenda item 94, entitled “General and
complete disarmament”. The historic dimension of this
day is reflected in the fact that a General Assembly
draft resolution with an attached treaty text regulating
the international trade in conventional arms is, for the
first time, the subject of action in this Hall.
I would like to thank Ambassador Peter Woolcott
of Australia, President of the Final United Nations
Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty, for getting us
so close to the finish line. I would also like to express
my deep appreciation to his predecessor, Ambassador
Roberto García Moritán of Argentina, for his tireless
efforts in that process. Last, but certainly not least, I
would like to recognize the key role that SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon has played in ensuring that this
crucial issue remained at the top of the agenda of what
he has aptly called our “over-armed world”.
In 2006, Member States pledged in this very Hall
to engage in a multilateral effort to produce a legally
binding instrument establishing common standards for
the import, export and transfer of conventional arms,
including warships and battle tanks, combat aircraft
and attack helicopters, as well as small arms and light

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-27622 (E)

*1327622*

A/67/PV.71

weapons. I personally believe that the final text of that
Conference meets those commitments to a great extent.
I also believe that the lack of a regulatory framework
on the import, export and transfer of conventional arms
has made a daunting contribution to ongoing conflicts,
regional instabilities, the displacement of peoples,
terrorism and transnational organized crime. The
final text underscores that point quite clearly. It also
draws a link between the presence of weapons across
the developing world, especially in conflict-affected
areas, and the challenge of sustainable development and
safeguarding human rights.
I believe that the final text is robust and actionable.
It is also in many ways groundbreaking. It indicates
that arms-exporting countries would be legally bound
to report arms sales and transfers. They would also
be obliged to make an assessment as to whether the
weapons they sell could be used to facilitate human
rights abuses and violations of humanitarian law.
That would be an important step towards enhancing
the transparency and strengthening the accountability
mechanisms of the legitimate trade in arms, which the
text explicitly reaffirms is within the sovereign rights
of all Member States.
The final text also respects and protects the right
of its signatories to regulate the buying and selling
of conventional armaments, both domestically and
internationally, as well as the primacy of national
legislation in defining the conditions under which their
citizens may own and operate arms.
While the text of the arms trade treaty represents
an important step forward, much work remains to be
done in other areas, especially on arms control and
international disarmament. If the United Nations is
to continue to play a key role in assisting countries
in establishing or improving their respective arms
control systems, additional efforts will need to be
made in pushing forward progress in forums such as
the Conference on Disarmament, which unfortunately
has not produced significant progress for more than a
decade.
Whatever the outcome of today’s meeting, if the
treaty is to be effective, we will need to keep working
together to fulfil its goals. As President of the General
Assembly, I sincerely hope that we will all continue
with our efforts to bring an arms trade treaty into being.

2

I now give the floor to the President of the Final
United Nations Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty,
Ambassador Peter Woolcott .
Mr. Woolcott (Australia): Pursuant to operative
paragraph 7 of General Assembly resolution 67/234,
of 24 December 2012, it is an honour for me, as
President of the Final United Nations Conference on
the Arms Trade Treaty, to report on the outcome of
the Conference to the General Assembly. This report,
which will be made available on the website of the Final
Conference, should be considered in conjunction with
the report of the Final Conference, which was adopted
on the evening of Thursday, 28 March, and is contained
in document A/CONF.217/2013/2.
Since my endorsement as President-designate of
the Final Conference at the informal consultations in
New York on 20 November 2012 and throughout the
Final Conference itself, I articulated a single goal
for the Final Conference — an open and transparent
process towards a consensus outcome on an arms trade
treaty that, if implemented, would make a difference
by reducing human suffering and saving lives. It is
unfortunate that the Final Conference could not fully
achieve that goal. On Thursday, 28 March, I ruled that
there was not a consensus in the Final Conference for
the adoption of the negotiated treaty text contained
in the annex of document A/CONF.217/2013/L.3, due
to the objections of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Nevertheless, that result should not diminish what
was achieved at the Final Conference or the efforts of
delegations since the final day of the United Nations
Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty, held in July
2012, in working hard to bridge differences and achieve
an arms trade treaty. Our open and transparent process
at the Final Conference was conducive to that end.
From December 2012, I conducted a series of
consultations — in New York and Geneva, as well
as Addis Ababa, Beijing, Brussels, Cairo, Mexico
City, Moscow, New Delhi, Paris, Port of Spain
and Washington, D.C. — listening to the views of
Governments in bilateral, regional, group and openended meetings. Throughout my consultations, I was
clear about how the process would be conducted, and I
offered no surprises. We set an ambitious programme
of work for the Final Conference, and together we
implemented it.

13-27622

A/67/PV.71

At the core of that programme of work were three
reviews of the treaty text leading to the draft treaty
texts introduced in accordance with the programme of
work of the Final Conference, on 20, 22 and 27 March,
respectively. Meeting those deadlines would not have
been possible without the commitment of all delegations
to the process. Each text built upon the previous draft
and represented a fair expression of negotiation,
compromise between major interests in the room and
ultimately what might command consensus at the end
of the Final Conference.
The process had two key elements designed
to ensure, first, that views could be narrowed in a
negotiating setting and, secondly, that there would be
confidence in the legal quality of the final product. I am
indebted to the cross-regional group of facilitators who
led delegations through complex issues, sometimes late
into the night; they were invaluable for the negotiating
process. Their names are set out in the report of the
Final Conference, but I want to pay tribute to them
here again individually — Ambassador Mari Amano
of Japan on brokering; Ambassador Paul Beijer of
Sweden on scope; Mr. Roberto Dondisch of Mexico
on diversion; Mr. Bouchaib Eloumni of Morocco
on preamble, principles, and object and purpose;
Ambassador Dell Higgie of New Zealand on
general implementation and relationship with other
international agreements; Ambassador Paul van
den IJssel of the Netherlands on record-keeping and
reporting; Ambassador Federico Perazza of Uruguay
on final provisions; Mr. Zahid Rastam of Malaysia
on transit and trans-shipment; Ambassador Riitta
Resch of Finland on other considerations; Ms. Shorna
Kay Richards and Ms. Michelle Walker of Jamaica on
prohibitions; and Mr. Rob Wensley of South Africa on
international cooperation and international assistance.
The cross-regional drafting committee under the
leadership of Deputy Foreign Minister Juan Manuel
Gómez Robledo of Mexico, which represented all
official United Nations languages and various legal
traditions, helped to standardize the text and ensure
that it met a high legal standard.
But ultimately, all delegations came together during
the Final Conference, working hard and negotiating in
a constructive manner and looking for success. The
different interests and perspectives in the room required
us to work through complex issues. The commitment
of delegations across the arc of negotiation was truly
impressive; they wanted a strong outcome. In the end,

13-27622

the Final Conference came very close to success; the
final draft text is a compromise text that represents the
broadest possible input of delegations. That text would
make a difference to the broadest range of stakeholders.
It would establish new common international standards
in the conventional arms trade. It would also establish
a forum, the Conference of States Parties, for
transparency and accountability. The text would make
an important difference by reducing human suffering
and saving lives.
In looking back, I must recognize the contribution
of my predecessor, Ambassador Roberto García Moritán
of Argentina, whose work and tireless efforts allowed
the Final Conference to have a firm basis for its work.
I also want to recognize the role of civil society whose
members brought their energy, dogged advocacy and
sheer hard work to the whole process over many years.
I thank the Bureau of the Final Conference for its
strong support and wise advice. I thank the SecretaryGeneral, High Representative Angela Kane and the
Secretary-General of the Conference, Daniel Prins,
for their commitment to this process. I also thank
the Secretariat staff who supported the work of the
Final Conference, from the political officers of the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs to the
Secretary and the conference services staff, the legal
advisers, the interpreters, the document translators who
did some great work in the final days of the Conference,
the technical officers and the security staff. It was a
team effort. Finally, I thank my team who worked
tirelessly — Claire Elias, Namdi Payne, Guy Pollard,
Rachel Stohl, Emily Street and my deputy, Paul Wilson.
In closing, I wish to thank all participants in the
Final Conference for their hard work and dedication
to the Arms Trade Treaty. It has been my honour
and privilege to work with them during this process.
With my statement today, my role as President of the
Final Conference ends. But as Australian Permanent
Representative to the United Nations in Geneva, I look
forward to working with delegations into the future as
we strive together to bring into force and implement an
arms trade treaty.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica to introduce draft
resolution A/67/L.58.
Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): It
is an honour to introduce to the General Assembly
draft resolution A/67/L.58, entitled “The Arms Trade

3

A/67/PV.71

Treaty” on behalf of more than 100 Member States.
Through draft resolution A/67/L.58, we will adopt the
arms trade treaty whose text is laid out in the annex to
document A/CONF.217/2013/L.3.
After seven years of hard work culminating in the
last two weeks of negotiations, we have before us a
balanced and robust document. It is in essence the type
of efficient and transparent treaty for which we so have
arduously fought. The question we must ask ourselves
now is not whether we should approve it, but why we
have waited so long to do so. The time has come to act
without delay. Let us reaffirm with factual evidence that
the United Nations is able to address the most serious
and most complex challenges that our peoples face, that
it can turn fair expectations into tangible realities and
that it is an indispensable organization in the twentyfirst century.
Let today’s meeting be one of which we can be
proud. Let us turn today, 2 April 2013, into a historic
day by adopting, at last, the arms trade treaty.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/67/L.58, entitled “The Arms
Trade Treaty”. Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote before the vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): My delegation would like
to explain its position before the vote on draft resolution
A/67/L.58, entitled “The Arms Trade Treaty”.
Indonesia supports the need to establish international
standards for regulating international trade in
conventional arms and preventing and eradicating
their diversion towards illicit markets or their use for
illegitimate purposes. However, the standard should be
fair, transparent and non-discriminatory. We are aware
that the majority of countries have been expecting to
adopt an arms trade treaty (ATT) and believe that the
entry into force of such a treaty would contribute to
corrective efforts being undertaken to reduce human
suffering. Accordingly, because my country respects
the aspirations of those countries, Indonesia has never
stood in the way of the possible adoption of a text by
consensus at the United Nations conferences on the
ATT.
While respecting the aspirations of those countries,
Indonesia will abstain in the voting on the draft

4

resolution A/67/L.58 for the following reasons, inter
alia.
First, the text of the ATT laid out in the annex to
document A/CONF.217/2013/L.3, despite its many
positives, contains substantive deficiencies. It does not
provide a fair balance in its attempt to accommodate the
legitimate interests of the majority of importing States.
Secondly, it does not reflect the reality that, in
the case of intra-State conflict, States have rights and
responsibilities to protect civilians, as well as to defend
their national unity and integrity.
Thirdly, the scope of the arms trade treaty has been
expanded and is not entirely clear. It covers only the
7+1 categories, but includes ammunitions, munitions
and components. Moreover, the scope can be extended
by the exporting States to the broadest possible range of
conventional weapons.
Fourthly, the text unfairly favours exporting
States in judging the parameter and meaning of a
serious violation of international humanitarian law
or international human rights law. Our proposal
to establish an independent panel or independent
advisory group consisting of eminent persons of high
moral standing who have expertise in human rights
and international law with mandates to observe and
scrutinize the application of human rights law and
humanitarian law is not reflected in the text.
Lastly, the text does not prohibit unauthorized and
unlawful non-State actors from possessing or using
arms as defined in the scope of the arms trade treaty.
Therefore, Indonesia is not yet in a position to
consent to acceptance of the text. A careful examination
will be conducted in our capital involving all the
relevant stakeholders, from the Government, think
tanks and universities, members of Parliament and civil
society. The text will be scrutinized in a transparent
and comprehensive manner pursuant to the national
laws and the security needs of Indonesia.
Before I conclude, allow me to commend the
President of the Final United Nations Conference on
the Arms Trade Treaty, Ambassador Peter Woolcott
of Australia, for his tireless efforts. He made his best
effort to try to reflect in the text proposals by countries,
including Indonesia, that enjoy support from numerous
countries. We would also like to congratulate the
States, as well as civil society, that have, from the very
beginning, supported the early conclusion of an arms

13-27622

A/67/PV.71

trade treaty. I join them in hoping that the adoption of
the arms trade treaty and its entry into force will bring
about concrete results in reducing human suffering,
building confidence among States and contributing to
international peace, security and stability.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to extend its heartfelt
thanks to Ambassador Wolcott, President of the Final
United Nations Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty,
for his efforts to bring the views of Member States closer
together, despite of the differences and contradictions,
with a view to reaching an acceptable draft of the arms
trade treaty that can enjoy consensus. All of us in the
Hall recognize that his task was never an easy one due
to the significant and fundamental differences in the
positions of Member States and the conflicting political
interests among countries.
My delegation would like to emphasize its full
support for the global trend towards building a world
free from the use and the threat of use of force that is
governed by the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, which are based on justice,
equality and peace. We wish to confirm our readiness
to participate in any international effort that seeks to
achieve that goal in good faith.
As mentioned by the President of the Conference,
we have worked for years, like other Member States,
in order to achieve a good treaty — not one that is
inapplicable or used solely as a means of bringing
pressure to bear on others in the future, as was the case
with other important instruments. We are not against
the treaty. We believe that, if it were to be concluded by
consensus, as required, it would be a major gain for the
international community. We need a good treaty that
we will not regret later and that will not be used for
political exploitation by some States against others.
My country, Syria, will not be on the side of
obstructing a treaty to which we all aspire. However,
those who have impeded a fair and balanced treaty are
the ones who refused to pay attention to the concerns
and worries of a large segment of Member States. We
in Syria are interested more than others in concluding
and adopting a good and viable treaty that paves the
way for a new era in dealing with issues concerning the
illicit arms trade, instead of the state of immoral chaos
that currently prevails in that area. The shadow of that
anarchy falls over international peace and security
and blatantly ignores the concerns of victims and the

13-27622

disadvantaged, in favour of the interests of users and
warmongers.
My country is among the Member States that have
always sought to legalize and regulate the arms trade,
due to the risks posed by the illegal arms trade to
international peace and security. A case in point is what
my country is currently witnessing due to that bloody
trade, which indiscriminately supports terrorism and
its perpetrators against Syria and its people. Certain
countries among those that strongly supported the draft
treaty before us are fully engaged in supplying terrorist
groups in Syria with all kinds of lethal weapons, which
claim the lives of thousands of civilians and destroy
the country’s infrastructure. That in itself explains the
objection that those States raised to the inclusion of a
paragraph banning supplying unauthorized non-State
actors with weapons. That is political hypocrisy and
a clear indication that the draft treaty before us is
selective, and therefore cannot enjoy consensus.
My delegation has worked hard to achieve a treaty
based on consensus that safeguards the rights of all
States, be they exporting or importing ones. We have
tried to bring different perspectives closer together
by holding several meetings attended by a number of
like-minded delegations, as well as by meeting with
the President of the Conference more than once. We
presented to him a number of essential points that we
wanted to be included in the text of the treaty before
us in order to make it balanced and able to meet the
expectations of all Member States. Regrettably, that
effort, like many parallel efforts undertaken by other
delegations interested in the adoption of a compromise
text, have been lost because of the insistence of some
on protecting the interests of arms producers, at the
expense of the interests, concerns and security of a wide
range of countries. Accordingly, my delegation, having
exhausted all methods of persuasion and dialogue,
finds itself compelled to vote against the draft treaty
text attached to the draft resolution contained in the
document A/67/L.58, for the following reasons.
First, the draft treaty ignores the proposals by a
number of States, including Syria, to include a reference
to foreign occupation and the inalienable right of
peoples under such occupation to self-determination.
As the Assembly well knows, Israel still occupies Arab
lands in the Syrian Golan, Palestine and South Lebanon.
Second, the draft treaty does not contain a clear
paragraph referring to the categorical prohibition of

5

A/67/PV.71

the supply of arms to unauthorized non-State terrorist
actors and groups. My country cannot accept the
omission of that serious issue, from which Syria is
suffering currently due to the fact that some countries
are supplying terrorist groups with weapons. That
omission is mainly due to the shameful disregard by
Member States of the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and the principles of international
law by ignoring the involvement and complicity of
Arab, regional and Western authorities in illegal arms
smuggling to Syria in order to undermine any hope
of a peaceful political resolution to the Syrian crisis,
in accordance with Security Council resolutions 2042
(2012) and 2043 (2012).
Third, the draft treaty fails to include a special
section on definitions to address certain ambiguities
related to the concepts and the arms covered by
the treaty. Without clarifying the definitions and
terminology, those who approve of the draft treaty
are like someone who is asked to swim without first
knowing how to float.
Fourth, the draft treaty fails to reflect a very
important topic, namely, the crime of aggression as
defined and internationally agreed upon in resolution
3314 (XXIX), of 1974.
Fifth, selectivity in arms control and transparency
does not represent a balanced and comprehensive
starting point. That would impede the international
community’s ability to reach a commitment on
disarmament in a practical, transparent and impartial
manner.
Sixth, in its current form, the draft treaty constitutes
interference with the powers of the Security Council.
We would like this to set a precedent for international
efforts before completing the Security Council reform.
Seventh, in its current form, the treaty is not
consensual, as it does not take into consideration the
positions and opinions of many nations, including those
of my country.
The proposed draft resolution is incomplete and
unbalanced; it protects the interests of some States at
the expense of the interests of others. My delegation
believes that it is important to allow for action and
follow-up negotiations in earnest on an arms trade
treaty that ensures balance, equality and justice among
Member States and that strives to maintain international
peace and security, rather than abusing, in one way or

6

another, the security and peace of many Member States
and ignoring their fundamental national interests.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Our delegation would like to make the following
explanation of vote with regard to draft resolution
A/67/L. 58, entitled “The Arms Trade Treaty”.
The working principle of adopting decisions by
consensus was established from the beginning of the
arms trade treaty process, with the understanding
that that was the way to ensure a strong, effective and
balanced treaty that was acceptable to all States. The
principle of consensus has always been considered
essential in the process, given the fact that the outcome
would be a legally binding instrument on the arms
trade that would have, inter alia, important political,
economic and security-related implications for all
States.
The Final United Nations Conference on the Arms
Trade Treaty, which concluded on 28 March, was unable
to reach consensus on the adoption of the draft treaty
put forward by the President of the Conference, owing
to the clear differences among the positions of the
participating States with regard to the text. Despite that,
a group of delegations decided to force a decision by the
General Assembly on a draft treaty that did not achieve
the desired consensus. That is to say that an approach,
which is not shared by Cuba, has been imposed in which
the only possible successful outcome of the process that
we have been undertaking is that of the adoption of a
treaty at any price, even when it does not duly take into
account the legitimate interests of all States. In Cuba’s
opinion, what was necessary was the continuation of
a broad, transparent and inclusive negotiating process
with the participation of all States until the necessary
consensus was achieved. Unfortunately, as we have
pointed out, that did not happen.
We never expected to achieve an ideal and perfect
treaty. We are realistic. However, we participated
in the Conference fully committed to the mandate
of resolution 67/234, which sets forth that the treaty
resulting from that process should be strong, balanced
and effective. Regrettably, that mandate was not met.
The Conference provided a historic opportunity to
respond effectively to the serious consequences of the
illicit and unregulated arms trade for many people and
States throughout the world. That historic opportunity
was not appropriately seized. Unfortunately, the final
draft of the treaty that is now being considered for

13-27622

A/67/PV.71

adoption was not up to the just demands and needs
of the international community, and therefore did not
enjoy consensus.

to create obstacles to the right of States to acquire
and possess arms for their legitimate self-defence, a
principle recognized in Article 51 of the Charter.

As we have already indicated, we believe that
the draft arms trade treaty that has been introduced
has serious limitations, which led to our delegation’s
decision to abstain in the voting owing to the multiple
ambiguities, inconsistencies, lack of definitions and
legal loopholes that characterize its text, among other
reasons. This is an unbalanced document that favours
the interests of the arms-exporting States, for which
privileges have been established that are detrimental
to the legitimate interests of the rest of the States,
including on matters of defence and national security.
Moreover, the points of view of some exporting States
were favoured over the human suffering caused by the
illicit and unregulated arms trade.

The lack of clarity on the scope of the treaty creates
a real danger that every State will define that scope in its
own way and that it will thus be applied inconsistently.
Since the scope does not expressly exclude dual-use
parts and components that have broad application for
legitimate peaceful uses, the treaty could eventually
become a new system for controlling the transfer of
technology, equipment and parts that would have an
effect on their use in civilian life, especially for those
countries that need such resources for development.
And the fact that the treaty’s ratification by the principal
producers and exporters of arms is not a requisite for
its entry into force undermines its effectiveness and
universality.

A prohibition of international arms transfers
to individuals, groups and institutions that are not
duly authorized by the governmental authorities of
receiving State was omitted, although there is evidence
that such non-State actors are among the primary
parties responsible for the illicit diversion of and trade
in arms and its associated scourges. That omission
significantly weakens the instrument and undermines
its efficacy and effectiveness. What is worse, by not
prohibiting those, the treaty actually legitimizes arms
transfers without the consent of the Government of the
receiving State, which constitutes a flagrant violation
of the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations with regard to non-interference in the internal
affairs, the political independence and the territorial
integrity of States.

Mr. Beck (Palau), Vice-President, took the Chair.

It is unjustifiable that the final draft of the
treaty eliminates the ban on the transfer of arms
for actions involving the use or threat of the use of
force in contravention of the Charter of the United
Nations, including acts of aggression in particular.
The principles that should guide the application of the
treaty, the minimum guarantee that the majority of
States will rely on in order to deal with possible abuses
or manipulation, are still unreasonably excluded from
the treaty’s operative part; their relevance in the context
of the treaty’s application was intentionally weakened.
The final draft of the treaty gives arms-exporting
States the privilege of evaluating the behaviour of
importing States at their discretion, on the basis of a
list of subjective and imprecise criteria that could easily
be abused or manipulated for political reasons, in order

13-27622

In conclusion, I would like to say that, on the
subject of the arms trade treaty, the Cuban authorities
reserve the right to take a definitive position when the
time comes to do so. Our country has been an active
and constructive participant throughout the process;
our delegation submitted many proposals, both in our
national capacity and jointly with other countries. In
that spirit, I would like to emphasize that Cuba will
continue to implement measures aimed at preventing
and combating the illegal arms trade, conscious, as we
are, of the legitimate humanitarian concerns associated
with it. We reiterate that commitment here today, and
we assure the Assembly that illicit arms trading cannot
exist in Cuba because we have a system that ensures its
impossibility.
Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, Nicaragua would like to thank
the Ambassador of Australia for his report and for all
his efforts during the negotiations.
We would also like to state our position on the
treaty that we are about to adopt on the arms trade,
as contained in draft resolution A/67/L.58. Nicaragua
has always worked on the premise of the possibility of
reaching consensus. Unfortunately, however, we did
not have the political will necessary to accommodate
the positions of all the parties — one that would have
enabled us to arrive at a consensus on a balanced,
non-discriminatory text. My country has committed
and is taking the measures necessary to help combat
and eradicate the illicit trade in arms. Aware as we

7

A/67/PV.71

are of our commitment to peace for our people and
to fighting and preventing illicit arms trafficking, we
have incorporated into our national legislation the
reform of our programme of action and our instrument
for tracking arms through a special law controlling and
regulating firearms, ammunition, explosives and other
related materials. Law No. 510 has launched a new era
that includes a rigorous programme for registering
firearms in civilian hands, as well as for confiscating
weapons of war.
We are aware of the humanitarian impact and all the
consequences of this scourge, particularly in our region
of Central America. It is for that reason that we are
committed to creating a regime that is truly multilateral
and that reflects, in a balanced and objective manner,
the views of all States parties. It is only in that way
that we will be able to achieve a solid, balanced,
responsible and effective treaty. We have always said
that any attempt to do anything else would risk making
it vulnerable to political abuse. For obvious reasons,
such a treaty would not be sufficiently credible, and an
opportunity would be wasted to achieve universality,
which is indispensable to the legitimacy of this type of
treaty. It is unfortunate that a treaty such as this has to
be adopted by vote rather than by consensus.

are quantifiable and easily verifiable. The treaty does
not provide for the kind of clear and clearly defined
terminology that can enable States parties to meet their
obligations as predictably as possible. As it stands, the
text uses many terms that are difficult to define and do
not include the necessary definitions.
We note with concern a major bias towards producers
and exporters of arms at the expense of importers,
which affects States parties’ national security. There
is no consistency between the sections of the treaty
that ensure that international assistance must hew to
the same level of legal obligations; there is no reference
to the excessive production of conventional weapons,
and their growing arsenals, on the part of primary
arms producers and exporters, which is an essential
element that should have been included in the treaty.
We continue to believe that every effort should be made
to ensure that the production of arms, particularly in
producer States, is done under international scrutiny.
For all of those reasons, Nicaragua will abstain
in the voting on draft resolution A/67/L.58 on the
arms trade treaty. The Government of Nicaragua will
continue to study and analyse the treaty.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Ambassador
Peter Woolcott for his efforts in seeking an agreement
on the draft treaty that we have before us today.

Speaking generally, we are concerned about
various elements in the treaty. For instance, there is
no mention of a ban on arms transfers to non-State
actors, which seems very dangerous to us, since if such
a ban is not included, it could be interpreted to mean
that such transfers are permitted. My delegation would
like to recall that our country was a victim, in the
1980s, of precisely this policy of arming and financing
non-State actors, resulting in, for example, the loss of
tens of thousands of Nicaraguan lives. The Central
American region now faces another scourge, namely,
drug trafficking and organized crime. There is no clear
affirmation in the operative part of the draft treaty of
States’ sovereign right to act in self-defence and for
their own security. There is no ban on arms transfers
to States that adopt a policy of the use or threat of use
of force or that commit crimes of aggression against
other States.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is fully
committed to preventing, combating and eradicating
the illicit trade in conventional weapons and has always
believed that the best way to achieve those objectives
is through a solid multilateral system that results in
a balanced, objective and non-discriminatory treaty.
We believe that the dynamic of the negotiations on the
draft treaty, in particular the imposition of artificial
timetables for its conclusion, has prevented the
development of in-depth discussions that would have
allowed us to achieve a genuine consensus worthy of
inclusive multilateralism. Instead we find ourselves
with a draft treaty that is susceptible to political
manipulation and that lacks the elements necessary for
becoming a universal and lasting instrument.

The current text does not give importers a phased
mechanism for appealing against political abuse.
It makes it possible for the treaty as a whole to be
vulnerable to potential manipulation, since it does
not include parameters that are objective, measurable,
concrete and based on generally accepted criteria that

Our country believes that, in its current state, the
draft treaty lacks balance both in nature and scope
and fails to take into account the proposals made
by numerous delegations. The draft treaty does not
address the serious problems of the overproduction
and stockpiling of conventional weapons by the world’s

8

13-27622

A/67/PV.71

largest producers and exporters. It does not recognize
the right of all States to acquire, produce, export,
import and possess conventional arms for self-defence
and security. It ignores the dangers that come with the
transfers to unauthorized non-State actors, nor does it
make any reference to crimes of aggression.
For the those reasons, my country will abstain in
the voting on draft resolution A/67/L.58, entitled “The
Arms Trade Treaty”.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, the Bolivian
delegation would like to thank Ambassador Woolcott
for his work during the Conference. We should also
like to point out that the Political Constitution of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia sets forth that our country
is a pacifist country. We are therefore opposed to all
forms of violence for the settlement of conflicts, which
does not mean we renounce our legitimate right to selfdefence, as we have maintained since the beginning of
the discussions leading to an arms trade treaty.
Of course, Bolivia agrees that the international
community should agree upon and transparently
negotiate consensual limits on the arms trade, which
has caused so much human suffering. Unfortunately,
consensus was not reached, although we could have
allowed ourselves more time for discussions and for
the debate on numerous pending topics that had been
proposed on repeated occasions by many delegations.
After a review of the treaty introduce for the
consideration of the General Assembly, we came to
the conclusion that the final draft has deficiencies,
contradictions and gaps. We will mention just a few of
the essential aspects.
First, there is an imbalance between the obligations
of exporting countries and importing countries. That
imbalance could affect the legitimate self-defence
needs of importing countries. Of course, it favours an
industry that lives off of the production of weapons.
Again, priority is given to profit over human suffering
and interventionism is legitimized notwithstanding the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
Furthermore, there is a lack of consistency in that
one of the primary reasons for which it was agreed
to establish the treaty — to fight the illicit traffic in
weapons — is so insufficiently developed in the text,
particularly in the part referring to the implementation
of the treaty. It is not possible for explicit provisions

13-27622

on preventing the sale or transfer of weapons to
irregular groups and non-State actors be left out. Nor
is it acceptable that, despite the oft-repeated requests of
many Member States, the text does not include provisions
that explicitly address the need to prevent the sale of
arms to countries involved in crimes of aggression and
in the invasion of autonomous territories, or that are
currently occupying other countries.
Lastly, we deem regretable the fact that the treaty’s
text is not sufficiently consistent with the spirit of the
Conference on Disarmament and that it lacks specific
provisions aimed at controlling and limiting the
production of more weaponry.
Those and other observations, inconsistencies and
gaps make the treaty vulnerable and subject to subjective
interpretations and manipulation. The weapons, war
and death industries will rest easy knowing that the
treaty that is to be adopted today favours their economic
interests. Bolivia has therefore decided to abstain in the
voting on the draft resolution on the arms trade treaty
before the Assembly.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The draft international arms trade treaty
(ATT) we are considering today contains a whole
range of positive elements. Upon Russia’s initiative,
with which a significant number of delegations have
associated themselve, a fundamentally new article has
been formulated, one that prompts States to prevent,
and indeed suppress, the transfer of weapons to illegal
trade channels. That is the first step, albeit insufficient,
on the path towards resolving the global problem related
to the illicit trade in conventional arms.
What is also important is that the text enshrines an
obligation on States to create effective national control
systems for regulating the transfer of conventional
arms. However, it was not backed by concrete measures
that, taken together, would have prevented arms from
being illegally traded.
The draft treaty contains a number of other
shortcomings. Despite the aspirations of a number of
States, the treaty does not include a ban on the supply
of weapons to unauthorized non-State entities. That is
a significant shortcoming that will inevitably have an
impact on the effectiveness of the treaty.
An additional shortcoming pertains to a number of
sensitive issues that could give rise to future diverging
interpretations of treaty obligations. Humanitarian

9

A/67/PV.71

criteria for risk assessment are insufficiently clearly
spelled out, which could lead to curious interpretations
that in turn could be used by individual States for
political purposes or to improve competitiveness. In
that context, we would like to especially focus on the
wording of article 6, paragraph 3, pursuant to which

Assembly’s consideration on the arms trade treaty
(ATT).

“[a] State Party shall not authorize any transfer
of conventional arms ... if it has knowledge at the
time of authorization that the arms or items would
be used in the commission of genocide, crimes
against humanity, grave breaches of the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 ...”

I should like to begin by recognizing the efforts of
Ambassador Peter Woolcott and his team throughout
the two-week process in trying to deliver a text that
incorporates the opinions of all States participating
in the Final United Nations Conference on the Arms
Trade Treaty. We appreciate the elimination from
article 7, on export and export assessment, of some
highly subjective concepts that could have been used to
apply undue political pressure and interference in the
internal affairs of States.

According to assurances that we have received
from the President of the Conference and sponsors of
that wording, the term “knowledge” in legal English is
a considerably broader concept than “to be informed
of” and indicates full conviction of something based
on all aggregated data. We are also assured that a
conclusion as to the existence or absence of knowledge
can be reached only by the exporting State itself. In
the context of the ATT, Russia will rely on its own
understanding of the term “knowledge”. Furthermore,
in the Russian text of the treaty, the wording will have
to be translated as “possesses reliable knowledge”.

Nevertheless, Ecuador believes that the text of
the arms trade treaty continues to contain imbalances
between the rights and obligations of importing and
exporting States. That has been evident from the
beginning. The lengthy deliberations and negotiations
with the President of the Conference and his facilitators
did not close those gaps. The gaps remain, and with
them the possibility of the text serving the exporting
countries’ interests over those of the importing
countries. It also increases the possibility that exporting
countries may impose on and therefore endanger the
security of the importers.

On the whole, we note that the draft in its current
form could, we hope, introduce a number of positive
elements into international trade and arms. However,
it fails to attain the standards that, in line with
existing international practice, are applied not only
in the Russian Federation, but also in many other
States. Out of respect for the desire of many States to
conclude and open for signature an arms trade treaty
as soon as possible, we were prepared not to object to
the Conference’s decision to approve the treaty’s text.
However, today we cannot offer it our unambiguous
support and will abstain in the voting.

My delegation believes that various factors could
have greatly diminished the imbalance in the treaty text.
Transferring the section on principles to the operative
part of the treaty could have done so. That did not
happen despite the very-well-argued points of view that
were offered by numerous delegations, including mine.
Paragraph 3 of article 2, on scope, was not eliminated
despite the insistence of many delegations. We believe
that this paragraph could contradict the objectives
referred to in article 1, in particular as related to
diversion, transparency and the treaty’s contribution to
international and regional peace, security and stability.

The ATT draft, as I have already stated, contains
significant exceptions and provisions that give rise
to doubts and questions. Until the very last minute,
the text was subject to significant changes requiring
comprehensive consideration, which in turn requires
time. Therefore, we intend to thoroughly work on the
draft in Moscow; following that, we will decide whether
it would be advisable to give our support to the treaty.

Other problems relate to the reference in article 6,
on prohibitions, to the crime of aggression; improved
identification of the national evaluation criteria referred
to in article 7, with the goal of preventing their political
use by exporting States; the exclusion of the prohibition
of transfers to non-State actors that do not have the due
authorization of the State to which those transfers are
sent; and the matter of States involved in acts of foreign
occupation. In addition, and in spite of the reiterated
requests of many delegations, we believe that the
process that we just concluded could have gone beyond
the process of negotiation between the President and the

Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to explain our vote on draft
resolution A/67/L.58, submitted for the General

10

13-27622

A/67/PV.71

States, which would have allowed for direct negotiations
among States. For that reason, my delegation wishes
to make it clear that such a modality should not be
considered a precedent for future negotiations of any
similar instruments within the United Nations.
My delegation wishes to express its serious concern
over the open attempts of numerous delegations to
redefine the rule of consensus. Had that proposal
been accepted, it could have done unforeseen damage
to States’ future ability to make consensus-based
decisions within multilateral organizations.
In conclusion, in spite of the failures and
shortcomings of the text yet out of respect for the majority
opinion in the General Assembly, the Government of
Ecuador, through its competent authorities and entities,
will carefully study the treaty in order to define its
position. My delegation will therefore abstain in the
voting.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
allow me to join those who have extended thanks to
Ambassador Peter Woolcott, President of the Final
United Nations Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty,
for his efforts during the negotiation process.
We affirm that the Sudan, like all other States in
our international system, is committed to regulating
the arms trade to serve the sound use of such trade,
which would strengthen the stability of all States. With
that objective in mind, our delegation participated
effectively in the negotiating process and in a
sincere effort to arrive at a balanced treaty. However,
unfortunately, our most important concerns, which
are shared by numerous other States, have not been
taken into consideration. These can be summarized as
follows.
The Treaty does not include any reference to
the prohibition of importing arms to groups and
individuals, which opens the door wide to arming
the mutinous groups that are currently destabilizing
security and stability in my country. Those groups
refuse to give up arms, listen to the voice of reason and
sit at the negotiating table. We should guarantee that
such groups do not have access to weapons with which
they can undermine stability.
Article 6, on the prohibition of transfers, is based
on Security Council resolutions. Instead, it should
have been based on the Charter of the United Nations
and its principles, which are more comprehensive than

13-27622

those of the Security Council. The article has no entry
on abbreviations and definitions, which increases
the possibility that the treaty will be politicized and
interpreted by exporting States to suit their own
interests. The Treaty contains terms of reference that
we respect and to which we are committed, but are also
open to politicization in this context. Those include,
inter alia, human rights, international humanitarian
law and their association with war crimes and crimes
against humanity.
Based on those reasons, my delegation will abstain
in the voting and anticipates that its abstention will be
included in the record of the meeting.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We pay a rich and
well-deserved tribute to Ambassador Peter Woolcott
for his untiring efforts to lead the Final United
Nations Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty to
success. Pakistan will vote in favour of draft resolution
A/67/L.58 on the arms trade treaty (ATT). We will do
so to demonstrate our solidarity with the people and
States negatively impacted by unregulated and illicit
trade in conventional arms, particularly small arms
and light weapons. In so doing, we also respond to the
aspirations of a broad coalition of States from Africa,
Latin America, the Caribbean region and Europe, as
well as to the strong advocacy of international civil
society and the media.
We recognize and support the humanitarian spirit
that has guided the initiative towards an arms trade
treaty. We agree that it is time to establish global
benchmarks to regulate the transfer of conventional
arms. We earnestly hope that the ATT is able to achieve
the noble goals that are enshrined in its text. We also
believe that credible steps need to be taken to ensure
that conventional weapons and munitions, small or
heavy, will not be used for terrorism, for transnational
crime or in violation of human rights or humanitarian
law, and that they will not be illegally diverted. The
Government and the people of Pakistan share those
ideals and aspirations.
We agree that the ATT is not an arms control or
disarmament treaty. The treaty is about responsible
arms trade and reducing human suffering and saving
human lives. We regret that it could not be adopted by
consensus. A little more flexibility on the part of all
sides could have addressed that problem. Universality
would have ensured wider validity and a more
predictable implementation.

11

A/67/PV.71

As the President of the United Nations Final
Conference ruled on 28 March, the text of the ATT could
not be adopted by consensus. The text was transmitted to
the General Assembly for action by vote. That procedure
does not alter the well-established rule of consensus
within the United Nations system or other multilateral
forums. The meaning of consensus in the framework of
United Nations action is generally understood to mean
adoption of a decision without formal objection and
vote. Selective interpretation of the rules of procedure
and departure from the established working methods
in treaty negotiations do not constitute any precedent
for future multilateral treaty negotiations in the field of
security and disarmament.
I take this opportunity to highlight once again
some of the key aspects to which Pakistan repeatedly
drew attention, but that were not taken on board. First,
arms acquisition by States motivated by security needs
can hardly be separated from their production and sale,
which are driven by profits and politics. The treaty
text ignores the vital element of excessive production,
which is an inseparable component of the entire chain
of international trade in conventional arms. In our view,
that is a serious omission which may impact the treaty’s
effectiveness in the long run.
Secondly, the treaty may be seen by many as
essentially a product of and by the exporters. It may
be perceived as not striking the necessary balance of
interests and obligations among the exporters and
importers, as well as the affected States. The call for
balance was endorsed by an overwhelming majority. As
we said at the conclusion of the diplomatic conference,
some treaty provisions seek to endorse in a global
legal instrument what existing national and plurilateral
export control systems already cover. As a treaty
anchored in humanitarian ideals, it is ironic to see
the interests of some major exporting countries being
protected in its text.
Thirdly, the treaty glossed over two lacunae.
Those include, first, the absence of definitions. That
omission represents a departure from established
treaty practice. Such a deviation may be used by some
exporters to circumvent provisions of the treaty. The
multiplicity of national definitions goes against the
central objective of the treaty, which is to establish
the highest common international standards. The
second is the lack of accountability of the exporters.
Although the text creates a few responsibilities for the
exporters, it does not provide a clear mechanism for

12

the accountability of those exporters, which may flout
or violate their new responsibilities, particularly those
relating to established criteria. Such lack of oversight
could reinforce the perception that the treaty is unfairly
tilted in favour of the exporters.
We had hoped that the arms trade treaty review
process would ensure that some of the concerns
highlighted today are addressed effectively. Such a
step would be key to promoting the effectiveness and
universality of the treaty.
Finally, I request that this statement be reflected
in the Assembly proceedings as well as in the official
records.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/67/L.58, entitled “The Arms Trade Treaty”.
I give the floor to the Under-Secretary-General.
Mr. Graisse (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/67/L.58, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Andorra, Barbados,
Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, the Central African Republic, Dominica,
El Salvador, Gabon, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Ireland,
Lesotho, Madagascar, Maldives, Malta, Micronesia,
Monaco, Mongolia, Mozambique, Nauru, the Niger,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, the
Republic of Moldova, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Samoa,
San Marino, Senegal, Seychelles, South Africa, South
Sudan, Suriname, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Ukraine, the United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay and Vanuatu.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunai
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African

13-27622

A/67/PV.71

Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal,
Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South
Sudan, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Uruguay, Zambia
Against:
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Syrian Arab Republic
Abstaining:
Angola, Bahrain, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), China, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Fiji,
India, Indonesia, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Swaziland, Yemen
Draft resolution A/67/L.58 was adopted by 154
votes to 3, with 23 abstentions (resolution 67/234 B).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Angola and
Cape Verde informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]

13-27622

The President: I shall now give the floor to
those representatives who have requested to speak in
explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted.
Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil): Brazil voted in
favour of resolution 67/234 B, which requests that the
Secretary-General open the text of the Arms Trade
Treaty (ATT) for signature as of 3 June 2013. We wish
to congratulate Ambassador Peter Woolcott of Australia
on his able leadership and conduct of the Final United
Nations Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty, held
during the past two weeks.
We participated actively in the ATT process
from its early stages, supporting the adoption of a
legally binding multilateral instrument that regulates
international transfers of conventional weapons as
a means of reducing the likelihood of such weapons
being diverted into the illicit market, contributing to
international conflicts and fueling armed violence. We
reaffirm our support for the text arrived at in the Final
Conference last week, even though the inclusion in it of
some aspects — such as the unambiguous inclusion in
the Treaty’s scope of ammunition, a clear prohibition
of transfers to unauthorized non-State actors, and a
requirement of end-use/end-user certificates for all
transfers of conventional weapons — would have
contributed to an even stronger treaty.
Ms. Mehta (India): As we stated in the concluding
plenary of the Final Conference on the Arms Trade
Treaty on 28 March, the draft treaty text that has now
been adopted through resolution 67/234 B fell short
of our expectations and those of a number of other
key stakeholders for a text that is clear, balanced and
implementable, and one that is able to attract universal
adherence. From the beginning of the Arms Trade
Treaty (ATT) process, India maintained that such a
treaty should make a real impact on illicit trafficking
in conventional arms and on their illicit use, especially
by terrorists and other unauthorized and unlawful
non-State actors. India has also consistently stressed
that the ATT should ensure a balance of obligations
between exporting and importing States.
However, the text that is annexed to the resolution
just adopted is weak on terrorism and non-State actors,
and those concerns find no mention in the Treaty’s
specific prohibitions. Furthermore, India cannot accept
that the Treaty should be used as an instrument in
the hands of exporting States to take unilateral force

13

A/67/PV.71

majeure measures against importing States parties
without consequences.
The relevant provisions in the final text do not meet
India’s requirements. India was an active participant
in the ATT negotiations. Underlying our participation
in those extended negotiations was the principle that
Member States have a legitimate right to self-defence
and our belief that there is no conflict between
the pursuit of national security objectives and the
aspiration that an arms trade treaty be strong, balanced
and effective. That is consistent with the strong and
effective national export controls that India already has
in place with respect to defence items.
My Government will undertake a full and thorough
assessment of the ATT text from the perspective of
our defence, security and foreign policy interests. At
this stage we are not in a position to endorse the text
contained in the annex to resolution 67/234 B. We have
therefore abstained on the resolution. I request that
this statement be reflected in full in the records of this
meeting.
Mr. Aljowaily (Egypt): Once again, the United
Nations Conference on an Arms Trade Treaty was not
able to achieve consensus. One delegation blocked
consensus in July, while three others did so last week.
Egypt regrets that the Final Conference was not able
to reach agreement on a fair, balanced and robust text
applicable to all. In that regard, however, I would like to
commend Ambassador Peter Woolcott of Australia, who
presided over the Final Conference, for his transparency
and integrity, and for all the effort he put into achieving
consensus. We must recognize that every country has a
shared responsibility for not showing enough flexibility
to accommodate others’ compelling concerns.
Egypt abstained in the voting on resolution
67/234 B, on the Arms Trade Treaty, in order to express
our reservations about the principle of adopting an
important international instrument on disarmament
through a vote. That is a dangerous precedent that
threatens to undermine the basis on which most
international agreements on disarmament are being
developed.
Egypt associates itself with the comments delivered
last week by the representative of Kuwait on behalf of
the Arab Group and to be delivered, also on behalf of
the Arab Group, by the representative of Lebanon later
today. I would also like to add the following remarks.

14

The text that has just been adopted lacks a number
of elements that would have helped to achieve the
goals and purposes of the Treaty. They include, first,
the absence of definitions of important terms and
concepts essential to the implementation of the Treaty,
including “end use” and “end user”. We stress that
providing information regarding end use or end user
should be consistent with the laws and national security
requirements of the receiving party.
Secondly, another important missing element is
the criteria by which an exporter would undermine the
implementation of the treaty. We believe that United
Nations resolutions constitute a clear benchmark for
the respect of human rights. Non-cooperation with
the Human Rights Council should constitute a serious
violation that should trigger prohibition.
Thirdly, the explicit reference to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 is a valuable addition to the
prohibitions section. The inclusion of a clear reference
to the crimes of aggression and foreign occupation as
part of the assessment and prohibitions sections would
have clarified the implementation process. It would be
necessary for the credibility and moral authority of the
Treaty as an instrument of international law.
Fourthly, Egypt believes that all countries should
be equally accountable to common benchmarks.
Without agreed definitions or clear criteria based on
international resolutions, the implementation of the
Treaty risks being subjective. It would depend mainly
upon the national political considerations of exporting
States.
Egypt is well aware of the effects of the illicit
trafficking in weapons. We are fully committed to
making every effort to combat and eradicate the illicit
arms trade. We urge all countries that decide to accede
to the Treaty to implement it in good faith in order
to achieve its purpose and goals. We will be closely
following developments regarding the accession to,
entry into force and implementation of the Treaty in
order to determine our final position.
Mr. Ovsyanko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
The delegation of the Republic of Belarus actively
participated in the Final United Nations Conference on
the Arms Trade Treaty, which ended a few days ago.
Belarus strove to make every possible effort to ensure
that the Treaty was commensurate with its main goal,
namely, to prevent the illicit trade in conventional
arms. Together with a group of like-minded States and

13-27622

A/67/PV.71

in our national capacity, we submitted proposals aimed
at improving the text of the Treaty. Some of them were
taken into account, while others — the most substantive
ones — were not reflected in the text presented on
28 March by the President of the Final Conference.
Against that backdrop, we could not declare
ourselves in favour of the Treaty, which has a number
of serious shortcomings. First, there is no prohibition
on shipments of arms to non-State actors, which is the
main cause of the illicit proliferation of conventional
weapons. Secondly, the reference to international
humanitarian law and human rights lacks clarity and
is not in accordance with the terminology agreed upon
in the United Nations, which leaves a wide margin for
subjective interpretations of the export criteria and
their implementation in bad faith. Thirdly, in the article
on resale, there is a lack of provisions regarding the
need for exporters’ consent for re-export, which is a
key element in preventing arms from falling into the
hands of unauthorized end users and, therefore, from
being illicitly traded.
The lack of the elements that I mentioned in the
Treaty calls into question the effectiveness of the high
international standards regulating the international
trade in conventional arms and their ability to
effectively prevent and eradicate the illicit arms trade.
For those reasons, the delegation of the Republic of
Belarus abstained in the voting on resolution 67/234 B,
entitled “The Arms Trade Treaty”.
The Republic of Belarus would like to assure the
Assembly that the Treaty will be carefully considered
by the relevant State bodies in the Republic of Belarus.
A decision on the next steps with regard to the Arms
Trade Treaty will be taken after a comprehensive
analysis of the text and an assessment of the initial
results of the Treaty’s implementation.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the President
of the Final United Nations Conference on the Arms
Trade Treaty, Ambassador Peter Woolcott, for his
selfless work in preparing and agreeing to the Treaty
text and in conducting the negotiations process.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
consistently supported the negotiations on the Arms
Trade Treaty and expected all parties to reach consensus
on an effective Treaty to regulate the conventional
arms trade and to combat the illicit trafficking in small
arms and light weapons. China participated in the
negotiations in a constructive manner and made its own

13-27622

contributions to advancing the negotiation process on
the final text submitted by the President of the Final
United Nations Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty.
China would support a treaty reached through
consensus. China is not in favour of pushing through a
multilateral arms control treaty at the General Assembly
that concerns international security and the security of
all nations. We are very concerned about the possible
negative precedent for multilateral arms control
negotiations. We should insist on negotiating to reach a
treaty acceptable to all parties through consensus. Only
by doing so can we ensure the universal support and
effective implementation of the Treaty. Regrettably,
however, resolution 67/234 B, on the Arms Trade
Treaty, does not address China’s concerns. Therefore,
China abstained in the voting. We do not believe that
it will set a precedent for future arms-control-treaty
negotiations.
Mr. Neo (Singapore): Singapore voted in favour
of resolution 67/234 B. Throughout the entire process,
from the sessions of the Preparatory Committee to the
Final United Nations Conference on the Arms Trade
Treaty, Singapore consistently stated its position that
an arms trade treaty should be practical, effective and
based on feasible and implementable obligations so that
it could be universally accepted and its text adopted on
the basis of consensus.
The work of Member States during the Final
Conference resulted in a much-improved text with
clearer and tighter legal language. However, certain
articles were introduced late in the day and incorporated
into the final text with little opportunity for debate. It
would have been better to incorporate more views and
proposals to facilitate broader acceptance of the text.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to thank
the President of the Final Conference, Ambassador
Peter Woolcott and his team, as well as the Secretariat,
for their tireless efforts during the Conference.
Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
voted against resolution 67/234 B. That reflects the
position of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and the grave concerns that my country has with regard
to the Arms Trade Treaty. My delegation would like to
make the following explanation of vote.
First, as many delegations have noted, the
negotiations leading to the Treaty were difficult and it

15

A/67/PV.71

was clear that there were divergent views and concerns.
Looking back over almost 10 days of negotiations, we
can see how little those divergent views and legitimate
concerns were addressed. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea shares the view that the Treaty is
imbalanced. Under the current text, whose interests are
best served? The answer is very clear: the interests of
exporters. There is no balance between the interests of
exporters and those of importers. In fact, we started the
negotiations with the very good intention of addressing
two issues, namely, coming up with a common standard
for regulating the trade in conventional weapons and
preventing the diversion of arms to non-State actors.
Many delegations are still raising those very serious
concerns. To frank, the text does not address either of
those objectives.
Exporters have interests in two areas. Their first
objective was to find a common standard, but without
limitations on exports or overproduction. The Treaty
is therefore of great benefit — great profit — for
exporters. Secondly, the absence of a legal provision
prohibiting the diversion of arms to non-State actors
also serves the profit interests of exporters. Under the
Treaty, therefore, exporters have come to have two
channels that serve their commercial interests. I think
that no one can deny that fact.
Secondly, a great number of countries, including
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, insisted on
dealing with the issue of transfers of arms to non-State
actors. The term “non-State actor” is a crucial one.
Many countries asked to have that phrase included, as
many African and Latin American countries face the
problem of the illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons. Non-State actors, together with organized
crime, are an ongoing and very real aspect of the
problem in those countries. However, the fundamental
term “non-State actor” was not reflected in the Treaty.
Thirdly, there is a great risk of political manipulation
in the interests of exporters. In the language of the text,
there are criteria for prohibition consisting of two major
elements, but it is up to the individual exporter to judge
whether an importing country has clean hands on the
issue of human rights and on the matter of so-called
Security Council-imposed embargoes. They therefore
have an absolute right to decide whether to export or
not and whether to reject or deny a request or not. An
absolute right of that kind is obviously in the interests
of exporters. There is a great danger of political abuse

16

and interference in the internal affairs of sovereign
States.
Having made those three points, the delegation
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea would
like to express its appreciation for the hard work of
Ambassador Woolcott in narrowing the differences
among various countries and for all the travel he
undertook to meet with different groups around the
world. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea was
part of one of the groups he addressed and has been
engaged in constructive dialogue on the issues as a
result. I thank Ambassador Woolcott and his team, as
well as all the facilitators, for their hard work.
Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia): Malaysia has always
supported the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) process. We
engaged constructively and in good faith to ensure
that the outcome would be a strong, balanced and
implementable treaty. Malaysia voted in favour of
resolution 67/234 B because we recognize that the
process has been fruitful.
We recognize that, although the text of the ATT
may not satisfy all the concerns of every State, the
Treaty will evolve as common understandings and
interpretations are made, as implementation moves
forward and as the Conference of the Parties develops.
As with any new international instrument, Malaysia
looks forward to future reflection and consideration,
to engaging in internal consultations and to taking
the domestic legislative and administrative steps
needed to become a State party to the Treaty. Malaysia
has no timeline for that process, and it is up to each
country to decide on its own pace. As countries begin
to implement the ATT, they need to hold fast to the
principle of ensuring that the Treaty is implemented in
a consistent, objective and non-discriminatory manner.
That principle would ensure that all countries are
able to work together to close any gaps, remove any
loopholes and bring interpretations and implementation
closer to the ultimate goal of establishing the highest
possible common international standards for regulating
the international trade in conventional arms.
My delegation wishes to take this opportunity
to express its sincere appreciation to Ambassador
Peter Woolcott, President of the Final United Nations
Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty, his team and
all the members of the Secretariat who have taken the
Treaty to where we are now. Ambassador Woolcott
had a challenging task, but he handled it with skill,

13-27622

A/67/PV.71

knowledge and charisma. He was balanced, transparent
and inclusive.

treaty to regulate the arms trade. This has been the
established principled position of Lebanon.

My
delegation
also
wishes
to
thank
Ambassador Roberto García Moritán for his efforts,
which contributed to the outcome that we have today.

While Lebanon is the current Chair of the Group of
Arab States in New York and fully supports the Arab
position on the outcome of the Final United Nations
Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty, which has been
expressed and will be reiterated in the statement to
be delivered on behalf of the Group at this meeting,
Lebanon voted in favour of resolution 67/234 B.

Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): My delegation welcomes the adoption
of the Arms Trade Treaty. We voted in favour of
resolution 67/234 B, for we believe in the importance
of the Treaty’s universality. The Treaty provides
the international mechanism needed to regulate and
improve the arms trade while respecting the right of
States to acquire weapons for legitimate self-defence
and to limit the threats and the suffering faced by
the victims of armed conflict, especially women and
children. In order to create the necessary framework for
international cooperation, we should build confidence
among signatory States of the Treaty. In that regard,
we welcome the inclusion in the Treaty of elements
that were not part of the original draft and that had a
decisive effect in obtaining the consensus of numerous
delegations.
Although we voted in favour of the Treaty, we
associate ourselves with the concerns to be expressed
by the representative of Lebanon as Chair of the Group
of Arab States for this month, especially regarding the
fact that the Treaty includes no provision guaranteeing
the inalienable right to self-determination of all
peoples under foreign occupation or the right of States
to territorial integrity and political independence of
States, rejecting foreign occupation, or reiterating the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territories by force,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and international law. We note that the Treaty identifies
no formula that guarantees the financing of technical
cooperation fund through the assessed contributions
from the major arms producers and exporters, which
would have provided the opportunity to support
developing countries in implementing the obligations
through such assistance.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like today to reiterate and affirm that Lebanon is a
small country that has suffered a great deal. Its citizens
continue to die and their property continues to be
destroyed because of the illegitimate proliferation of
arms. Therefore, based on the historical evidence of
human suffering, Lebanon has consistently stressed
the importance of arriving at an effective international

13-27622

Mr. Idris (Eritrea): Eritrea has been engaged
in the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) process with high
expectations. As my delegation has reiterated on several
occasions, a balanced, objective, non-discriminatory
ATT that is immune to political use could curb and
eradicate diversions of arms to illicit users, thereby
contributing qualitatively to regional and international
peace and security, as well as to human progress.
Eritrea shares the view that the final text of the ATT
fails to take into account the constructive proposals and
legitimate concerns of several delegations, including
my delegation. More flexibility and time could have
allowed us to address the deficiencies of the existing
text and to achieve a universal treaty.
However, in the spirit of cooperation for international
peace and security, and in the understanding that the
provisions of the Treaty will be implemented consistent
with the Charter of the United Nations and will not in
any way restrict the right of any nation to self-defence,
in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of the
United Nations, Eritrea voted in favour of resolution
67/234 B.
Eritrea’s vote in favour does not in any way
prejudice its position with regard to the final status of
the Treaty. The final text will be examined thoroughly
by relevant Government bodies, and such assessments
will be undertaken with reference to our national
defence and security needs.
In conclusion, let me thank Ambassador Peter
Woolcott and Ambassador Roberto García Moritán for
the skillful manner in which they navigated the process.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I take
the floor in my delegation’s explanation of its vote on
resolution 67/234 B, on the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT).
The delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran, like
many other delegations, was expecting the conclusion of
an effective, robust, balanced and non-discriminatory

17

A/67/PV.71

ATT, aimed at achieving the noble goal of reducing
human suffering resulting from the illicit trade in
conventional arms. However, the text, due to many
legal flaws and loopholes, falls far short of meeting
those expectations and objectives. Accordingly, my
delegation was compelled to object to the adoption of
the text at the Final United Nations Conference on the
Arms Trade Treaty on 28 March, and to cast a negative
vote today on the resolution adopting that Treaty in
particular, for the following reasons.
First, taking into account the fact that the
suppression of acts of aggression is a fundamental
purpose of the United Nations, it was expected that
the Treaty would clearly prohibit the transfer of
conventional arms to aggressors and foreign occupiers.
However, ironically and surprisingly, and despite the
legitimate demands of a large number of States, it
fails to incorporate such a prohibition because certain
countries that are very well known for committing acts
of aggression and occupation, including in our region
in the Middle East, as well as their patron, strongly
objected to its inclusion.
As a victim of an act of aggression in recent
history, our question is: how can we reduce human
suffering by turning a blind eye to aggression that may
cost the lives of thousands of innocent people? Are we
rewarding aggressors by not prohibiting the transfer of
arms to them? That legal flaw is totally unacceptable
to my delegation and is one of the main reasons for our
objection to the Treaty.
Second, while regulating all international transfers
of conventional arms was supposed to be the main goal
of the ATT, the text is not applicable to the international
movement of conventional arms by or on behalf of
States parties. That exemption is a major loophole in
the Treaty, and is clearly incompatible with its object
and purpose. Those weapons have been used in some
areas and in some cases to commit aggression and
occupation, causing human losses and destruction of
the economic infrastructure in a number of countries,
including in the Middle East and the Persian Gulf.
In the same vein, paragraph 2 of article 6 provides
the grounds for the exemption of the transfer of arms
between States members of military alliances. That
should be considered another major loophole in the
text. In our view, paragraph 2 of article 26 of the Treaty
also provides a ground for similar exemptions at the
bilateral level.

18

Third, while the text recognizes even the
commercial interests of States in the international
trade in conventional arms, it not only falls short of
recognizing the inherent right of the States to acquire,
produce, export, import and transfer conventional arms
required for the realization of the inalienable rights
of any State to security, self-defence and territorial
integrity, but it also does not accord even the same
weight and value to such sovereign rights of States.
Fourth, while the rights of individuals to the trade,
the ownership and the use of guns have been well
protected in the text in the strongest possible terms in
order to meet the constitutional requirements of only one
State, unfortunately and despite the serious demands of
many States, the inalienable right to self-determination
of peoples under foreign occupation, alien and colonial
domination has been completely ignored. In that case,
that right was ignored in order to appease a notorious
occupying Power.
Fifth, while the text emphasizes that nothing should
prevent States from adopting measures additional to
those contained in the Treaty, it does not require such
measures to be consistent with the Treaty’s objectives,
purposes and principles. That can be considered to be
a blank check given to all exporting countries, as they
can adopt any measure or standard in exporting arms
even if they are not compatible with Treaty provisions
and the Treaty’s overall objectives and purpose.
Sixth, while the Treaty contains no real mechanism
to safeguard the rights of importing countries and while
a section on principles was excluded from the operative
part of the Treaty as a result of the objections of one
State, the inclusion of parts and components in article
4 of the Treaty without any clear definition of that term
and the application of the provisions of articles 6 and
7 to the export of such parts and components clearly
create a risk whereby any simple dual-use item or piece
of equipment could be equated with actual conventional
weapons, thus making the situation much worse. That
is how many types of equipment for civilian use can
easily become subject to restrictive measures that are
detrimental to the economic development and wellbeing of importing developing countries. That situation
has occurred despite proposals to balance it, including
proposals to emphasize each State party’s responsibility
not to deny or impose treaty-based conditions or
restrictions on the international trade in equipment,
products, services, technologies and know-how for
civilian purposes.

13-27622

A/67/PV.71

Seventh, while the reference in article 6 of the
Treaty to measures adopted by the Security Council has
no legal weight or value, its incorporation in the current
text together with the use of the term “in particular,
arms embargoes” in paragraph 1 surprisingly innovates
a new type of self-imposed arms embargo in cases
where the Security Council has not even adopted
an arms embargo. It also gives rise to a completely
new, and of course erroneous, understanding of the
obligations of States Members of the United Nations
under the Charter.
Eighth, while the rights of arms-exporting States
is preserved in the text, the right of importing States
to acquire and import arms for their security needs is
subject to the discretionary judgment and extremely
subjective assessment of exporting States. For that
reason, the text is highly abusive and susceptible to
politicization, manipulation and discrimination.
Ninth, while defining the basic terms of a treaty is
an established practice in international treaty-making,
the text of the Treaty, despite repeated demands by
many delegations, suffers from a failure to provide
adequate definitions. In its current format, the Treaty
relies mainly on national definitions and control lists,
which normally vary from one State to another. That
situation goes against the central tenet of establishing
common international standards and provides a
convenient loophole to all exporting States to allow
them to circumvent Treaty provisions by defining terms
in a way that serves their interests.
Tenth, while the equality of a State is a legal and
Charter-based principle, it is excluded from the Treaty.
That is perhaps because in the Treaty’s imbalanced and
discriminatory text — which takes into account to the
greatest extent possible only the rights and interests of
arms-exporting countries in the form of exemptions,
exceptions and protections and disregards the most
basic and inherent rights of importing States — there is
no room for such a principle.
Eleventh, while numerous major documents of the
United Nations reaffirm that States have responsibilities
in exercising restraint over the production and transfer
of conventional arms, the Treaty text has failed to
address that important aspect of conventional arms
control, despite repeated calls by many countries that
it do so.
Twelfth, it is regrettable that, for the first time in
the history of international treaty-making within the

13-27622

United Nations, a text has been tendered for adoption as
an internationally legally binding instrument without
being negotiated. Despite the strong calls by many
delegations and their submissions of concrete proposals,
minimal changes were made to the text, while in some
instances many new concepts, paragraphs and phrases
were added to the Treaty without ever having been
presented by any delegation during the consultations,
even orally. Indeed, legal flaws, loopholes and other
deficiencies in the text are the product of a process by
which the established practice of the United Nations
to conduct negotiations in an open, transparent
and participatory manner and to accommodate one
anothers’ concerns is overlooked.
As mentioned by other delegations, we also would
like to underline that the working methods adopted
during the ATT process do not constitute a precedent
for any future multilateral treaty negotiations in
the field of security and disarmament. I also wish
to emphasize that certain delegations that made an
attempt even to redefine consensus should not forget
that the equality of States is the guiding principle at the
United Nations. Therefore, the voice of each and every
country, regardless of its size, location or population,
must be heard and taken into account.
In conclusion, the Islamic Republic of Iran has
been a staunch supporter of the novel idea behind
the ATT, inter alia, the idea of preventing arms from
falling into the hands of criminals, illegal armed
groups, terrorists and extremist groups. Iran is situated
in a region that has experienced the bitter effects of
the flow of arms to such groups. We are witnessing
the adverse consequences of the arms trade on the
security and the well-being of the people in our region.
We actively participated in the discussions during
the preparatory phase and the conferences held prior
to the finalization of the Treaty, in the hope that the
text could be hammered out in a manner that covered
the legitimate concerns of the wider membership of
the United Nations. Our sincere hope was to reach a
consensual and universally accepted text. However,
under the pressure of some countries, the Treaty was
adopted in a hasty manner without having the universal
acceptable that is a prerequisite for a such a treaty. The
results of the voting on the resolution today are vividly
indicative of that fact.
Let me conclude with an expression of the hope
that, with the effective cooperation and will of all
States, we will be able to deal effectively with the

19

A/67/PV.71

menace stemming from the excessive accumulation of
arms and the militarization of regions already suffering
from conflicts by putting an end to the illegal transfer
of arms into the hands of non-State actors.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote. We shall now hear
statements by delegations following the adoption of
resolution 67/234 B.
Mr. Dondisch (Mexico): I wish to deliver this
political declaration on behalf of the following States,
without prejudice to their own individual views: Albania,
Antigua and Barbuda, Austria, the Bahamas, Barbados,
Belize, Belgium, Benin, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cape
Verde, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, the
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, the Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Liberia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Malta, the
Marshall Islands, Mauritius, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Monaco, Morocco, Mexico, Montenegro,
Mozambique, Nauru, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
the Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, the Republic
of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
South Sudan, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey,
Uruguay and Vanuatu.
Today the General Assembly has made a historic
achievement. It has adopted the Arms Trade Treaty.
That would not have been possible without the hard
work of the President of the Final United Nations
Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty, Ambassador
Peter Woolcott, and of his team, as well as that of the
facilitators, who for the past two weeks conducted the
negotiation process in an open and transparent manner.
After years of hard work, culminating today, we
have produced a strong text that fulfils the mandate
given to us by the General Assembly. We believe that
the effective implementation of the Treaty will make a
real difference for the people of the world.
The Treaty prohibits conventional arms transfers
when they would violate relevant international treaty

20

obligations, including those contained in human rights
treaties. The Treaty also prohibits all transfers of arms
that would be used in the commission of genocide,
crimes against humanity or war crimes in all types of
armed conflict. Any transfer that has the potential to lead
to negative consequences, such as serious violations of
human rights or international humanitarian law, shall
not be authorized. Furthermore, the risk of diversion
has to be assessed.
The Treaty would allow us to regulate all
international transfers of all conventional arms.
National control lists should be comprehensive.
The Treaty enhances transparency and strengthens
accountability by making key information available.
We know that the final text does not fully meet
everyone’s expectations. However, the Treaty enables
us to make it stronger and, through its implementation,
to adapt it to future developments. We look forward to
working with all future State parties to make it so.
This is just the beginning. The hard work starts
now. We must secure the rapid entry into force of this
historic Treaty and implement it as soon as possible.
At the beginning of this process, we set out to make
a real difference in people’s lives. That continues to be
our commitment, which we will carry out through the
implementation of the Treaty.
Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
speak on behalf of Argentina, Australia, Costa Rica,
Finland, Japan, Kenya and the United Kingdom.
Seven years ago, seven countries saw the terrible
harm being caused by the unregulated trade in
conventional arms. We listened to the voices of people
around the world living daily in fear of violence and
armed conflict and we resolved to act. However, we did
not act alone. Countless people deserve credit for what
has been achieved today. Many of their names will be
familiar. We begin with eight Nobel Peace Laureates,
led by former President of Costa Rica, Óscar Arias
Sánchez, who was the first to inspire us to change
the world by improving the way we controlled the
international arms trade. We also extend our thanks to
Argentine Ambassador Roberto García Moritán, whose
leadership throughout the process brought us close to
a robust, global treaty. And, of course, we must thank
Ambassador Peter Woolcott, President of the Final
United Nations Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty,
for his excellent leadership over the past two weeks. His

13-27622

A/67/PV.71

work led us to a strong text that deserves the support of
the international community.

reward will be a world moving closer to the peace that
all nations deserve.

But those three names are just a drop in the ocean.
Hundreds of people — diplomats, activists, victims and
politicians — devoted years of their lives in pursuit of
the Treaty. Their names may not be immortalized in
newsprint or in the records of the Organization, but
their tireless work and their belief in the importance
of the effort have made it possible for us to reach this
point. All of those people can be proud of what we have
achieved today. We can also be proud of having played
our part towards realizing their dream. Once again,
the United Nations has reminded us that, together, we
can face the most dire and complex problems. With the
adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty, this institution has
shown that it continues to be indispensable to achieving
peace and security in the twenty-first century.

Mr. Charles (Trinidad and Tobago): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the member States of
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), namely,
Antigua and Barbuda, the Bahamas, Barbados, Belize,
Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Suriname and my own country, Trinidad
and Tobago.

The text that we have adopted by an overwhelming
majority establishes the first truly global standards
for the arms trade. It reaffirms the United Nations
commitment to human rights and international
humanitarian law. It covers a wide range of conventional
arms, including all calibres of ammunition and their
parts and components.

The adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) has
reaffirmed CARICOM’s faith in multilateralism in
general, and in the United Nations system in particular
in establishing legally binding rules for the conduct of
the international relations among States. Today’s action
represents an important first step towards closing a
significant lacuna in the international legal order.

But our work does not end today. This is only one
milestone on our long journey to a safer and more just
world. We stand ready to take the first steps along the
path to its implementation. As co-authors, our special
responsibility for the Treaty does not end here. The
Treaty is indeed strong, but together we will work to
make it even more so.

The Governments and people of our region now have
an international instrument that has the potential, in the
near future, to supplement their efforts at preventing
the diversion of conventional arms to the illicit market,
including small arms and light weapons and their
ammunition, parts and components. That trade, which
is associated with international drug trafficking and
other forms of transnational organized crime, has
negatively impacted our societies. CARICOM is of the
view that the provisions of the Arms Trade Treaty can
assist us in maximizing the use of existing agreements
and in concluding new ones for mutual legal assistance
in investigations and prosecutions in addressing
violations of the Treaty.

We are called to that task by the millions of people
who have needlessly lost their lives because of the small
arms and light weapons that flow unrestricted across
borders. We are also called by the child soldiers who have
been armed because of the lack of proper restrictions.
We are called by the families that have been torn apart,
the communities that have been destroyed, the societies
that are terrorized and the victims of organized crime.
Above all, we are called to this task by the millions of
human beings who will able to continue to live because
of the decision we have taken today. They are the reason
for the work we have done here, and they are the people
for whom we will continue to work.

CARICOM is proud to be part of this history-making
exercise, together with other States, intergovernmental
organizations and representatives of civil society and
the non-governmental organization community, in
crafting a treaty that establishes that the regulation and
control of the global arms trade is the responsibility of
all States, particularly arms producers and exporters.
CARICOM is satisfied that the ATT identifies clear
obligations for States parties to prevent the diversion
of conventional arms into the illicit market. We are,
however, disappointed by the exclusion of ammunition
and parts and components from the articles on diversion
and the scope of the treaty.

This is a great achievement that we will never
forget, but its true power lies not in the lives it touches,
but in the lives it will save. We have come here to make
history. We have succeeded. If we stay the course, our

The States of CARICOM have always adhered to
the tenets of the rule of law in their relations with other
States, both bilaterally and at the multilateral level.
Consequently, we welcome the provisions in the ATT

13-27622

21

A/67/PV.71

that prohibit a State party from authorizing a transfer
of conventional arms if it would be in violation of
non-derogable norms under international law. We also
welcome the provisions for the settlement of disputes,
which could assist us in ensuring that disputes with
other States parties concerning the interpretation and
application of the provisions of the Treaty do not remain
unresolved, thereby undermining the rule of law.
Diplomatic negotiations conducted in good faith,
if successful, usually result in compromise on the
divergent positions held by negotiating States. The text
of the Treaty that we have adopted contains examples of
some of the necessary compromises that are inevitable
if the differences between divergent views and positions
are to be bridged in a multilateral negotiating process.
It is true that not everything in the Treaty is totally
acceptable to CARICOM. Given the human rights
and humanitarian law focus of the instrument, we
lament the absence of a sharper focus on customary
international law. On balance, however, there are many
elements of this instrument that we endorse and that
led CARICOM to vote in favour of the adoption of the
Arms Trade Treaty. We wish also to place on record our
understanding that the concept of “object and purpose”
in the law of treaties is not confined to one article even
if that article were to be entitled “Object and purpose”.
CARICOM also wishes to urge all future States
parties to interpret and apply this instrument in an
objective and non-discriminatory manner and to resist
the temptation to exploit any possible loopholes that
may exist in the ATT.
Finally, we applaud all States, intergovernmental
organizations and members of civil society for their
participation in the negotiating Conference, which
made it possible for the United Nations to achieve
this milestone today. Special tribute must be paid to
Ambassador Peter Woolcott and his team for their hard
work, which allowed us to achieve this noble objective.
Similarly, CARICOM also pays tribute to Ambassador
Roberto García Moritán of Argentina, whose hard work
laid the foundation for our achievement today.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): We would
like to express our great satisfaction at the General
Assembly’s adoption of a balanced and robust Arms
Trade Treaty, which emerged following seven years of

22

negotiations. We would like to express our particular
appreciation to Ambassador Peter Woolcott, President
of the Final United Nations Conference on the Arms
Trade Treaty.
The Treaty is the product of a comprehensive and
inclusive process that allowed all States Members of
the United Nations to express their views and see them
reflected in the final text elaborated by the United
Nations Conference and adopted today by the Assembly.
The international community can claim full ownership
of this new landmark international instrument.
The Treaty we have agreed on will make the trade
in conventional arms more responsible and transparent,
reduce human suffering and tangibly contribute to
international peace, security and stability. The Treaty
contains strong parameters, including on international
humanitarian and human rights law. The golden rule is
reflected in it. The Treaty covers a wide range of arms,
including ammunition and parts and components. It
contains clear transparency provisions. We have a
strong Treaty that will be capable of adapting to future
developments, including technological ones.
Those are all elements of a Treaty that will allow
us to meet the ambitious objective set by the General
Assembly in its previous resolutions. We have managed
to adopt a strong and robust Arms Trade Treaty that
establishes the highest common international standards
for the international transfer of conventional arms.
The European Union was actively engaged during the
entire Arms Trade Treaty process and will continue to
be engaged in the next stages in order to ensure the
Treaty’s swift entry into force and universalization, as
well as to support the effective implementation of the
Treaty by all States. We urge all Member States to sign
and ratify the Treaty as soon as possible to ensure that
it can make a difference to our citizens and improve
their security.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Bahamas, Belize,
Chile, Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Jamaica,
Mexico, Peru, Trinidad and Tobago and Uruguay.
(spoke in English)
After several years of intense negotiations, today
we have finally adopted the Arms Trade Treaty in the
General Assembly. This great achievement would not
have been possible without the skilful leadership of the
President of the Final United Nations Conference on

13-27622

A/67/PV.71

the Arms Trade Treaty, Ambassador Peter Woolcott.
We take this opportunity to commend him and his
very able team and the Secretariat for the hard work,
transparency and organization with which they have
conducted the Final Conference. Our appreciation goes
as well to all the facilitators, whose work was crucial
in finding compromises wherever there were strongly
differing views.
We also recognize that the success of the Final
Conference builds on the progress that we achieved in
previous stages of the negotiation process. That is why
we also want to acknowledge the work of the former
President of the Conference, Ambassador Roberto
García Moritán. Last, but not least, we want to thank
civil society and non-governmental organizations,
which, for many years now, pushed for the adoption of
an arms trade treaty by the international community.
At this political juncture, given the current
international conditions, we believe that the text we
have produced is the best we could have achieved. It not
only creates a common international regime to regulate
the arms trade, but it gives us the opportunity to further
develop a more robust control regime in the future,
both through possible amendments to update the Treaty
and through the revision of its implementation at the
Conferences of States Parties. We look forward to the
future revision of the scope of the Treaty in order to
include more clearly other conventional weapons, such
as hand grenades, mines and explosives.
As the Assembly knows very well, the subject
matter of the Treaty is at the heart of our region’s
concern. We suffer every day the negative consequences
of illicit trafficking, especially in small arms and
light weapons. That is the reason that we have always
strongly advocated for a meaningful arms trade treaty.
In that regard, we note with appreciation that several
of the suggestions that we put forward throughout the
negotiation process were incorporated in the final
text that we have adopted. For example, we welcome
the fact that the text not only includes small arms and
light weapons in its scope, but establishes that the
descriptions States parties will use to regulate those
types of weapons cover all possible small arms and light
weapons. On the other hand, we call on future States
parties to apply as well, to the fullest extent possible,
all of the Treaty’s provisions to munitions, ammunition,
parts and components.

13-27622

It is now time to look to the future. In order for
the Arms Trade Treaty to have a positive impact on the
ground, we must ensure its rapid entry into force and
its effective implementation. We urge all delegations to
sign and ratify the Treaty as soon as possible to that
end, as well as to achieve its eventual universality.
Finally, we want to reiterate that the same high level
of importance and commitment that the group of friends
has shown throughout the process will be reflected in
our implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): The Group
of Arab States has consistently supported international
efforts to arrive at an arms trade treaty. On more than
one occasion, the Group has voiced its support for
reaching a globally balanced treaty to regulate the arms
trade and to combat illicit trafficking, so as to reduce
people’s suffering and contribute to the achievement
of peace and security throughout the world. The Arab
Group has already expressed its position with regard
to the outcome of the Final United Nations Conference
on the Arms Trade Treaty, held in New York between
18 and 28 March, as well as its position with regard
to the text considered at the Conference. Our position
was set out in the official report of the Conference
(A/CONF.217/2013/4).
The Arab Group would have been ready to move
forward and join the consensus had it been achieved
in conformity with the provisions of resolution 67/234,
of 24 December 2012. The Arab Group would have
done so out of its desire to achieve an arms trade treaty
and acknowledge the efforts made by the President
of the Conference to achieve consensus through the
elaboration of a draft treaty and the improvements
made to it, despite the fact that the text before us
does not satisfy the demands voiced through adequate
means throughout the negotiating process. Those
demands include, first, the taking into account of the
interests of all States, not just those of major exporting
and producing States, and the consideration of all
delegations’ positions in a balanced manner.
Our second demand was to incorporate the
inalienable right to self-determination of all peoples
suffering under the yoke of foreign occupation, as
well as States’ rights to regional security and political
independence and to reject foreign occupation, such
as Israel’s practices in the occupied Arab territories,
including in the occupied Palestinian territories. The
Arab Group wishes to express its surprise that the text

23

A/67/PV.71

adopted excludes the rejection of foreign occupation in
the “Principles” section of the Treaty — although it is
a blatant violation of international peace and security
and runs counter to international law in general, and to
humanitarian international law and human rights law
in particular.
Our third demand was for a mechanism to
settle disputes with regard to the interpretation
and implementation of the Treaty, thereby assuring
importing States that the Treaty would not be
implemented in a politicized or subjective manner.
Our fourth demand was that the technical
cooperation fund should be financed through
contributions from major producing and exporting
States and that its activities be focused on supporting
developing States’ efforts in implementing Treaty
obligations.
Our fifth demand was that the phrase “end user” be
replaced by “end use” throughout the text.
Our sixth demand was that the Treaty’s entry into
force should depend upon its being adhered to by a
sufficient number of States, given that adherence by
the major producing, exporting and importing Member
States would contribute to its effectiveness.
The Treaty’s objective reporting system, which
is characterized by selectivity, lacks a clear-cut
mechanism requiring exporting States to present
sufficient information in rejecting the export or transfer
of weapons. Moreover, all references to the need for
voluntary reporting by the parties to the Treaty were
eliminated.
Lastly, the “Principles” section should have been an
integral part of the operative paragraphs of the Treaty.
The States members of the League of Arab States
emphasize their position on record that accepting
the credentials, which were signed in Jerusalem, of
the Israeli delegation to the Final United Nations
Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty in no way signals
a recognition on the part of the Arab States, the United
Nations or the international community of the illegal
status quo imposed by Israel, the occupying Power, in
the city of Jerusalem, including the claim that Jerusalem
is its capital.
The Arab Group would like once again to state its
position that the political understanding that allowed
the participation of the State of Palestine and the Holy
See in the Conference, as well as the manner in which
24

the credentials of those two delegations were treated,
was an exceptional, one-time arrangement that can
in no way constitute a precedent to be used in other
conferences in which participation is open to all States.
In conclusion, the Arab Group believes that the
United Nations is the only framework for negotiating
international treaties, whose adoption should be
consensual. That is the framework that has been agreed
to for arms-control and disarmament negotiations.
Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the 15 members of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), I would like to
voice our satisfaction at the adoption of the Arms Trade
Treaty through resolution 67/234 B.
This is but a first step, albeit a decisive one. For
the member States of ECOWAS, which, on a daily
basis, experience the tragic consequences of the lack of
international regulation of arms transfers, it is certainly
a significant step, as the spread and uncontrolled
accumulation of conventional arms undoubtedly
represents the most serious threat to the peace and
security of our States. Aware of the scale and scope of
the challenge, our region has had in place a convention
on small arms and light weapons and their ammunition
since 2006. However, we very quickly understood that
such a measure taken at the regional level — in a region
where there are of course no arms-manufacturing
States — would simply be insufficient. What was
needed was greater awareness at the international level,
with a view to pooling all our efforts.
It is in that light that one should see our commitment
to achieving an international arms trade treaty that
would, among other things, be open to all concerned
parties — including manufacturers and exporters, and
in particular exporters of conventional arms — and, in
the long term, lead to limiting the number of conflicts,
thereby creating conditions for sustainable, lasting
peace and stability for our States, so as to better meet
the challenges posed by development.
The final text of the Treaty that we have just
adopted does not reflect some of our concerns. Those
include a ban on arms transfers to unauthorized entities
by importing or receiving States, the adoption of the
broadest possible scope to cover all existing and future
conventional arms and their ammunition, the taking
into account of munitions throughout the whole transfer
chain, as well as an article on diversion and a stronger

13-27622

A/67/PV.71

commitment in favour of international assistance to
ensure the implementation of the Treaty.
In spire of all that, it behoves us to recognize
that, even with its limitations, the Treaty does contain
significant steps forward. It focuses on the need for
enhanced control of munitions and components by
devoting entire articles to that aspect, and by subjecting
imports and exports to the same standards as those
applying to conventional arms. Furthermore, article
20, paragraph 3, entitled “Amendments”, opens up
the possibility to States parties to gradually improve
the Treaty by focusing on major issues that were not
resolved within the framework of the recently completed
negotiations.
In conclusion, I would like to state here that the
member States of ECOWAS, which approved the text
of the Treaty on 28 March, have committed themselves
to facing the new challenges regarding the Treaty’s
implementation as soon as it enters into force.
Lastly, I would also like to pay warm tribute to the
President of the Final Conference, Ambassador Peter
Woolcott, for the outstanding quality of his and his
team’s work, as well as to thank him for his bravery,
transparency and integrity. I would also like pay tribute
to the non-governmental organizations that provided
constant support to Member States throughout the
negotiations.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): Japan welcomes the adoption
of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) through resolution
67/234 B — an achievement for which Japan advocated
for years.
We fully endorse the joint statement made by the
representative of Costa Rica on behalf of the seven
authors of the ATT.

I would like to take this opportunity to express
our deepest appreciation for the outstanding work of
Ambassador Peter Woolcott of Australia, who presided
over the Final United Nations Conference on the
ATT, as well as for the devotion and professionalism
demonstrated by his team.
By implementing standards on international
humanitarian law and human rights law, the Arms
Trade Treaty will prevent the transfer of arms into the
wrong hands. States and members of civil society alike
have referred to such standards as “golden rules”.
With the adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty, we
now have a solid basis to assess whether States are
conducting their arms transfers responsibly or not.
With the scope of items and activities covered in the
Treaty, States can be held accountable for their actions.
Throughout the negotiations, Japan attached
particular importance to enhancing transparency
and strengthening accountability through a reporting
mechanism. Japan also believes the Treaty will
contribute to building confidence among States. The
sharing of national control lists, for example, will
provide both predictability and transparency in arms
transfers.
As the proponents of the Arms Trade Treaty
repeatedly said throughout the negotiations, we now
have the floor, not the ceiling. In order to better
implement the Treaty, each State can do more than
what the ATT prescribes. In that regard, international
cooperation and assistance are very much essential.
The process of establishing the Treaty may
have ended today, but the journey of perfecting the
framework for regulating the global arms trade has
just begun. Japan will continue to do its utmost in that
endeavour.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

13-27622

25
