A /78/PV.15

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-eighth session

15th plenary meeting

Friday, 29 September 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Francis

(Trinidad and Tobago)

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Agenda items 13 and 117 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit
Draft resolution (A/78/L.1)
The President: Before we proceed to take action
on draft resolution A/78/L.1, I should like to remind
members that the Assembly will hold a joint debate on
agenda items 13 and 117 on Thursday, 5 October.
Annexed to draft resolution A/78/L.1 is the
political declaration that was adopted by consensus on
18 September by the High-Level Political Forum on
Sustainable Development, under the auspices of the
General Assembly, in the presence of Heads of State
and Government.
We shall now
resolution A/78/L.1.

proceed

to

consider

draft

Before giving the floor for explanations of vote
before the voting, I would like to remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Peñalver Portal (Cuba): From the very
beginning of the consultation process on draft resolution
A/78/L.1, which is before us today, the Group of 77 and

China requested the inclusion in the text of a reference to
the critical issue of the imposition of unilateral coercive
measures on developing countries, taking into account
the fact that this issue was addressed in paragraph 30
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and is
one of the commitments to be assessed in the midterm
review exercise on that important document. The fact
that since the adoption of the 2030 Agenda and to this
very day, the situation of countries that have been subject
to that kind of measure has worsened — particularly
during the coronavirus disease pandemic — was an
additional reason to insist on such a reference. It is
in line with the historical position that our Group has
adopted with regard to such policies, which are contrary
to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. Nevertheless,
developed countries, by exercising a veto power of
sorts, refused even to consider the language proposed
and did not provide a single valid argument for their
intransigent position.
The Group of 77 and China maintains that the
lack of a reference to unilateral coercive measures is a
major shortcoming in the draft resolution to be adopted
today. In that regard, we reiterate that such measures
are a grave hindrance to the efforts of the affected
countries to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals and sustainable development in general, and
that the international community, including the United
Nations system, should continue to firmly reject the
imposition of such measures and work to see them
lifted unconditionally if they truly want to uphold the
principle of leaving no one behind. The Group of 77 and

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned
to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0928 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected
records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations
(http://documents.un.org).

23-28326 (E)

*2328326*

Accessible document

Please recycle

A/78/PV.15

29/09/2023

China therefore reserves the right to come back to that
issue in future processes.

the sister Republic of Cuba on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.

I shall now make a statement in my national capacity.

I would also like to thank members in advance
for their indulgence if our statement is a long one. We
hope that our right to speak will not be stifled and that
our microphone will not be cut off, as occurred with
some of our Heads of State and Government in several
meetings of the recently concluded high-level segment
of the current session.

(spoke in Spanish)
Cuba has decided to support the document that
was introduced for adoption by the Assembly with
the understanding that, despite its shortcomings, as I
just mentioned on behalf the Group of 77 and China,
it retains language and concepts that are important for
the countries of the South in a way that we believe to
be acceptable. Nevertheless, we cannot fail to mention
our deep concern about the processes used during the
informal consultations on the text, which repeatedly
impeded genuine dialogue among Member States,
despite the many complaints made in that regard. We
insist on a return to traditional negotiating practice to
enable every Member State to express its opinion and
present proposals that are taken into account in any text
that may result from consultations.
A failure to observe that practice has meant that
many views held by nations of the South were not
taken into account during the consultations. A text that
supposedly received the broadest possible consensus
had to be reopened at the last minute to accommodate a
small group of developed countries opposed to making
serious financial compromises to assist developing
countries, even going against various other agreements
that were reached several decades earlier.
Member States must remain the legitimate owners
of negotiation processes and their outcome documents,
in strict adherence to the rules of procedure of the
Assembly. The co-facilitators must fulfil their role of
assisting all Member States via an impartial conduct
of those processes, which should be carried out in an
open, transparent and truly inclusive manner. That
is the only way to ensure genuine and meaningful
consensus for all.
Cuba will continue to advocate for the enforcement
of established procedures, and in particular for respect
for countries of the South and their legitimate claims
and aspirations.
Mr. Pérez Ayestarán (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela has the honour to speak on behalf of the
Group of Friends in Defence of the Charter of the
United Nations, whose Member States align themselves
with the statement delivered by the representative of
2/17

The Preamble to the founding Charter of the United
Nations states:
“We the peoples of the United Nations determined ... to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom”.
The Charter goes on to say that, in line with the
purposes of the Organization, it is essential that
we achieve “international cooperation in solving
international problems of an economic, social, cultural,
or humanitarian character”.
Today we will fail again. Once again, consciously
and voluntarily, we will break our promise to leave
no one behind. We will adopt a document that
ignores the negative impact of the unilateral coercive
measures that, we stress, apply to more than a third of
humankind. That is perhaps one of the reasons that our
peoples feel frustrated with the United Nations and fail
to understand why, despite its convening power and its
authority, our decisions in the General Assembly do not
have a real impact on their daily lives, or on easing their
burdens and ensuring that we, as their representatives,
are in a position to effectively provide for their most
basic needs.
Under those circumstances, and given the pernicious
way of pretending as if everything were normal and
that nothing is happening, how can we bring to fruition
the Charter’s vision of peace, prosperity, progress
and sustainability? If we continue along the path of
allowing the same supremacist mindset to prevail in the
Assembly Hall, it is clear that we will be condemned to
fail time and time again.
The question of unilateral coercive measures
cannot continue to be ignored or swept under the
rug, in particular at the current juncture, as we face
a growing trend of continued, systematic, relentless,
unprecedented and ever-increasing promulgation,
application and even expansion of the ill-named
sanctions that have an impact not only on the countries
23-28326

29/09/2023

A/78/PV.15

that are subject to them, but also on the global economy
as a whole, including supply chains, food security,
energy, security and many other areas. Things being
as they are, unilateral coercive measures deliberately
worsen the current multifaceted global crisis faced
by humankind.

said that it was of critical importance because many
Member States of our Group of Friends are subject to
the illegal application of such measures and know at
first-hand the negative and indiscriminate impact that
they have on their peoples, whose dignity will never be
subject to negotiations.

Unilateral coercive measures are illegal. They are
in violation of purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and the most basic norms
of international law. They are measures of coercion that
are used to promote foreign policy objectives and to
exercise political, financial and economic power over
independent and sovereign States, especially in our
developing world.

We decided, as always, to participate actively and
constructively in the negotiations. We were determined
to reach agreements that would ultimately enable us to
achieve a consensual outcome. We engaged at all times
in good faith and we showed, as ever, a broad degree
of flexibility. However, consensus is forged day after
day. It means acting in good faith and understanding
and respecting different points of view. It also involves
a process of mutual accommodation. Consensus cannot
be imposed, which is precisely what the Office of the
previous President of the General Assembly attempted
to do. We trust that such a mistake will not be made
again, and we stress that the shortcomings of the
process drawing to a close today should in no way set a
precedent for future processes, especially as we embark
later this year on preparations for the forthcoming
Summit of the Future.

Unilateral coercive measures are cruel and
inhumane. They seek to capitalize on the pain and
suffering they cause to entire peoples by advancing
interventionist and destabilizing agendas. They are
not just gross violations of human rights, including the
right to food, health and development, but are also, in
and of themselves, crimes against humanity, insofar as
they clearly seek to deprive entire populations of their
means of subsistence. In many cases, their negative
impact is immeasurable. Moreover, it has been proven
that they can even be just as lethal and disruptive as the
weapons used in conventional war.

“refrain from promulgating and applying any
unilateral economic, financial or trade measures
not in accordance with international law and the
Charter of the United Nations that impede the full
achievement of economic and social development,
particularly in developing countries.” (resolution
70/1, para. 30)

Throughout the almost five months of extensive
negotiations, we never found on the other side of the
table the same spirit or eagerness to compromise.
Quite the contrary, from the beginning, there was an
attempt to impose a kind of veto on any discussion
related to the inclusion of the issue of unilateral
coercive measures in the text under consideration
today. We must say emphatically: that is not the way to
conduct intergovernmental negotiations at the United
Nations, and we regret that the co-facilitators failed to
discourage such an approach during the negotiations.
We proposed various innovative options, alternatives
and formulations, including ones that differed from
the consensus language previously agreed in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development on this topic,
which should have been the easiest to reflect in the text.
We regret that there was not one single attempt to try
to include in the document — even “modestly”, to use
the words of the co-facilitators — the issue of unilateral
coercive measures, either implicitly or explicitly.

From the very start of the process in February, our
delegations underscored, both individually and as a
Group, the critical importance of including the question
of unilateral coercive measures in the draft political
declaration that will be formally adopted today. We

In spite of that, and by virtue of our flexibility and
interest in ensuring the success of the SDG Summit, to
which we attach particular importance, we discussed at
the time, both with you, Sir, and with your predecessor,
the possibility of working on a political package —

Unilateral coercive measures are a direct and
deliberate attack on development and are applied
precisely by those same Governments that deny the very
existence of the right to development as a universal,
indivisible and inalienable human right. As such, those
measures are the main obstacle to the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the achievement of its Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). In other words, they are an obstacle to the same
Agenda that urges States to

23-283263/17

A/78/PV.15

The President: I ask the representative of the
Venezuela to conclude his statement, as 10 minutes
have passed.
Mr. Pérez Ayestarán (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would ask you to allow
me to finish my statement. I am speaking on behalf of
20 delegations, and the aim of my one intervention is to
avoid having 20 other delegations take the floor in order
to move forward. I would appreciate your leniency.
We discussed at the time, both with you and your
predecessor, the possibility of working on a political
package that could serve to reach compromises
ultimately capable of leading us to the adoption of all
the documents by consensus. In that context, we must
note our surprise at one of your letters, Sir, circulated
on 15 September, in which you stated that you had
heard nothing that would constitute a sufficient basis
for reopening and re-examining the texts, which not
only gave the impression that consensus had been
reached, but also ignored — once again — the concerns
of a large number of delegations, including those in our
Group of Friends.
This very plenary meeting, for example, has taken
many of us by surprise. Contrary to the assurances
given to us on 17 September that the formal adoption
of the political declaration would take place in early
October, we were called at very short notice for this
meeting in order to take action on the draft resolution.
It seems a rather premeditated decision and one that
intended, either deliberately or inadvertently, to ensure
that there was insufficient time for consultation and
coordination between the delegations interested in
finding a way forward on this issue. We must express
our disappointment at that course of action.
On behalf of the Member States of the Group of
Friends in Defence of the Charter of the United Nations,
we conclude with the following four points.
First, we regret that it has not been possible to
reach consensus on the political declaration soon to be
adopted, as has become evident today. Needless to say,
the text to be adopted remains incomplete, as it lacks
a crucial element for the realization of development in
its three dimensions in at least 30 countries around the
world: the urgent call for the elimination of unilateral
coercive measures.
Secondly, we call for the shortcomings of the
process, both in terms of substance and procedure,
4/17

29/09/2023

to be addressed urgently, inter alia to ensure greater
transparency and avoid undue exclusions, in particular
of stakeholders, including those that may have broken
silence procedures on draft negotiating documents.
We reaffirm that the imposition of political agendas
or consensus cannot be normalized or become a new
trend, much less be assumed by this forum as an
accepted practice.
Thirdly, we reiterate our unwavering support
and strong solidarity with nations and peoples under
unilateral coercive measures and renew our strong call
for their total, immediate and unconditional lifting.
Fourthly, and in strict accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations and the rules of procedure of this
organ, we reserve the right to take whatever action we
deem appropriate in order to prevent such a situation
from recurring in the General Assembly.
Mr. Al Hassan (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): I deliver
this statement on behalf of the Member States of the
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), namely, the United
Arab Emirates, the Kingdom of Bahrain, the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, the State of Qatar, the State of Kuwait
and my country, the Sultanate of Oman.
At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting to discuss
items 13 and 117 of the agenda. In that regard, I would
like to note that the GCC countries support the draft
political declaration of the High-Level Political Forum
on Sustainable Development, while stressing that our
countries are determined to achieve the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). I would like to take the opportunity
to reiterate our appreciation of the co-facilitators,
Her Excellency Ambassador Alya Ahmed Bin Saif
Al-Thani, Permanent Representative of the State
of Qatar, and His Excellency Ambassador Fergal
Mythen, Permanent Representative of the Republic
of Ireland, for their appreciated efforts in facilitating
the intergovernmental consultations on the political
declaration of the SDG Summit in an open, transparent
and comprehensive manner.
The GCC countries emphasize the need to avoid
any procedures that might undermine the capacity
of developing countries to achieve the SDGs or that
contradict the Charter of the United Nations and
the principles of the international law, which are
underpinned by mutual respect, non-interference in the
internal affairs of States and good-neighbourliness. The
23-28326

29/09/2023

GCC countries underscore the importance of the political
declaration on meeting current demands by taking the
measures necessary to scale up efforts to achieve the
2030 Agenda and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda.
That entails various means including development
cooperation, investment in the SDGs, reforming
the international financial architecture, supporting
steady, inclusive and sustainable growth, enhancing
macroeconomic policy cooperation, exploring practical
and transparent means to measure the progress made
on sustainable development that complement, or go
beyond, gross domestic product and implementing
actions to accelerate sustainable development, in
particular in support of developing countries.
We are fully committed in the GCC countries to
achieving the vision of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development in line with the laws, plans and aspirations
of our countries towards achieving prosperity, peace
and partnership. That is the main purpose and goal of
the national plans and strategies of the GCC countries.
In that regard, we would also like to note that the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development is universal in
nature and its targets and goals are far-reaching and
cross-cutting. It is underpinned and guided by the noble
and sublime purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.
The GCC countries stress the importance of
activating Article 17 of the political declaration, in
which we,
“commit to stepping up our efforts to fight against
racism, all forms of discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance, stigmatization, hate speech,
through cooperation, partnership and inclusion and
respect for diversity.”
In that regard, we would like to underscore that
the GCC countries respect diversity in line with
their national legislation and religious and cultural
values. Accordingly, we condemn all manifestations
of intolerance, extremism, Islamophobia and
xenophobia. We believe that burning the Qu’ran and the
desecration of the sanctities and religious symbols are
irresponsible behaviour that serves to encourage hatred
and extremism.
In conclusion, the GCC countries reaffirm the
importance of the political declaration to be adopted
today, which was earlier endorsed by the Heads of
Delegation during the SDG Summit, as a robust and

A/78/PV.15

important document to accelerate the implementation
of our shared goals.
Mrs. Nyagura (Zimbabwe): My delegation aligns
itself with the statements delivered on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China and the Group of Friends in
Defence of the Charter of the United Nations. In my
national capacity, let me share some important points,
as we deliberate on this very important document (draft
resolution (A/78/L.1), which should guide us as we all
strive to get the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
back on track during the remaining seven years before
2030, without leaving anyone behind.
Unilateral coercive measures have a profound
negative impact on the ability of the countries concerned
to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. Those
measures hinder progress towards achieving the SDGs
in several ways, including the restriction of access to the
means of implementation, especially at this challenging
time when we are facing a global “polycrisis” like
no other.
Our situation is compounded by unilateral coercive
measures, not to mention their effect resulting in
an incomplete picture of the real state of play in the
implementation of the SDGs and, ipso facto, on the best
way forward, in a manner that leaves no one and no place
behind. As explained by other delegations in support of
the language referring to unilateral coercive measures,
my delegation engaged in the negotiation process
constructively, with the commitment to contribute
towards an honest assessment of where we truly are in
terms of implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the 17 SDGs. From our experience,
and the evidence provided by the Special Rapporteur
on the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures,
the latter are a major impediment to the implementation
of SDGs and the enjoyment of all the other rights of the
majority of people in targeted countries.
We support the inclusion of paragraph 30 from
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We
are convinced that paragraph 30 should be included
verbatim, as it is very relevant and is in line with
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It is
our considered position that any refusal to accept
this fundamental text, already agreed in the original
document, is tantamount to revising the SDGs by
stealth, at a time when we have to turbo-charge the
implementation of the SDGs. It is a negation of the
revitalized global partnerships that we all committed

23-283265/17

A/78/PV.15

to in 2015, as reflected in paragraph 39, on the means
of implementation. It is equally a negation of the spirit
of global solidarity, particularly with those furthest
behind and those in vulnerable situations. Adding
paragraph 30 is not mutually exclusive of any of the
paragraphs already contained in the declaration before
us; it enriches the document. In that regard, Zimbabwe
looks forward to the support and understanding of each
and every member of the General Assembly. We call on
all countries that impose unilateral coercive measures to
engage in constructive dialogue and diplomacy to find
peaceful resolutions to differences, while prioritizing
the collective pursuit of the SDGs, which represent our
shared commitment to a better and more sustainable
future for all.
Mr. Momeni (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation associates itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and the statement
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of Group of Friends in
Defence of the Charter of the United Nations.
In addition to our registered reservations, the Islamic
Republic of Iran considers the political declaration
(A/78/L.1) as a non-legally binding and voluntary-based
instrument. My country is not committed to those parts
of the document that are in contradiction with Iranian
national priorities, laws, legislation, regulations and
policies, as well as cultural and religious values.
The Islamic Republic of Iran engaged constructively
in the negotiation process of the political declaration to
reach a balanced and acceptable outcome document. We
regret that consensus could not be reached. Hence, the
political declaration cannot be seen as a document that
represents the consensus among us, as it totally ignores
the legitimate concerns of one third of humankind,
including the legitimate priorities of the people of my
country. Consensus cannot be forced. In the process,
the text of the declaration was opened for amendment
for a small group of countries. We expect that such an
action, as happened in this process, will not reoccur in
the General Assembly.
We are extremely disappointed that the political
declaration does not address several of my delegation’s
legitimate concerns, including the detrimental
effects that unilateral coercive measures have on the
social, environmental and economic development of
developing countries that are unjustly subjected to such
measures. Unilateral coercive measures are cruel and
6/17

29/09/2023

inhumane and violate basic human rights. Such actions
not only undermine the principles enshrined in the
Charter and international law, but also severely threaten
the freedom of trade and investment and violate the
principle of the right to development, leaving behind
more than 2 billion people of the countries affected.
In conclusion, we underscore the urgent need to
end the implementation of laws and regulations with
extraterritorial application, as well as all other types
of coercive economic measures, including unilateral
coercive measures against developing countries.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We align ourselves with the statement made
on behalf of the Group of Friends in Defence of the
Charter of the United Nations.
The language in the outcome document (draft
resolution A/78/.L.1), especially its evaluative
and operative parts, contains important elements
for the future of a multipolar world, namely, the
acknowledgement of the structural crisis in the world
economy and the need to reform the international
financial system for the sake of development. The
upcoming negotiations in the Second Committee will
allow for a comprehensive discussion on implementing
the kind of mandate that has been developed by
Member States in the political declaration. As I already
mentioned, we align ourselves with the statement
made on behalf of the Group of Friends in Defence
of the Charter of the United Nations and express our
concerns about attempts to silence, or simply dismiss,
the plight of millions of people living under sanctions
in developing countries.
The draft political declaration before us today
contains a comprehensive list of the many cascading
health-, climate- and conflict-related crises. But
those crises are not hindering development as
much as are illegal unilateral — and in particular
extraterritorial — measures, which are aimed at
depriving people of their basic needs and rights. The
preamble to the draft document before us today is
replete with references to multilateralism and trust.
However, unilateral measures are the antithesis of
multilateralism. They also undermine trust between
former partners. The draft declaration is replete with
references to the importance of fully implementing the
Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. However, an integral
part of the 2030 Agenda — the call not to use unilateral
23-28326

29/09/2023

sanctions — was rejected by a group of countries as
serving to politicize the negotiations.
It is unlikely that we will be able to celebrate in
unison the adoption of the draft document before
us today. Its negotiation, and the text itself, have
demonstrated how much remains to be done to reverse
the deepening inequalities and divergences. Moreover,
entire populations are not just being increasingly left
behind; they are also being forcibly held back in a
state of backwardness and dependency, recalling the
dark days of colonialism. At the same time, despite
external pressure, Russia will continue to implement
the provisions of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and stand in solidarity with developing
countries in the new environment. In that regard, we
consider the 2023 draft declaration as a working tool,
a schematic framework to achieve further progress
together and get back on track to implement the
Sustainable Development Goals. Despite the absence
of important elements in the draft declaration, its
successful implementation and the comprehensive
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development will depend on taking them and our
discussions today into account.
Mr. Dandy (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, my delegation aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of Cuba
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, and with the
statement delivered by the representative of Venezuela
on behalf of the Group of Friends in Defence of the
Charter of the United Nations. I would like to make the
following remarks in my national capacity.
Given our belief in the importance of implementing
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, we
were committed to constructively participating
in negotiations on the political declaration of the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) Summit. Like
the Secretary-General, who has emphasized this on
numerous occasions, we have stressed many times that
priority should be given to the SDG Summit despite this
year’s busy agenda. My delegation therefore effectively
and constructively participated in the relevant
negotiations from the very beginning. At the very
first round of negotiations, we expressed our concern
and hoped that the co-facilitators would show more
flexibility and patience to provide sufficient time for the
negotiations, especially because we were negotiating on
a declaration at the level of Heads of State. The result
was an incomplete political declaration that left behind

A/78/PV.15

more than 3 billion people throughout the world who
are at risk of food, water, health and energy insecurity,
all of which is due to unilateral coercive measures.
Those unilateral measures diminish the countries’
ability to implement their economic, development and
social policies, thereby preventing them from investing
in the infrastructure needed to implement the SDGs.
Furthermore, the overzealous implementation of such
measures leads to exacerbating the suffering of targeted
peoples as a result of the intimidation policies of the
States that impose such illegal and inhumane measures.
In addition, it has become difficult to cope with
the effects of natural disasters linked to climate
change. In that regard, it is important to note the
devastating earthquake that struck my country, Syria,
on 6 February. Those coercive measures prevented us
from having access to early-warning systems and the
heavy rescue machinery that could reach and save
people under rubble. That had doubled the number of
victims and led to an increase in the number of those
who lost their homes.
We demand once again from this rostrum the full,
immediate and unconditional lifting of those coercive
measures, which amount to a crime against humanity
committed against the targeted peoples. They also
constitute economic terrorism, which is no less brutal
and dangerous than armed terrorism.
Mr. Jiménez (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): Our
delegation aligns itself with the explanations of position
delivered by the representative of Cuba, on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China, and by the representative
of Venezuela, on behalf of the Group of Friends in
Defence of the Charter of the United Nations.
The delegation of Nicaragua would like to convey its
disappointment at the lack of good faith concerning the
draft resolution (A/78/L.1) to be adopted today, as the
position that was repeated many times by a significant
group of countries over the course of negotiations on
the draft declaration of the Sustainable Development
Goals Summit was ignored. We insisted repeatedly that
the text of this draft resolution include paragraph 30
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, on
the impact of the illegal unilateral coercive measures.
However, we were completely ignored, and the
document is therefore incomplete. That is unjustifiable,
especially when it is undeniable and everyone knows
that developing countries, in addition to facing greater
challenges, require access to financing and capacity-

23-283267/17

A/78/PV.15

building. It is unacceptable to ignore a population of
more than billion people from over 30 countries, who
suffer every day as a result of the imposition of the illegal
and terroristic unilateral coercive measures and their
concomitant obstacles to loans and viable projects in
international financial institutions to assist developing
countries in implementing the 2030 Agenda, especially
as it relates to the eradication of poverty.
The reality is that the imperialist and neocolonial
countries continue to apply pressure and manipulate
the rules of procedure in order to continue increasing
and applying disastrous unilateral coercive measures
on more and more countries. These aggressions and
sanctions are incompatible with, and a contradiction
of, the Charter of the United Nations and the
combined efforts of the United Nations towards the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda. Therefore, they
should be eliminated.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan will join the
consensus on the political declaration (A/78/L.1), to be
adopted today.
We sincerely commend the co-facilitators — the
Permanent Representative of Qatar, Her Excellency
Ms. Alya Al-Thani, and the Permanent Representative
of Ireland, Ambassador Fergal Mythen — for their
heroic efforts to reach an agreement on a document that
is both substantive and important.
Pakistan aligns itself with the statement made by
the Ambassador of Cuba, setting out the position of the
Group of 77.
The non-inclusion of the unilateral coercive
measures reflected in paragraph 30 and the provisions
against foreign occupation reflected in paragraph
35 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
does not in any way compromise the legality and
implementability of those provisions or the principles
that they reflect.
At the same time, we must note that the political
declaration contains many significant advances that
could accelerate progress towards achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals. Those include the
commitment to advance the Secretary-General’s
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) stimulus
proposal; the commitment to urgently rechannel special
drawing rights, while also exploring ways for future
allocations to benefit the countries that need them most;
the commitment for an improved international debt
8/17

29/09/2023

mechanism, with an expansion of support and eligibility
to vulnerable countries in need; the commitment to
reform the international financial architecture and to
engage in inclusive discussions in that regard here,
at the United Nations; the commitment to reform the
multilateral development banks, including ways to
increase their capitalization; and the commitment to
consider using multidimensional vulnerability as a
criterion to access concessional finance.
At the same time, we must not allow those
commitments to remain only on paper. After the adoption
of this political declaration, Pakistan will initiate
consultations, during the current General Assembly
session, on the creation of an intergovernmental
mechanism to promote and monitor the implementation
of the commitments that have been made by Member
States in the political declaration.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): Egypt fully associates
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Cuba on behalf of the Group of 77.
The delegation of Egypt is extremely satisfied with
the adoption, under your able leadership, Mr. President,
of the Secretary-General’s political declaration during
the high-level week, and we once again support the
adoption of a political declaration (A/78/L.1) today,
on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). In that
regard, we wish to highlight several points.
I would like to express our deep and sincere
appreciation to my dear sister, Her Excellency Ms. Alya
Al-Thani, Permanent Representative of Qatar, and
my dear friend, His Excellency Mr. Fergal Mythen,
Permanent Representative of Ireland, and their teams for
their commendable and tireless efforts in the marathon
that began in February and has led us to today’s
adoption of the political declaration. The adoption of
this timely declaration presents a golden opportunity
for all of us to strengthen our joint efforts to achieve
sustainable development, with poverty eradication as
its core and centre. This consensual adoption should
truly turbocharge and reaffirm our commitment to
work together to achieve the SDGs in the remaining
seven years until 2030 and to defeat the trend we have
been facing of falling off track.
Egypt would have wished to see the treatment of a
number of extremely important issues with far stronger
language, especially those pertaining to the provision of
the means of implementation to developing countries,
including finance and, especially, concessional
23-28326

29/09/2023

finance. We also would have liked stronger language
on the reform of the international financial institutions,
including the participation of developing countries
in the governance structure of the international
financial institutions and the multilateral development
banks. The same applies to climate financing and its
importance. Egypt firmly believes that the provision of
concessional climate financing to developing countries
is a prerequisite to achieving a just transition and the
goals of the Paris Agreement, as well as the SDGs.
We firmly believe in the need to build on the
consensus achieved in the political declaration so as
to further strengthen our efforts to achieve sustainable
development. Egypt remains fully committed to our
joint efforts pertaining to implementing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the full
achievement of the SDGs.
Mr. Evseenko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of
the Group of Friends in Defence of the Charter of the
United Nations.
On our part, I would again like to draw attention to
the unacceptable nature of the use of unilateral coercive
measures, which have a negative impact on regional,
global and national sustainable development. Sanctions
imposed on undesirable countries have an impact on
the social and economic development of the undesirable
countries and on the well-being of their people. They
also prevent the enjoyment of the right to development.
We would again like to underscore that Belarus
is actively committed to global efforts in support of
sustainable development. But is it possible to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in countries
feelling the pressure of sanctions? It is obvious that
the answer is no. We believe that it is unacceptable to
ignore the topic of unilateral coercive measures. That is
important to developing countries, including countries
in the developing global South. We deplore the fact that
the final text of the political declaration of the SDG
Summit contains no references to that issue. That
should not set a precedent for future processes.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/78/L.1, entitled “Political Declaration
of the High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable

A/78/PV.15

Development convened under the auspices of the
General Assembly”. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt the draft resolution A/78/L.1?
Draft resolution A/78/L.1 was adopted
(resolution 78/1).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after the adoption of the
resolution, may I remind delegations that explanations
of position are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Larsen (Australia): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of Canada, New Zealand and
my own country, Australia (CANZ).
I would like to start by recognizing the Permanent
Representatives of Ireland and Qatar and their teams
for their efforts in facilitating the political declaration.
CANZ is staunchly committed to protecting,
promoting and advancing the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and its Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), domestically and through
our international development programmes alike. For
CANZ, last week’s SDG Summit represented a crucial
milestone in our shared agenda. The Summit marked
the halfway point in trying to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals, to which we all agreed eight years
ago. And with only 15 per cent of targets on track, it is
clear that we are far behind where we need to be to meet
the commitments we made to our own populations and
to one another. The health of our planet, our people, our
institutions and the well-being of all our populations
and, indeed, our global economy are all at serious risk.
That is why the political declaration is so important.
It is a moment for all Member States to recommit to the
spirit and substance of the 2030 Agenda and to double
down on the implementation of all 17 Sustainable
Development Goals. It is therefore disappointing that
some Member States used the negotiation to try to
rollback hard-fought agreement on critical issues such
as climate ambition, gender equality, health and the
very foundations of the 2030 Agenda, as underpinned
by respect for human rights and international law, and
that the perspectives, priorities and needs of all peoples,
including Indigenous and First Nations peoples, were
not given sufficient consideration. As a result, we regret
that the political declaration displays unequal ambition
across the three pillars of sustainable development.

23-283269/17

A/78/PV.15

The great wisdom of the 2030 Agenda is in
recognizing the connection between the various aspects
of social and economic development and environmental
protection and how together they enable prosperity and
peace. The relationship between gender equality and
sustainable development is a clear example of that. If we
were to close the gender gap in economic participation,
we would add at least $12 trillion a year to global gross
domestic product. In other words, closing the gender
gap would generate three times more money than the
estimated amount needed to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals.
And yet some Member States staunchly opposed
efforts to recognize the critical importance of creating
an enabling environment to achieve gender equality
through eliminating sexual and gender-based violence
and meeting our commitment — a commitment
specified in the 2030 Agenda itself — to providing
sexual and reproductive health-care services.
We all invested years in negotiating the 2030
Agenda. It provides an irreplaceable normative
framework for collective global action. All Member
States have a duty to protect and deliver on what we
agreed. As we move towards 2030, CANZ remains
fully committed to fulfilling our shared commitments
to achieving sustainable development for all and to
leaving no one behind.
Ms. Jiménez de la Hoz (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union and its member States. The candidate
countries Türkiye, North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia, Albania, Ukraine, Moldova and Bosnia and
Herzegovina; the potential candidate Georgia; and
Liechtenstein, member of the European Free Trade
Association and the European Economic Area, align
themselves with this statement.
The European Union and its members are pleased
to join the consensus today confirming our leaders’
adoption of the political declaration on the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) at the High-Level Political
Forum on Sustainable Development held under the
auspices of the General Assembly. We commend the
able co-facilitation and tireless efforts of Ireland and
Qatar, working closely with all delegations to achieve
a text that reflects the current consensus on the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Only 15 per cent of SDG targets are on track after
years of progress to eradicate poverty and hunger,
10/17

29/09/2023

promote education and gender equality were rolled back
by the coronavirus disease pandemic, Russia’s war of
aggression and its devastating impact on global food
and energy security and the existential threat of climate
change. More than ever before, the world needs the
mobilization of all Governments and all societies to live
up to the promise we made in 2015. The SDG Summit
and the consensus-based adoption of the declaration
show our unequivocal joint commitment to reviving
the 2030 Agenda and accelerating the achievement of
the SDGs.
The European Union participated constructively in
the negotiations, while showing the utmost flexibility
and a sincere grasp of the concerns of developing
countries at the halfway point in trying to implement
the 2030 Agenda. We hope that we can join forces to
make the declaration and the 2030 Agenda possible. As
the Secretary-General said at the summit, the SDGs are
not just a list of Goals. They are the hopes, dreams,
rights and expectations of peoples all over the world.
Let us work hard to keep that promise and leave no
one behind.
Mrs. Zalabata Torres (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): Colombia welcomes the adoption just now
of the political declaration of the High-Level Political
Forum on Sustainable Development (resolution 78/1)
and hopes for the urgent realization of the commitments
set out therein to accelerate the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. I would
like to express my delegation’s gratitude to Qatar and
Ireland for their hard work as co-facilitators throughout
the difficult negotiation process, which left us with a
package of measures with the potential to introduce
systemic reforms aimed at closing the financial gap
required to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
Colombia hopes that, throughout the main period
of negotiations of the General Assembly and its
Committees and towards the Summit of the Future
in 2024, Member States will focus their efforts on
landing those reforms. In particular, we highlight
the importance of advancing quickly and with the
greatest political will in the reform of the international
financial system; the recapitalization of multilateral
banks; the intensification of debt-for-nature and debtfor-climate swaps; and the rechannelling and issuance
of special drawing rights and the establishment of
metrics beyond gross domestic product. All of those
measures are essential to expand the fiscal space for
developing countries and allow them to access the
23-28326

29/09/2023

A/78/PV.15

enormous financial resources required to protect global
public goods.

balanced and interconnected road map to achieve
prosperity for the planet and its people.

Just as we recognize the achievements of the
political declaration, we express our deep concern about
the lack of ambition in matters of greatest relevance.

Mrs. Horváth (Hungary): At the outset, on this
landmark occasion, please allow us to express our
profound gratitude to the two co-facilitators, from
Ireland and the State of Qatar, and their teams for
their exemplary efforts in guiding the deliberations of
Member States to a successful conclusion. We welcome
the adoption by consensus by the General Assembly
of the political declaration of the High-Level Political
Forum on Sustainable Development (resolution 78/1).

First, in terms of gender equity and the empowerment
of all women and girls, Colombia expresses its
disappointment at the absence of an explicit reference
to the elimination of sexual and gender-based violence,
which is one of the main obstacles faced by women in
all their diversity, including with regard to benefitting
from development strategies and being able to fully
assert their human rights. Colombia will continue to
promote that aim in all relevant negotiation processes
and discussion forums, especially considering that the
General Assembly already has agreed upon language
adopted by consensus on the matter. The political
declaration should not constitute a setback in previously
achieved multilateral commitments.
Similarly, we express our discontent at the
absence of a commitment to accelerate the just energy
transition — an issue that is at the centre of the climate
action agenda. As was recognized during the SecretaryGeneral’s Climate Ambition Summit, the issue requires
greater political will to achieve the goal of establishing
decarbonized economies, under the leadership of the
countries with the highest emissions, before temperature
levels exceed 1.5°C. To not have addressed that issue
in a document of such high importance is a collective
failure that we hope will be amended in the outcome
of the twenty-eighth Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, to be held in the United Arab Emirates.
Thirdly, we highlight the importance of the
inclusive approach of the political declaration and
that of the 2030 Agenda in general to transcend the
categorization of groups in situations of vulnerability
and evolve towards the recognition of needs and the
responsibility of Member States in the development,
execution and evaluation of policies with a differential
and intersectional approach in all areas of public
administration. Colombia will continue to insist on that
in future processes.
Finally, we reaffirm that the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, including the commitments
on unilateral coercive measures contained therein,
continue to constitute the universal, comprehensive,

As expressed by the President of Hungary at the
Summit, we are firmly committed to the realization
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). The figures contained in the
Sustainable Development Report 2023 underpin that
commitment. Hungary currently ranks twenty-second
in terms of implementation. Building on the prudent
macroeconomic and development policies pursued by
the Government of Hungary during the past decade,
we have been able to increase the amount we devote to
official development assistance by more than two-anda-half times. We have also revamped our international
aid framework by creating the Hungary Helps
programme, which, among its top priorities, serves as
the main framework for our efforts to address the root
causes of migration.
Bearing that in mind, we deem it particularly
important that the international community could come
together at this watershed moment in history and forge
consensus around this quintessential declaration. We
are convinced that it will serve as a road map that will
guide our redoubled efforts in the second half of the
journey to implement the SDGs. However, given the
nature of compromises, we believe that the text adopted
by our leaders at the Summit contains some particular
points that are not entirely reflective of the complexities
of certain issues.
In that regard, we would like to highlight that, in our
appraisal, paragraph 29 of the declaration represents an
unbalanced approach when it comes to addressing the
issue of international migration. We believe that the
text of the paragraph would have benefited from the
application of a more nuanced approach that equally
took into account the various detrimental long-term
socioeconomic ramifications of migration as well.

23-2832611/17

A/78/PV.15

At this point, we wish to recall Hungary’s
principled position, according to which the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration and
the Global Compact on Refugees are both non-binding
and non-universally accepted texts. As Hungary did not
accept those documents, we do not participate in their
implementation either. Therefore, it is our position that
no provision of those declarations should be read as
endorsement or recognition of any binding legal effects
of those documents.
It is Hungary’s view that migration should not be
considered a primary tool for development policy and
that we should refrain from steps that may lead to
creating further migratory pull factors. Instead, it is
our firm conviction that the international community
should strive to foster favourable economic and social
conditions that allow people to stay and enjoy sustainable
living standards in their homelands. Therefore, we
would like to put on record our reservations regarding
the imbalanced approach of paragraph 29 of the
declaration and to express that we do not consider
it the most appropriate reference point for future
intergovernmental negotiations on the subject.
Mrs. Narváez Ojeda (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile deeply values the adoption by the General
Assembly of the Political Declaration of the HighLevel Political Forum on Sustainable Development
Convened under the Auspices of the General Assembly
(resolution 78/1). We are grateful for the work undertaken
by the co-facilitators during this process, which we know
was not without its difficulties. However, beyond the
legitimate differences expressed, Chile must reinforce
the indisputable value of consensus as the preferred
means to make progress in addressing global challenges
that require multilateralism in our commitment to a
more just, equitable and sustainable world.
Chile is clear in its condemnation of unilateral
coercive measures that represent a threat to the full
achievement of sustainable development, in particular
in the countries of the global South. Halfway through
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the adoption of this declaration should be
an urgent call to action to all stakeholders to accelerate
compliance with the SDGs, in which progress is slower
than we hoped. If we continue at this pace, not only do
we run the risk of not achieving the objective we set
ourselves as an international community by the end of
this decade, but that is the most likely scenario. In that
sense, this document cannot be only a declaration. On
12/17

29/09/2023

the contrary, it must be a turning point for adopting
concrete and ambitious measures that makes it possible
to keep alive the hope of a more prosperous future for
current and future generations.
Chile reaffirms its commitment to work tirelessly
to realize the vision of the Sustainable Development
Goals, confident that the political declaration will be
a powerful catalyst for global action for the benefit of
humankind and our planet. At stake is the sustainability
of life and the well-being of billions of people who are
relying on us to deliver on the commitment adopted in
2015 to eradicate poverty, fight inequality and develop
peaceful societies while leaving no one behind. The
world is watching us, and we must rise to the occasion.
Ms. Carty (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to join consensus on the
Political Declaration of the High-Level Political Forum
on Sustainable Development Convened under the
Auspices of the General Assembly (resolution 78/1).
We appreciate the dedicated and constructive work
of the co-facilitators, Ireland and Qatar, and thank
General Assembly Presidents Csaba Kőrösi and Dennis
Francis for their able leadership in finding consensus
on the declaration.
In his remarks to the General Assembly, President
Biden called upon his fellow world leaders to find within
us the courage to do what must be done to preserve the
planet, to protect human dignity, to provide opportunity
for people everywhere and to defend the tenets of the
United Nations (see A/78/PV.4). He called on us to
bring urgency and ambition to our efforts to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). We see the
SDG Summit political declaration as an important step
to that end.
The United States remains committed to full
implementation of the SDGs both at home and abroad.
It is why have invested more than $100 billion in global
development, just over the past two years. But we know
that public investment is not enough. That is why we
have leveraged limited public funds to mobilize billions
more in private sector investments.
Recognizing that achieving the SDGs will require a
renewed collective effort, we re-emphasize the urgency
of increasing finance from all sources, which is a
fundamental tenet of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda.
The role of the private sector will be vital, in addition
to a focus on domestic resource mobilization, official
development assistance and development finance
23-28326

29/09/2023

and creating investment climates that help mobilize
private capital.
We must all do this together — with Governments,
the private sector, civil society, unions and local
actors. This vital whole-of-society approach must
empower stakeholders at all levels, including
individuals in vulnerable situations and members of
marginalized groups.
Achieving the SDGs requires our commitment
as Member States to foster societies that respect
human rights and worker rights, uphold the rule of
law and access to justice, promote gender equality,
tackle corruption and support inclusive, accountable
governance for all citizens.
Advancing gender equality and human rights and
empowering all women and girls is central to achieving
the promise of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We are pleased that the declaration
recognizes the importance of gender equality, but
we regret that it does not address the urgent need to
recommit to the empowerment of women and girls in
all their diversity amid a growing, coordinated and
highly resourced pushback on the exercise of their
human rights.
Similarly, sexual and reproductive health and
rights remain fundamental to accelerating universal
health coverage and to expanding preventive care; to
advancing girls’ education and workforce opportunities;
to achieving gender equality and equity; and to
promoting and protecting the human rights of LGBTQI+
individuals, particularly those who face multiple forms
of discrimination. We are deeply concerned that the
declaration does not recognize and robustly call for
accelerated efforts towards achieving the health- and
gender-related targets of the 2030 Agenda.
Regarding climate change, we also regret that the
declaration does not contain more ambitious language
on tackling the climate crisis, especially given broad
recognition of the negative impacts of climate change
on our ability to achieve the SDGs. The political
declaration, for example, does not mention the
imperative of limiting global temperature rise to 1.5°C
or the need for countries whose current targets are
inconsistent with the goal to urgently step up and align
them with the required level of effort.

A/78/PV.15

In joining consensus on the declaration, the United
States makes the following points of clarification on
the text:
On the issue of independent mandates, the United
Nations is critical to our efforts to achieve sustainable
development, and it benefits from complementary
work in the wider multilateral system and Member
States’ own bilateral efforts. Achieving the SDGs
requires embracing the comparative advantages of
different bodies, leveraging their technical expertise
and respecting that the legitimacy of the bodies is a
function of their independent mandates and governance
structures, as recognized in paragraph 58 of the
2030 Agenda.
The
multilateral
development
banks
(MDBs) — the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development — have their own governance structures,
mandates and decision-making processes that are
independent of the United Nations and are essential
to helping ensure that they remain fiscally solvent and
able to support the objectives of their shareholders.
Those institutions’ governing bodies include broad
country membership at all income levels, including
borrowing and non-borrowing members. As such,
it is inappropriate — and potentially undermines the
intended function of those entities — for the United
Nations to seek to directly influence or to make specific
recommendations targeting the MDBs and the IMF.
Concerning the issue of debt, the United States is
committed to helping countries in debt distress return to
debt sustainability and a positive economic trajectory.
We recognize the urgency of addressing heightened
debt vulnerabilities in low- and middle-income
economies. However, the proposal in paragraph 38(t)
(iii) for improved international debt mechanisms
would undermine ongoing efforts to improve the debt
restructuring process. Unfortunately, the paragraph
does not reflect the progress made on improving the
speed and predictability of the Group of 20 Common
Framework for Debt Treatments beyond the Debt
Service Suspension Initiative and, importantly, the
commitment to redouble efforts for that progress to
be sustained.
On the issue of the SDG stimulus, we appreciate
the Secretary-General’s call for renewed global
ambition to accelerate progress, however, we disagree
with some of the specific proposals in the proposed

23-2832613/17

A/78/PV.15

SDG stimulus. Moreover, we underscore that several of
the recommended actions are appropriately addressed
in forums outside of the United Nations. Additionally,
we feel that the stimulus does not sufficiently
reflect the hard-won consensus in the financing for
development agreement and the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda, including regarding the important role of
supportive policy, domestic resources and private
capital mobilization.
On the question of illicit financial flows, the United
States reiterates its concern that the term illicit financial
flows lacks an agreed-upon international definition.
In that context, we understand the declaration’s
recommitment to preventing and combating illicit
financial flows refers to Member States implementing
their existing obligations and commitments, including
to prevent and combat corruption and money laundering,
terrorist financing and other forms of illicit financial
flows through the implementation of the Financial
Action Task Force recommendations and other related
best practices.
Turning to the issue of special drawing rights
(SDRs), paragraph 38 (t) (vii) should recognize that
pledges have reached the total global ambition of
$100 billion in voluntary contributions of SDRs, or
equivalent, for countries most in need. The United
States is not in a position to channel SDRs to the
multilateral development banks, but we support other
countries choosing to do so if a technically sound
option exists. At this time, the United States does not
support a new general SDR allocation. The current
global environment calls for more targeted solutions,
including IMF lending, based on economic reforms,
progress on sovereign debt restructuring and robust
policy and technical support from the international
financial institutions.
On the question of the reform of the international
financial institutions, with respect to paragraphs 38
(t) (viii) and (ix), the United States has been highly
responsive to calls for support and reform, including
through its championing of MDB evolution, which
is moving the institutions to be more responsive to
borrowers and to global challenges. We are making
significant progress. MDB evolution has been a shared
outcome of multiple high-level gatherings, including
the Paris Summit for a New Global Financial Pact and
the G20 Leaders’ Summit.
14/17

29/09/2023

Through our joint efforts with other shareholders,
the MDBs could unlock $200 billion in new lending
capacity over the next decade through the implementation
of the recommendations of the G20 Capital Adequacy
Framework. The United States continues to press for
the implementation of further Framework reforms that
could unlock significant additional financial capacity.
It is unfortunate that the text does not better capture
those important efforts under way. An opportunity
was missed to highlight those efforts to make the
international financial architecture work better for
developing and emerging economies alike.
On the issue of trade and technology transfer, we
underscore our position that trade language negotiated
or adopted by the General Assembly has no relevance
for United States trade policy, for our trade obligations
or commitments or for the agenda at the World
Trade Organization (WTO), including discussions or
negotiations in that forum. While the United Nations and
the WTO share common interests, they have different
roles, rules and memberships. That includes calls to
adopt approaches that may undermine incentives for
innovation, such as technology transfer that is not both
voluntary and on mutually agreed terms.
Concerning intellectual property, the United
States understands, with respect to the declaration,
that references to the dissemination of technology and
transfer of, or access to, technology are to voluntary
technology transfer on mutually agreed terms, and that
all references to access to information and/or knowledge
are to information or knowledge that is made available
with the authorization of the legitimate holder. That
language in those areas concerning technology transfer
does not, from the perspective of the United States,
serve as a precedent for future negotiated documents.
In conclusion, as Secretary Blinken stressed in
his remarks at the Summit, the United States remains
unwavering in its commitment to achieving the SDGs
by 2030 and to making good on our pledge that no one
will be left behind.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting.
South Africa aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Cuba on behalf of the Group of
77 and China.
We wish to express our gratitude to the
co-facilitators for the political declaration of the
23-28326

29/09/2023

Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) Summit — Her
Excellency Ambassador Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani,
Permanent Representative of Qatar; and His Excellency
Ambassador Fergal Mythen, Permanent Representative
of Ireland. We also thank all delegations for their
tireless efforts on this important political declaration
(resolution 78/1).
South Africa welcomes the adoption of the
political declaration, which is aimed at accelerating
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and its SDGs. We urge all countries
to display solidarity and a revived commitment to
multilateralism to address the development challenges
facing the world.
We call on the international community to follow
up and support the Secretary-General’s proposal for an
SDG stimulus for developing countries. Some of the
areas in which concrete actions could be taken include
addressing the immediate debt crisis facing developing
countries, bridging the SDG financing gap and systemic
reforms, including the need to reform the international
financial architecture.
However, it is highly unfortunate that no reference
to unilateral coercive measures was included in the
political declaration, given that that is agreed language
from the 2030 Agenda. South Africa believes that
unilateral coercive measures contravene the Charter of
the United Nations and have far-reaching implications
for the human rights of the general populations of
targeted States, while disproportionately affecting
the poor and the most vulnerable. They also have a
negative impact on third countries, a reality that my
own country is experiencing. Furthermore, South
Africa underscores the importance of the creation of
a conducive international environment to support the
national SDG benchmarks, including through free
trade and less protectionism, especially emerging green
protectionism that undermines sustainable development.
Mr. Woodroffe (United Kingdom): As others have
done, I would like to begin, of course, by thanking you,
Mr. President, and the co-facilitators, Their Excellencies
the Permanent Representatives of Qatar and Ireland,
and indeed their full teams, for their hard work, which
enabled the adoption of the declaration today (resolution
78/1). We are pleased that, after months of negotiations,
we have been able to join consensus here in the General
Assembly following endorsement of the declaration at

A/78/PV.15

the highest levels during the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) Summit last week.
As our Deputy Prime Minister set out at that
Summit, the United Kingdom remains fully committed
to delivering the universal vision for economic,
environmental and social development set out in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
SDGs. With seven years to go, our collective promises
are in jeopardy. We need robust political will and
commitment to greater action to get them back on track.
Indeed, as His Excellency the Permanent Representative
of Pakistan set out earlier, the declaration includes a
number of ambitious and welcome commitments that
should provide the impetus to do so.
The United Kingdom recognizes how important
financing is to achieving the 2030 Agenda. That
is why we are pushing for a bigger, better, fairer
international financial system that increases the voice
and representation of the poorest and most vulnerable
countries. We are driving reforms of the multilateral
development banks (MDBs), including stretching
their balance sheets to release more than $200 billion
in additional financing over the next 10 years, scaling
MDB lending to unlock $1 billion in education financing
and $1.8 billion of climate financing for countries in
Africa and the Asia-Pacific region, and making the
MDBs more agile, shock-responsive and better able to
mobilize private investment.
We are also encouraging the MDBs, national
development banks and all other creditors to offer
climate-resilient debt clauses to pause debt payments
when disaster strikes. And that is also why, at the Group
of 20 summit, our Prime Minister announced a further
$2 billion for the Green Climate Fund.
But, of course, financing is only one part of the
equation. We must also ensure that it is invested in
areas that will accelerate progress across all the Goals,
such as gender equality, science and data, education,
health, food security and renewable energy. We must
rapidly cut emissions, decarbonize and transition to
renewable energy to keep 1.5°C in reach.
The United Kingdom remains committed to our
2013 nationally determined contribution, reaching netzero by 2050 and supporting developing countries in
achieving their climate and biodiversity ambitions. We
would have liked to have seen the declaration reflect
the need for continued high policy ambition to tackle
climate change and limit global temperature risk as

23-2832615/17

A/78/PV.15

we look towards a critical twenty-eighth session of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Given the importance of gender equality to
accelerating progress across the Goals and to their
delivery, we are also disappointed that the declaration
does not represent the full range of gender commitments
we collectively made in the 2030 Agenda. It will be
critical for us to build on our 2015 agreements as we go
into the Second Committee this year, the Commission on
the Status of Women session, the thirtieth anniversary
of the International Conference on Population and
Development next year, the proposed social summit
and, indeed, the Summit of the Future in order to be
sure that we really do leave no one behind.
Mr. Yamanaka (Japan): We would like to welcome
the adoption of the political declaration of the HighLevel Political Forum on Sustainable Development
Convened under the Auspices of the General Assembly
(resolution 78/1) by consensus today. Japan would like
to extend its deep appreciation for the dedicated efforts
of the co-facilitators, the Permanent Representatives of
Qatar and Ireland, and their teams, as well as the able
leadership of both the former and the current Presidents
of the General Assembly.
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are
facing mounting obstacles as the world grapples with
complex and interrelated crises and the international
community is being increasingly divided. As our Prime
Minister Kishida stated in his address last week (see
A/78/PV.5), now is the time to go back to the basic
foundation of the SDGs — leave no one behind — and
to strengthen international solidarity by shedding light
on human dignity. The SDG political declaration,
adopted after overcoming many differences in opinions,
represents our strong and unwavering commitment to
those principles.
Nevertheless, towards the end of the negotiations,
to our regret, we saw a rush to having a final draft
resolution without thorough consultations, resulting in
the missed opportunity to build a shared understanding
on some specific policy issues, including debt, the
allocation of special drawing rights, the reform of
international financial institutions and climate change.
With regard to such issues, Japan would like to reiterate
the importance of having a detailed discussion in
the appropriate forums and institutions, with more
16/17

29/09/2023

expertise than the United Nations here in New York,
in line with their mandate and governance framework.
Today’s adoption is not the end, but the midpoint
of the 2030 Agenda on Sustainable Development. Japan
will continue to uphold the concept of human security
and strengthen its best efforts towards the achievement
of the SDGs.
Mr. Pary Rodríguez (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, the Plurinational
State of Bolivia associates itself with the statements
made in explanation of position before adoption by the
representatives of Cuba, on behalf of the Group of 77
and China, and Venezuela, on behalf of the Group of
Friends in Defence of the Charter of the United Nations.
Bolivia supports the adoption in this plenary of
the Political Declaration of the High-Level Political
Forum on Sustainable Development Convened under
the Auspices of the General Assembly (resolution
78/1) in the understanding that the declaration
provides an impetus to implementing the 2030
Agenda on Sustainable Development, agreed at the
intergovernmental level. However, we would have liked
many other urgent issues to have been mentioned in the
context of sustainable development, and we see that the
declaration has several major gaps.
My country reiterates its principled position on
opposing the imposition of unilateral coercive measures.
We reaffirm our full solidarity with the peoples who
suffer the impacts of such measures, since they threaten
the lives of millions of people and the sovereignty of
States. Those measures affect the development and the
most basic human rights of the most vulnerable sectors
and undermine the efforts of States to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals.
I also take this opportunity to express our concern
over the gradual, but significant decline in the course
of negotiations within the General Assembly and
its various bodies. We observe that the positions of
developing countries are being ignored with increasing
frequency and disregard. The neglect of the needs
of developing countries in general and of groups of
countries with particular concerns only weakens
consensus and confidence-building in the context of
strong and effective multilateralism. That is something
that we cannot allow if we want to seek solutions to the
current systemic crisis more effectively.
23-28326

29/09/2023

Finally, we urge that, under your presidency,
Mr. President, all processes to be moved forward
during the current session be put back on track.
Bolivia expresses its readiness to work with all States
to strengthen multilateral dialogue and consensusbuilding, with a view to achieving the 2030 Agenda in
its entirety for the benefit of peoples and leaving no
one behind.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by welcoming the adoption of the
Political Declaration of the High-Level Political Forum
on Sustainable Development Convened under the
Auspices of the General Assembly (resolution 78/1) and
to acknowledge the efforts made by Ireland and Qatar
as the co-facilitators of the challenging and critical
process to achieve a balanced and consensual outcome.
I also want to highlight the fact that my delegation
associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Cuba on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China. Argentina firmly opposes the use of unilateral
coercive measures and the adoption of discriminatory
trade practices.
The 2030 Agenda on Sustainable Development is
the most ambitious effort in terms of development since
the establishment of the United Nations. The data show
that, given the many crises that the world is facing,
not only are we not making progress in meeting our
commitments, but also, in many cases, we are seeing
substantial setbacks in what has already been achieved.
Therefore, at the midpoint of the period that we set for
the implementation of that document, we must be as
ambitious as possible to ensure that we will genuinely
achieve sustainable development for all.

A/78/PV.15

In that regard, we cannot fail to highlight the fact
that we would have liked to have seen greater ambition
reflected in the text in relation to the empowerment
of women and girls in all their diversity and gender
equality, including the language already present in the
2030 Agenda and its Sustainable Development Goals,
as well as the issues on which we have made progress.
In addition, in relation to paragraph 38 (b), we
believe that the importance of promoting the integration
of developing countries in the global value chains should
be recognized, as we still have huge challenges both
in integrating and in increasing the added value to our
production and trade within those chains. We want to
once again highlight that international trade is an engine
for development, growth and employment creation, and
even more so in a post-pandemic recovery context.
The President: We have heard the last speaker
in explanation of position following the adoption of
resolution 78/1.
I would like to express my sincere appreciation
to His Excellency Mr. Fergal Mythen, Permanent
Representative of Ireland to the United Nations, and
his team and to Her Excellency Ms. Alya Ahmed Saif
Al-Thani, Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations, and her team, who ably and patiently
conducted discussions and complex negotiations in
the informal consultations on the political declaration.
I also thank their experts, Mr. John Gilroy and
Mr. Abdulrahman Al-Thani. I am sure that members
of the Assembly join me in extending to them our
sincere appreciation.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda items 13 and 117.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

23-2832617/17
