A/61/PV.65

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-first session

65

th plenary meeting
Monday, 4 December 2006, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Al-Khalifa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bahrain)

In the absence of the President, Mrs. Mladineo
(Croatia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Agenda item 108 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(c) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Draft resolution A/61/L.13)
(e) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Caribbean Community
Draft resolution (A/61/L.29)
(q) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference
Draft resolution (A/61/L.26)
(r) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Pacific Islands Forum
Draft resolution (A/61/L.20/Rev.1)
(s) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Organization
Draft resolution (A/61/L.18)

(t) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Southern African Development Community
Draft resolution (A/61/L.37)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine, who will introduce draft
resolution A/61/L.18.
Mr. Onishenko (Ukraine): The delegation of
Ukraine, in its capacity as Chair of the Preparatory
Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization (CTBTO), would like to introduce
a draft resolution entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban-Treaty Organization”,
which is contained in document A/61/L.18.
The latest developments in the field of nonproliferation represent a tough challenge for the
Preparatory Commission for the CTBTO, an accredited
international body in this sphere, and for its evolving
monitoring and verification machinery. Recent events
have renewed the increased attention of the world
community to the role of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty (CTBT) in nuclear disarmament and
the prevention of nuclear weapons proliferation, which
remains one of the most important challenges facing
humankind today.
Ukraine, which has made a crucial contribution to
achieving this goal, was among the very first nations to
sign and ratify the CTBT, and we implement our
obligations and commitments under the global nonproliferation regime. Therefore, we feel a special

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

06-64421 (E)

*0664421*

A/61/PV.65

responsibility in this respect and steadfastly support the
efforts of our other partners and the CTBTO
Preparatory Commission in promoting the Treaty.
In this regard, we welcome the recent ratification
of the Treaty by new States parties and call on other
States to follow that lead. We also appreciate the work
of the Preparatory Commission for the CTBTO and its
activities, its Executive Secretary and all the relevant
efforts of the Provisional Technical Secretariat. We call
on all delegations to support the draft resolution.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji, who will introduce draft
resolution A/61/L.20/Rev.1.
Mr. Kau (Fiji): As Chair of the Pacific Islands
Forum group of countries here in New York — namely,
Australia, the Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru,
New Zealand, Palau, Papua New Guinea, the Republic
of the Marshall Islands, Samoa, Solomon Islands,
Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and my own country, Fiji — I
have the honour to introduce draft resolution
A/61/L.20/Rev.1, entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Pacific Islands Forum”, under
agenda item 108 (r).
Too often, the issues affecting the Pacific island
countries are not on the radar screen of the United
Nations. I must bear testimony to this Assembly that
we do have serious issues affecting the people of the
Pacific region. Such issues include the eradication of
poverty, the struggle against the HIV/AIDS pandemic,
coping with the adverse effects of environmental
degradation, the attainment of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), the maintenance of peace
and security and other challenges presented by our
particular vulnerabilities.
Efforts to achieve economic growth, attracting
trade and investment, protecting our rich fisheries and
marine resources and the attainment of sustainable
development goals are also challenges facing the
countries of the region. Difficulties in addressing these
and other important issues are compounded by a lack
of technical expertise, institutional and administrative
capacity, as well as financial and other resource
constraints.
This is no exaggeration, as we heard from the
United Nations Development Programme Administrator,
Mr. Kemal Dervis, last Monday, 27 November 2006,
during the General Assembly’s informal thematic

2

debate on the Millennium Development Goals: “The
biggest problems on the road to the MDGs are
experienced in sub-Saharan Africa and Oceania where,
on current trends, none of the goals are likely to be
met, on average”.
This situation is of extreme concern to the Pacific
island countries. We must avoid the business-as-usual
approach and scale up efforts by undertaking concrete
actions that pave the way for Pacific island countries to
achieve the MDGs.
The Pacific island countries are committed
individually and collectively as a region to addressing
these important issues. In the area of peace and
security, our collective desire to deal with important
issues affecting countries in the region has been
manifested in the restoration of peace and normalcy on
the island of Bougainville, in Papua New Guinea, and
in our collective efforts in support of the consolidation
of law and order, the revitalization of the economy and
the strengthening of the Government machinery in
Solomon Islands.
Regional mechanisms are also put in place to
pursue issues of collective interests to countries of the
region. Regional organizations, such as the Pacific
Islands Forum Secretariat, the Forum Fisheries Agency,
the Secretariat of the Pacific Community, the South
Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission and the South
Pacific Regional Environment Programme, support
Pacific island countries in addressing their specific
environments, sustainable development, economic
growth, governance and peace and security needs.
An important vehicle for regional cooperation in
addressing the aforementioned issues is the Pacific
Plan, which is the overarching framework for
collaboration and cooperation among Pacific Islands
Forum countries in the areas of security, good
governance, economic growth and sustainable
development in the region. At the recently concluded
37th Pacific Islands Forum meeting, held in Nadi, Fiji,
from 24 to 25 October 2006, Forum leaders made
important decisions to undertake concrete actions to
advance the implementation of the Pacific Plan. Such
critical efforts require the support of the United
Nations and other development partners.
With the challenges facing the Pacific Island
countries, we count on the valuable support of the
United Nations system in addressing these issues. In
this context, we fully support the ongoing collaboration

06-64421

A/61/PV.65

between the United Nations and the Pacific Islands
Forum. I wish particularly to note the efforts of the
United Nations Secretary-General in instituting regular
consultations with regional organizations; these have
been vital for fostering closer partnership in vital
strategic areas.
The draft resolution is aimed at enhancing
cooperation between the two organizations in
addressing issues affecting individual countries, the
Pacific region and the international community at
large. Further, it reflects priority areas of concern and
challenges facing the countries of the region, which
can be addressed in partnership with and with the
support of the international community, including the
United Nations system and other relevant stakeholders.
Issues reflected in the draft resolution requiring
collaboration between the United Nations and the
Pacific Islands Forum include: combating the
HIV/AIDS pandemic and addressing related issues;
achieving the Millennium Development Goals by 2015
and implementing other important instruments, such as
the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation and the
Mauritius Strategy; combating international global
terrorism through, inter alia, the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy;
maintaining international peace and security, including
through conflict prevention and peacebuilding
activities; combating the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons through, inter alia, implementation of
the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects; implementing the
Secretary-General’s decision to establish an expanded
and joint in-country presence of the United Nations in
Kiribati, the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Nauru, Palau, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu
and Vanuatu; and supporting initiatives to enhance
South-South cooperation among Pacific island
countries and with other developing countries.
At this juncture, I must express our profound
gratitude and appreciation to the countries that have
joined the Pacific Islands Forum Group in sponsoring
the draft resolution, namely, Armenia, Australia,
Bangladesh, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chile, Croatia, the
Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Grenada, Guatemala, Haiti, India, Indonesia,
Israel, the Philippines, Romania, Saint Lucia,
Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Ukraine,
the United States of America and the Bolivarian

06-64421

Republic of Venezuela. We believe that the adoption of
the draft resolution by the General Assembly would
undoubtedly strengthen the ongoing collaboration and
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Pacific Islands Forum. I would therefore urge all
Members of the United Nations to show solidarity with
the Pacific Islands Forum Group in demonstrating
unanimous support for the adoption of this draft
resolution.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to
introduce draft resolution A/61/L.29.
Mrs. Ferrari (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
I have the honour to introduce, for the consideration of
the General Assembly, the draft resolution entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Caribbean Community”, which is before the Assembly
in document A/61/L.29. I do so on behalf of the
following sponsors: Antigua and Barbuda, the
Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada,
Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago and my own
country, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
regarding cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations (A/61/256), in
particular section IV thereof, pertaining to the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM), which was
prepared pursuant to paragraph 10 of resolution 59/138
of 10 December 2004. The report outlines various
aspects of cooperation between the secretariats of the
United Nations and CARICOM, which involves an
active process of consultation and exchange of
information. That cooperation is important to the
economic and social development of the Caribbean
subregion.
In its preambular section, the draft resolution
stresses the importance of regional organizations in
furthering the role of the United Nations in the
maintenance of peace and security, within the context
of Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. It draws
attention to two initiatives of particular interest to the
Caribbean Community: first, the importance of
adopting an integrated management approach to the
Caribbean Sea area in the context of sustainable
development; and secondly, the necessity of
implementing the Barbados Programme of Action on
small island developing States. It notes the unique

3

A/61/PV.65

vulnerability of the Caribbean region to devastating
hazards and reaffirms the need to strengthen existing
cooperation in areas related to economic and social
development, particularly HIV/AIDS, comprehensive
disaster management and climate change.
In its operative section, the draft resolution takes
note of the Secretary-General’s report and encourages
him, in association with the CARICOM SecretaryGeneral, to continue to assist in furthering the
development and maintenance of peace and security
within the Caribbean region. It urges the specialized
agencies and other United Nations organizations and
programmes to cooperate in order to initiate, maintain
and increase consultations and programmes with the
Caribbean Community and its associated institutions in
the attainment of their objectives.
The draft resolution invites the organizations of
the United Nations system, as well as Member States,
to increase financial and other assistance to Caribbean
countries to help to implement the priorities of the
Caribbean Regional Strategic Framework, particularly
with regard to HIV/AIDS. It calls upon the United
Nations, the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system to assist the
countries of the region in addressing the social and
economic consequences of the vulnerability of
Caribbean economies. It reaffirms the objective of
strengthening the implementation of the Mauritius
Strategy and welcomes the initiatives of Member States
in assisting in the cooperation between the United
Nations and the Caribbean Community.
The draft resolution recommends that the fourth
general meeting between representatives of the two
organizations be held in the Caribbean area in early
2007 in order to review and appraise progress in the
implementation of the agreed areas and issues. Finally,
it requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to
the General Assembly at its sixty-third session and
decides to include an item on the subject in the
provisional agenda of that session.
The purpose of the draft resolution is to seek
further to develop the process of cooperation and
collaboration between the United Nations system and
the Caribbean Community. We believe that that goal
will attract wide and generous support in the General
Assembly.
In that connection, I would like to thank the
following countries, which have become sponsors of

4

the draft resolution: Comoros, Cuba, Ecuador,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Honduras, Liberia, Nicaragua, Papua
New Guinea, the Philippines, Samoa, Thailand, Tuvalu,
Zambia and Zimbabwe. The sponsors hope that, as
with similar texts in previous years, the draft resolution
can be adopted by consensus.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lesotho to introduce draft resolution
A/61/L.37.
Mr. Maema (Lesotho): On behalf of the States
members of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), namely, Angola, Botswana, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Madagascar,
Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, South
Africa, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe and
my own country, Lesotho, I have the honour to
introduce draft resolution A/61/L.37, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Southern African Development Community”, under
sub-item (t) of agenda item 108, “Cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and other
organizations”.
First of all, on behalf of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), let me express our
sincere appreciation to all the delegations that
participated in the informal consultations on the draft
resolution and to those countries that joined in
sponsoring it. We invite other delegations to do the
same.
In this year’s draft resolution, SADC reaffirms its
commitment to enhanced cooperation with the United
Nations and its related agencies, funds and
programmes, as well as with development partners. We
welcome continued efforts in the maintenance and
strengthening of such cooperation.
The draft resolution takes note of the high
prevalence of the HIV/AIDS pandemic, as well as the
adverse social and economic consequences of other
communicable diseases in the region, such as malaria
and tuberculosis. SADC solicits stronger support and
assistance from the United Nations and the
international community as a whole to fight the
scourge.
The draft resolution also takes note of the
continued efforts of SADC countries to make Southern
Africa a landmine-free zone. We reiterate our appeal to
the United Nations and its related bodies, as well as to

06-64421

A/61/PV.65

the international community, to support and assist
SADC in its efforts to rid the region of landmines.
The vulnerability of the SADC subregion to
natural disasters is also highlighted in the draft
resolution. In this regard, we also appeal to the
international community to assist SADC in
strengthening its disaster preparedness and early
warning capacity.
The Southern African Development Community
is convinced that, following the recent election in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, appeals to
members of the international community are necessary
in order to continue to contribute to the promotion of
peace and stability in that country and to extend
increased humanitarian, financial and other relevant
forms of assistance to alleviate the suffering of the
Congolese people.
The draft resolution welcomes the decision of the
summit of SADC heads of State and Government that
was held in Lesotho in August 2006 to convene a
SADC conference on poverty and development.
Members of the international community would be
invited to participate in the Conference.
The draft resolution welcomes progress made by
SADC towards achieving the target of 30 per cent
representation of women in decision-making as well as
SADC’s new target of 50 per cent. Furthermore, the
draft resolution takes note of SADC’s commitment to
launch a free trade area by 2008, and its preparations
for a customs union by 2010.
Finally, let me express once again our
appreciation to those countries that joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution. SADC hopes that, as
was the case with resolution 59/140, on cooperation
between the United Nations and SADC, this year’s
draft resolution will also be adopted by consensus.
The following Member States have joined the list
of sponsors of the draft resolution: Comoros, the Czech
Republic and Honduras.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolutions A/61/L.13,
A/61/L.18, A/61/L.20/Rev.1, A/61/L.26, A/61/L.29 and
A/61/L.37.
We turn first to draft resolution A/61/L.13,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations”. I would

06-64421

like to announce that since the introduction of draft
resolution A/61/L.13, the following countries have
become
sponsors:
Albania,
Algeria,
Angola,
Azerbaijan, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Croatia, the
Czech Republic, France, Grenada, Guinea, Honduras,
Iran, Jordan, Montenegro, Nauru, the Netherlands,
Portugal, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, the Sudan, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey and
Yemen.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/61/L.13?
Draft resolution
(resolution 61/46).

A/61/L.13

was

adopted

The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution A/61/L.18, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Preparatory Commission
for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Organization”. I should like to announce that since the
introduction of draft resolution A/61/L.18, the
following countries have become sponsors: Andorra,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan,
Latvia,
Lithuania,
Monaco,
the
Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, the Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey
and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kuwait,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab

5

A/61/PV.65

Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
United States of America
Draft resolution A/61/L.18 was adopted by 133
votes to 1 (resolution 61/47).
[Subsequently the delegations of Albania,
Bangladesh and Mexico informed the Secretariat
that they had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: We turn now to draft
resolution A/61/L.20/Rev.1, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Pacific Islands
Forum”. I should like to announce that, since the
introduction of draft resolution A/61/L.20/Rev.1, the
following countries have become sponsors: Algeria,
Chile, the Comoros, the Dominican Republic, Guinea,
Honduras, Italy, Nepal, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Turkey.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/61/L.20/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/61/L.20/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 61/48).
The Acting President: We turn now to draft
resolution A/61/L.26, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference”. I should like to announce that, since the
introduction of the draft resolution, the following

6

countries have become sponsors: Brunei Darussalam,
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/61/L.26?
Draft resolution
(resolution 61/49).

A/61/L.26

was

adopted

The Acting President: We turn now to draft
resolution A/61/L.29, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Caribbean Community”. I
should like to announce that, since the introduction of
the draft resolution, Chile has become a sponsor.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/61/L.29?
Draft resolution
(resolution 61/50).

A/61/L.29

was

adopted

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/61/L.37, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Southern African Development Community”. I should
like to announce that, since the introduction of the
draft resolution, Madagascar has become a sponsor.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/61/L.37?
Draft resolution
(resolution 61/51).

A/61/L.37

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
those representatives who wish to speak in explanation
of vote or position on the draft resolutions just
adopted, I remind delegations that explanations of vote
or position are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Jokinen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Bulgaria and Romania, the candidate
countries Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates
Montenegro and Serbia, and the European Free Trade
Association countries Iceland and Liechtenstein,
members of the European Economic Area, as well as
Moldova, align themselves with this statement.
Although the European Union was able to join
the consensus today on the draft resolution on
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, contained in

06-64421

A/61/PV.65

document A/61/L.26, we would like to make clear our
views of a technical nature on one very important
issue.
The European Union is consistently opposed to
the inclusion in draft resolutions adopted by the United
Nations of references to documents expressing political
commitments or other matters of a purely internal
nature that have been agreed within other
organizations, whether regional, cross-regional or
confessional. Such commitments have been subscribed
to only by the members of those organizations. They
have not been subject to a process of intergovernmental
negotiation within the United Nations, and thus have
no place in United Nations resolutions.
The primary objective of resolutions such as the
one adopted earlier on cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference is the reaffirmation by the wider United
Nations membership of its willingness to pursue
cooperation of that nature. Such cooperation cannot
take place otherwise than in full adherence to the
Charter of the United Nations, and the commitments
expressed in such resolutions must likewise be
consistent with the principles of the Charter.
It is on that basis, and on the clear understanding
that the contents of the resolution create no precedent
for the future, that the European Union was able to join
the consensus on the resolution today.
Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): Solomon Islands is
a sponsor of draft resolution A/61/L.20/Rev.1, under
sub-item (r) — “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Pacific Island Forum” — of agenda
item 108, and sincerely thanks all of the sponsors of
the draft resolution. However, we would like to explain
our position on the resolution, in particular in
connection with operative paragraphs 3, 4, 10 and 13.
My delegation feels that the resolution could have
been broadened to conform to existing regional
frameworks and the realities of developments in the
region. In paragraph 3, Solomon Islands would have
liked to see cooperation between the United Nations
and the Forum extended and widened beyond the
Secretary General of the Forum secretariat. My
delegation would prefer that the United Nations be
flexible enough to deal with Forum island States and
development-oriented Pacific island institutions,
including the Pacific Island Community and the Forum
Fisheries Agency.

06-64421

Solomon Islands’ comments on paragraph 4 relate
to development in context. Only last week it was
reported that the Pacific is not likely to meet its
Millennium Development Goals. My delegation would
have liked to see stronger development-oriented
language consistent with the 2005 World Summit
Outcome Document and the Pacific Plan’s four pillars:
economic
growth,
sustainable
development,
governance and security. However, governance and
security have taken prominence. As stated by Solomon
Islands in its national statement during the general
debate, its concern is that the United Nations has
conducted eight workshops in the Pacific region — all
on governance and security, and none on development.
With regard to paragraph 10, the Regional
Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands has contributed
to peace and stability in Solomon Islands. It is an
excellent regional mechanism. However, like all new
concepts, it has its own teething problems and needs
fine-tuning. In this regard, Pacific leaders, at their
recent meeting in October, called for its review, with a
view to strengthening partnership between the
Solomon Islands Government and its people. That
development, however, was omitted from the draft
resolution.
On paragraph 13, my delegation would have liked
to see the United Nations not restricted to carrying out
joint regional cooperative needs assessment missions,
but open to carrying out independent missions where
appropriate, especially in response to requests by
Member States, in the areas of peacebuilding,
development and other economic and social challenges.
We must, as far as we can, not allow problems to grow
but, where possible, resolve them, especially when
they are beyond reach of regional efforts.
Solomon Islands assures the Assembly that it
attaches great importance to the resolution. Its
comments do not affect its association with the rest of
the text of the resolution. My delegation would like to
conclude by assuring the Assembly of its support for
closer cooperation between the United Nations and the
Pacific region.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-items (c), (e), (q), (r), (s) and (t)
of agenda item 108?
It was so decided.

7

A/61/PV.65

Agenda item 43 (continued)
Return or restitution of cultural property to the
countries of origin
Draft resolution (A/61/L.15/Rev.1)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held a debate under this agenda item at
its 47th plenary meeting, on 3 November 2006.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Chief, General Assembly Affairs
Branch): In connection with draft resolution
A/61/L.15/Rev.1, I wish to inform members of a small
correction to operative paragraph 16. In the last line of
operative paragraph 16, the word “non-binding” should
be inserted before the words “standard-setting
instrument”.
Paragraph 16 should thus now read as follows,
“Notes the decision taken by the General
Conference of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization in its
resolution 33 C/45 of 20 October 2005 that the
subject of cultural objects displaced in connection
with the Second World War should be the subject
of a non-binding standard-setting instrument.”
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/61/L.15/Rev.1, as
orally corrected.
I should like to announce that since the
introduction of draft resolution A/61/L.15/Rev.1, the
following countries have become sponsors: Algeria,
Angola, Belarus, Bolivia, Bulgaria, Canada, the
Central African Republic, Croatia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Gabon, Georgia,
Guinea, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia,
Kuwait, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Moldova,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, the Republic of Korea, Serbia,
Spain, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Tunisia, Ukraine and Yemen.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/61/L.15/Rev.1, as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/61/L.15/Rev.1, as orally
corrected, was adopted (resolution 61/52).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
the representative of the Russian Federation, who

8

wishes to speak explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote or position are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation attaches great
importance to the efforts of the international
community to preserve cultural property. We note the
leading role of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) in this
field. But now we would like to convey to the members
of the General Assembly our understanding of
operative paragraph 16 of the draft resolution.
The Russian Federation believes that the
reference therein to resolution 33 C/45 of the General
Conference of UNESCO of 20 October 2005, on the
subject of cultural objects displaced in connection with
the Second World War, does not contain any judgment
on the part of the General Assembly on that decision
and does not predetermine the final outcome of
UNESCO’s work.
We call upon the intergovernmental organs of
UNESCO to carefully go into the details of this issue
and to take the best possible decision in the light of
national legislation and the practice of States, bearing
in mind also both the positive and the negative
consequences of attempts to universalize this problem.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote. I now give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. George Voulgarakis, Minister of
Culture of Greece.
Mr. Voulgarakis (Greece): I am grateful for the
opportunity to address the General Assembly for the
purpose of expressing the sincere thanks and gratitude
of my Government for the unanimous adoption of the
draft resolution on the “Return or restitution of cultural
property to the countries of origin”. The adoption by
consensus of the draft resolution and its sponsorship by
a great number of delegations clearly manifest its
importance to the international community and the
clear intention of all of us to promote bilateral and
multilateral cooperation for resolving outstanding
issues.
At the core of the efforts towards the protection
of cultural heritage lies the consistent and hard work of
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural

06-64421

A/61/PV.65

Organization (UNESCO). At this point, I would like to
express the appreciation of my Government to the
Director-General, Mr. Koichiro Matsuura, for his work.
Illegal trading in antiquities falls into the same
category as the illegal trade in arms or drugs or
trafficking in human beings. It constitutes a form of
organized crime directly associated with moneylaundering and corruption. It is a crime committed
against every one of us. It is not directed only against
those nations whose cultural heritage is looted, but
against the whole of mankind.
With the destruction of monuments, vital
information is lost. Art works are deprived of their
natural historical context and are reduced to simple
objects of ornament. They are neutralized. They cease
to exist as integral elements of cultural unity. They no
longer testify as to our origins and identities.
Humankind, deprived of its cultural identity, is
destitute. Cut off from its natural cultural habitat,
humankind is unable to understand phenomena relating
to its progressive development.
Yet, in recent years, a new wind of optimism has
appeared on the horizon. Increasingly, museums
recognize the moral obligation to conform with ethical
codes in their acquisition policies. In the international
scientific community, including archaeologists, voices
have been raised for the protection of cultural heritage
worldwide. Demands have been expressed that the
looting of archaeological sites and the illicit trafficking
in antiquities must stop. New strict laws are being
passed; recently, Switzerland and Great Britain have
begun moving in this direction. Finally, international
public opinion and public sentiment have alerted the
press, especially after the destruction of monuments
and archaeological sites in Afghanistan and Iraq.
This necessity is reflected and embodied in
today’s resolution. Greece took the initiative for the
proposal of this resolution in an effort to signify the
important need for the protection of cultural heritage. It
reflects initiatives set forth on the national level
through treaties, conventions and the policies of
UNESCO.
It promotes cooperation between nations of the
United Nations and UNESCO with the aim to preserve
the cultural heritage of humankind in the timeless
humanitarian values it represents. It provides for the
return and the restitution of cultural treasures illegally
removed from their place of origin.

06-64421

In this era of globalization, it is important for
nations to be able to preserve their historical cultural
identity. It is obvious that this cooperation and cultural
exchange should be based on moral principle and
ethical codes of conduct.
Greece, in cooperation with other nations and
institutions, has to date successfully retrieved a number
of antiquities exiled abroad. Recently, two important
antiquities held by the J. Paul Getty Museum in Los
Angeles were repatriated, while negotiations for the
return of two more items from that museum are
currently in progress. In addition, two important
fragments from the Acropolis — one from the
Parthenon frieze — have been returned. I would like to
thank Heidelberg University for that gesture as well as
the Swedish collector involved. They both realized the
need for the reunification of the parts of one of the
most important cultural sites in the world. Those
returns confirm the need for the preservation of that
monument, which, of course, is in Greece, but belongs
to the world as a whole.
The Parthenon sculptures remain dispersed and
divided. The uniqueness of the Parthenon, as a
monumental symbol of Western civilization, is the
critical argument for the return of its parts, and the
demand for their return is ecumenical. Now that the
construction of the new Acropolis museum is almost
complete, it is our ambition that the new museum
shelter all extant parts of the Parthenon, and it is
expected to include the sculptures we claim must be
returned by the British Museum.
The reunification and restitution of antiquities
serves to complete a cultural mosaic which has been
disrupted and lies today in disarray. The image
presented by that mosaic, owing to the plundering of
some of its integral parts, has become distorted and
misleading — even traumatic. By protecting the
cultural heritage of each nation, we will be providing a
solid foundation not just for the present but also for
posterity and for future generations. The cultural
heritage of each nation is, of course, the cultural
heritage of humankind, and all humankind must
respond to this responsibility to protect that legacy.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 43?
It was so decided.

9

A/61/PV.65

Agenda item 46
Follow-up to the outcome of the twenty-sixth special
session: implementation of the Declaration of
Commitment on HIV/AIDS
Draft decision (A/61/L.40)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft decision A/61/L.40, entitled
“International Voluntary HIV Counselling and Testing
Day”.
I should like to announce that, since the
introduction of draft decision A/61/L.40, the following
countries have become sponsors of the draft: Barbados,
Cambodia, Comoros, Ethiopia, Fiji, Georgia, Grenada,
Honduras, Israel, Kenya, Lesotho, Madagascar,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Uganda and Viet Nam.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/61/L.40?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: I shall now give the floor
to those representatives wishing to make statements in
explanation of position on the decision just adopted.
May I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Tarragô (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the member States of
MERCOSUR, namely Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay,
Venezuela and Brazil, and the associated States
Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru.
I am taking the floor to make a statement in
explanation of position on behalf of MERCOSUR and
associated States following the adoption of draft
decision A/61/L.40, entitled “International Voluntary
HIV Counselling and Testing Day”.
MERCOSUR and associated States believe that
combating HIV/AIDS requires broad-based and
coordinated policies aimed at attaining, by 2010,
universal access to prevention, treatment, care and
support. In that regard, MERCOSUR and associated
States promote regular voluntary testing campaigns, in
accordance with their respective public programmes,
epidemiological status and specific needs.

10

I should like to thank the main sponsor of the
draft for having promoted discussion on voluntary
counselling and testing, although we would have
welcomed the submission of this important document
to all States Members of the United Nations for open
consultations. We are of the view that the decision just
adopted provides us with an important opportunity to
engage in a discussion on national counselling and
testing strategies. Such strategies must encompass full
respect for the human rights of the individuals
undergoing testing and must be integrated into plans to
combat the stigmatization and discrimination
associated with HIV/AIDS, with a particular focus on
stigmatized vulnerable groups, such as sexual minority
groups.
In addition, States must ensure confidentiality
with respect to test results so as to prevent
discrimination. MERCOSUR and associated States
believe that every effort should be made to ensure that
people do not confuse testing with prevention and to
make it clear that a negative HIV/AIDS status is not
permanent. Moreover, the success of national voluntary
testing campaigns will be gauged on the basis of
countries’ ability to guarantee persons living with
HIV/AIDS universal access to treatment and to
medication.
The national programmes of MERCOSUR and
associated States are based on a policy of providing
universal treatment and of ensuring access to
medicines to all those who require them.
MERCOSUR and associated States joined the
consensus on the draft decision on the understanding
that countries have total flexibility in implementing
their respective voluntary counselling and testing
strategies in the framework of their national policies
and action plans, including, as appropriate, the choice
of whether or not to designate an International
Voluntary HIV Counselling and Testing Day in 2007,
as well as the manner in which to observe it.
MERCOSUR and associated States consider that
this decision anticipates the debate on agenda item 46,
scheduled for the first half of 2007, at which time the
issue of voluntary counselling and testing will be
considered comprehensively and in depth, with the
participation of all States Members of the United
Nations.

06-64421

A/61/PV.65

Mrs. Ghanashyam (India): I take the floor to
explain India’s position following the adoption of
decision A/61/L.40, entitled “International Voluntary
HIV Counselling and Testing Day”.
My delegation has joined the consensus on the
adoption of the draft decision on International
Voluntary HIV Counselling and Testing Day. It is our
understanding that, in calling on Member States, the
decision leaves the option open to each Member State
whether or not to designate a Voluntary HIV
Counselling and Testing Day in 2007.
Ms. Davies (Australia): We are delivering this
statement also on behalf of Canada, Japan and Norway.
We wish to note that our interpretation of the
decision just adopted is that it invites Member States to
consider
designating
a
voluntary
HIV/AIDS
counselling and testing day, consistent with appropriate
national HIV/AIDS strategies. We remain committed to
a comprehensive HIV response and to supporting
countries in combating the HIV/AIDS pandemic.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 46.

Organization of work
The Acting President: I should like now to
consult members regarding an extension of the work of
the Second Committee. Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 13 September 2006, the
General Assembly approved the recommendation of the
General Committee that the Second Committee would
complete its work by Friday, 1 December 2006.
However, the President of the Assembly has been
informed by the Chairperson of the Second Committee
that the Committee was not able to finish its work by
Friday, 1 December. It is my understanding that the
Committee will need to meet until Wednesday, 6
December 2006.
May I, therefore, take it that the General
Assembly agrees to extend the work of the Second
Committee until Wednesday, 6 December 2006?
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I would also like to inform members that
consideration of agenda item 27, “Protracted conflicts
in the GUAM area and their implications for
international peace, security and development”,
scheduled for Thursday, 7 December 2006, has been
postponed to a later date to be announced.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

06-64421

11
