VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

consultation with the administering Power, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session.
70th plenary meeting
24 November 1981

36/48.

Question of American Samoa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 9
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other resolutions
and decisions of the United Nations relating to American
Samoa,
Taking into account the statement of the administering
Power relating to developments in American Samoa, 10
Conscious of the need to promote progress towards the
full implementation of the Declaration in respect of American Samoa,
Welcoming the active participation of the administering
Power in the related work of the Special Committee and
expressing the hope that this co-operation will be strengthened further so as to accelerate progress towards the full
implementation of the Declaration with regard to American
Samoa,
Having examined the report of the United Nations Visiting
Mission dispatched to the Territory in July 1981, 11
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of American Samoa and
stressing the necessity for diversifying the Territory's economy as a matter of priority in order to reduce its dependence
on fluctuating economic activities,
I. Approves the report of the United Nations Visiting
Mission to American Samoa and endorses the observations,
conclusions and recommendations contained therein; 12
2. Also approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to American
Samoa; 13
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
American Samoa to self-determination and independence
in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
4. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy implementation of the Declaration, which fully applies to the
Territory;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the members of the
Visiting Mission for the constructive work accomplished
and to the administering Power and the Government and
people of American Samoa for the co-operation and assistance extended to the Mission;

• Ibid., chaps. III and XXVlll.
10
Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session, Fourth Committee, 14th meeting, paras.
1-8.
11
A/AC.109/679 and Add.I.
12
A/AC.109/679, paras. 344-370.
13
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-~-ixth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/36/23/Rev.l), chap. XXVlll.

199

6. Calls upon the Government of the United States of
America, as the administering Power, to take all necessary
steps, taking into account the freely expressed wishes of the
people of American Samoa, to expedite the process of decolonization of the Territory in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the
Declaration;
7. Reaffirms that it is the responsibility of the administering Power to ensure that the people of American Samoa
are kept fully informed of their inalienable right to selfdetermination and independence, in accordance with the
Declaration contained in General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);
8. Reaffirms also the responsibility of the administering

Power for the economic and social development of the
Territory;
9. Calls upon the administering Power to take all possible steps to strengthen and diversify the economy of
American Samoa and to work out concrete programmes of
assistance and economic development for the Territory;
10. Urges the administering Power to continue to foster
close relations and co-operation between the people of the
Territory and the neighbouring island communities:
11. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the freely elected representatives of American Samoa,
to safeguard the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment of their natural resources by taking
effective measures which guarantee the right of the people
to own and dispose of those resources and to establish and
maintain control over their future development;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
consideration of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to American Samoa at an appropriate time and in consultation with
the administering Power, and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session on the implementation
of the present resolution.
70th plenary meeting
24 November 1981

36/49.

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December
1963, in which it requested the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to study the information transmitted to the
Secretary-General under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations and to take such information fully into account in examining the situation with regard to the implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolution 35/26 of 11 November 1980,
in which it requested the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution 1970
(XVIII),

Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee dealing with the transmittal of information under
Article 73 e of the Charter and the action taken by the
Committee in respect of that information, 14
Having also examined the report of the Secretary-General
on the question, 15
'

4

Ibid., chap. Vil.

" A/36/563.

200

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

Deploring the fact that some Member States having responsibilities for the administration of Non-Self-Governing
Territories have ceased to transmit information under Article
73 e of the Charter,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by the
General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing Territory has attained a full measure of self-government in terms
of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering Power concerned should continue to transmit information under Article
73 e of the Charter with respect to that Territory;
3. Requests the administering Powers concerned to
transmit, or continue to transmit, to the Secretary-General
the information prescribed in Article 73 e of the Charter,
as well as the fullest possible information on political and
constitutional developments in the Territories concerned,
within a maximum period of six months following the expiration of the administrative year in those Territories;
4. Requests the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under General Assembly
resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with established
procedures, and to report thereon to the Assembly at its
thirty-seventh session.
70th plenary meeting
24 November 1981

36/50.

Question of East Timor

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the inalienable right of all peoples to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, contained in its resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960,
Bearing in mind that the Fifth 16 and Sixth 17 Conferences
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries,
held at Colombo and Havana in 1976 and 1979, respectively, reaffirmed the right of the people of East Timor to
self-determination and independence,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to East Timor 18
and other relevant documents, 19
Deeply concerned at the suffering of the people of East
Timor and at reports of the critical situation resulting from
the new outbreak of famine in the Territory,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the
question of East Timor, 20
Recalling the communique of the Council of Ministers
of Portugal, issued on 12 September 1980, 21 in which the
administering Power pledged to undertake broad initiatives

with a view to ensuring the full and speedy decolonization
of East Timor,
Having heard the statement of the representative of Portugal, 22 as the administering Power,
Having heard the statements of the representative of the
Frente Revolucionaria de Timor Leste Independente, 23 the
liberation movement of East Timor, and of various East
Timor petitioners, as well as of the representatives of nongovernmental organizations, 24
I. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of East
Timor to self-determination and independence, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Declares that the people of East Timor must be enabled freely to determine their own future on the basis of
the relevant General Assembly resolutions and internationally accepted procedures;
3. Calls upon all interested parties, namely Portugal,
as the administering Power, and the representatives of the
East Timorese people, as well as Indonesia, to co-operate
fully with the United Nations with a view to guaranteeing
the full exercise of the right to self-determination by the
people of East Timor;
4. Notes the initiative taken by the Government of Portugal, as stated in the communique of the Council of Ministers of Portugal issued on 12 September 1980, and invites
the administering Power to continue its efforts with a view
to ensuring the proper exercise of the right to self-determination and independence by the people of East Timor,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV),
and to report to the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
on the progress of its initiative;
5. Expresses its deepest concern at the reports of the
critical situation resulting from the new outbreak of famine
in East Timor and calls upon all specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the World Food Programme, the United Nations
Children's Fund and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, immediately to assist, within
their respeclive fields of competence, the people of the
Territory;
6. Notes with satisfaction the humanitarian aid given
by some Member States and relief organizations to the people of East Timor and calls upon all Governments concerned
to continue this aid with a view to alleviating the suffering
of the people of the Territory;
7. Requests the Special Committee to keep the situation
in the Territory under active consideration and to follow the
implementation of the present resolution;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to follow the implementation of the present resolution and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled ''Question of East
Timor".
70th plenary meeting
24 November 1981

16

See N31/197, annex I, para. 36.
See N34/542, annex, sect. I, para. 155.
'" Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 23 (N36/23/Rev. l ), chap. X
19
N36/l60; NAC.109/663.
20
N36/598.
21
NC.4/35/2. annex.
17

22
Official Records of the Genera/Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session, Fourth
Committee, 9th meeting, paras. 45-48.
23
Ibid., I Ith meeting, paras. 31-49.
24
Ibid., 9th-l Ith and 15th meetings.
