S/2004/748

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 September 2004
Original: English

Letter dated 20 September 2004 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the Accra III Agreement on Côte d’Ivoire
concluded on 30 July 2004 in Accra, to the statement by the President of the
Security Council of 5 August 2004 (S/PRST/2004/29) and to my letters dated
16 August 2004 (S/2004/667) and 3 September 2004 (S/2004/716) concerning the
monitoring of the Agreement.
Please find attached the third report of the Tripartite Monitoring Group
established under the Accra III Agreement, covering the period from 1 to
15 September 2004 (see annex). I should be grateful if you would bring the present
letter and its annex to the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

04-51735 (E) 240904

*0451735*

S/2004/748

Annex

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE ACCRA III AGREEMENT
THIRD REPORT OF THE MONITORING GROUP
Covering 1 to 15 September 2004

I.

OVERVIEW

1. The security situation in the country has been calm in the period under review. The
Quadripartite Commission has been working to invigilate security on both sides of the
Zone of confidence. Consultations within the Commission point to serious attempts at
verifying the implementation of the decisions taken on reducing and dismantling
checkpoints and recovering heavy weaponry. This has brought about some progress in
securing greater freedom of movement of persons and goods in other parts of the
country.
2. The Government of National Reconciliation resumed its activities after a short
period of recess. The President and the Prime Minister are leading the various levels of
activities to grapple with national problems of high priority. These relate to the
contingency plans to syndicate funding to meet the expenses to be incurred in the
impending reopening of schools and social services throughout the country and to the
crisis in the coffee-cocoa industry. The President has embarked on a series of
consultations prior to his decision to reform the coffee-cocoa sector in order to stem the
declining revenue to the state and, what is politically significant, alleviate the growing
social tensions among the farmers and producers with its implications for national
reconciliation, national reconstruction and the peace process. The Prime Minister has
embarked on overseas missions to seek external funding from the Bretton Wood
institutions and from the donor community in the UN and the European Union.
3. The political scene has been dominated by the activities of the major political
parties as they position themselves in the campaign leading to the October 2005
elections. The politics of such posture is also reflected in the proceedings of the
National Assembly in particular, the current haggling over the passage of the texts of
legislation on the Nationality Code and on the composition of the Independent
Electoral Commission. The parliamentary caucuses have sought the good offices of the
Tripartite Monitoring Group and the Monitoring Committee. Consequently, the two
2

S/2004/748

bodies are engaged in facilitating a dialogue and a compromise between the principal
protagonists in the National Assembly.
4. Meanwhile, there is some progress in the National Assembly’s adopting at the
committee stage the draft legislation on Public funding of political parties and groups
and electoral campaigns. The National Assembly also has on its agenda the
consideration of the draft legislation on the Regime governing the Press which has just
been adopted by the Council of Ministers and awaiting its formal transmission by the
President of the Republic to the National Assembly.
5. Out of the heightened public debate, there is no doubt that much concern is focused
on what the public perceives as the slow pace and political obstacles in the adoption of
the legislative reforms envisaged under the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement and
highlighted in the Accra III Agreement.
6. In spite of the impressions given about the sharp divisions among the political
actors, it may be observed that attempts are being made to promote alliances and repair
frayed personal relations between political actors. A striking case in point is the
decision taken at the level of the Government of National Reconciliation to improve
personal and social relations among members of the Government. It has been agreed
that fortnightly luncheons would be initiated and hosted in turns, starting with the
Prime Minister through the former Prime Minister to other political leaders. Such social
and convivial occasions are intended to improve relations among Ministers beyond
what has so far been, for the most part, mere working relations.

II. SALIENT DEVELOPMENTS IN THE PEACE PROCESS
Proceedings on legislative texts in the National Assembly
7. It may be noted from the Synoptic Table on the status of progress of legislative
texts (enclosure 1) that in the period under review that there has been an update
regarding only two texts: the Public funding of political parties and electoral
campaigns and the Regime governing the Press. The text on the Nationality Code,
which was withdrawn from the Assembly, is still under consultations within the
Government.

3

S/2004/748

8. The current gridlock in the proceedings of the National Assembly began on
26 August 2004 following the refusal of the opposition Parliamentary groups to
participate in a vote on an amendment proposed by the FPI group to Article 5 of the
Government’s draft legislation on the composition of the Independent Electoral
Commission (IEC). The Minister of Territorial Administration, Issa Diakite, who
presented the text in the Assembly, walked out of the Assembly with the other
opposition groups. On the instructions of the President of the Republic, the Minister in
charge of Relations with Institutions of State, M. Alphonse Douaty, requested the
suspension of proceedings on the text pending resolution of the impasse by the
Government. The essential points of disagreement are over the representation of the
Forces Nouvelles in the proposed new membership of the IEC. The Government’s draft
proposes equal representation of two persons for each of the signatories of the LinasMarcoussis Agreement. This implies that Forces Nouvelles would be entitled to six
representatives. The FPI considered this to be an imbalance of representation in favour
of the Forces Nouvelles and therefore proposed initially one representative for the
Forces Nouvelles as one political entity. Subsequently, after consultations, the FPI had
now agreed to two representatives for the Forces Nouvelles. The G7 Marcoussistes
maintained their support for the Government’s proposal implying six representatives
for the Forces Nouvelles.
9. The Monitoring Group has met all the parliamentary caucuses and there is a
compromise which is emerging to agree on three representatives for the Forces
Nouvelles as a bloc. Both the Monitoring Group and the Monitoring Committee have
agreed to leave the negotiations among the parliamentary groups under the possible
lead role of the PIT political leader, Professor Francis Wodie.
10. In their consultations with the FPI parliamentary caucus, the Monitoring Group
raised the wider question of the especial responsibility of the caucus to convince the
FPI as a party and the President of the Republic so that by the 30 September deadline,
the National Assembly could have adopted legislation on the Nationality Code, on the
Composition of the IEC and on the amendment to Article 35. The Monitoring Group
also took the liberty to point out that thought must be given to reconstituting the
Constitutional Council to include opposition representatives in order to avoid the
political controversy that could soon erupt over the credibility of that Council as at
present constituted. The suggestion was made because the Council has powers, inter
alia, to determine the eligibility of candidates for presidential and parliamentary

4

S/2004/748

elections and to adjudicate on challenges to the results of presidential and
parliamentary elections.
Electoral process
11. ONUCI is encouraging a continuing dialogue on all related aspects of the electoral
process including the identification exercise. To that end, it has taken the initiative to
create a coordination framework among the various potential partners likely to extend
their support for the elections. Two meetings had been held among the partners on 1
and 14 September 2004. The first meeting recommended the establishment of a
working committee comprising ONUCI/UNDP/EU to assess the situation with regard
to the electoral process including the identification process; to make recommendations
for the strengthening of the institutional capacity of the Ivorian administration; to draw
up a programme of action with the institutions involved in the electoral process to
ensure rigorous follow-up action. The meeting recommended creating a forum for
consultations among development partners, the IEC, the National Identification Office
(NIO), the National Commission for supervising identification (NCSI), the CNDDR
and CNRA to ensure a better coordination of all activities relating to the electoral
process. The meeting proposed the postponement of the UN electoral assessment
mission until the beginning of October pending the evolution of the parliamentary
proceedings on the relevant texts of legislation relating to the electoral process.
12. The UK Ambassador, who participated in the meetings, has indicated that the UK
is interested in providing some support for the electoral process. He intends to ask IFES
to undertake a mission to Cote d’Ivoire to look into the prospects for such assistance.
13. Meanwhile, the UNDP has commissioned the preparation of a project-document on
technical assistance to support the organisation of a referendum and the presidential
elections of October 2005. The terms of reference of the consultant will be the
following: i) to assess the funding available within the UNDP and the donor
community; ii) to give a detailed assessment of the technical assistance needs of the
IEC; iii) to assess the status of preparations made for the organisation of the elections
and review the operational plan and cost estimates for the elections; iv) to prepare a
work plan for the IEC and international and national experts supporting the project; and
v) to assist UNDP in mobilising resources among the donor community.

5

S/2004/748

14. The European Union has provided the services of a technical expert within the
framework of its cooperation programme with Cote d’Ivoire to facilitate cooperation in
the area of the electoral and the identification processes.
Confidence-building measures
• Peace corridors (Corridors de la Paix)
15. ONUCI and UNDP launched, on 8 September 2004, a programme designated
Peace corridors after due consultations with the Government, in particular the Ministers
of National Reconciliation, Territorial administration, Victims of war, the displaced
and exiles, Solidarity and Social security. The programme has been launched as a
significant contribution to the commemoration of peace and national reconciliation
starting from the second anniversary of the Ivorian crisis on 19 September. The
programme will involve the UN system of agencies in Cote d’Ivoire and ONUCI
impartial forces. During the week of the commemoration, children from displaced
families will be organised to travel to Bouake to reunite with their families.
Subsequently, more of these exercises will be replicated to demonstrate the human
factor in the peace process, especially in the reunification of the country. In November
– December 2004, three such expeditions will be mounted from Man to Guiglo in the
West; Abidjan to Bouake in the central region ; and Bouna to Bondoukou in the East.
• Committee for Public Hearing of ECOWAS Residents
(Comité d’écoute des étrangers ressortissants des pays de la CEDEAO)
16. In another development reflecting efforts at national reconciliation, the Head of
State inaugurated on 8 September 2004 under the aegis of the Ministry of African
Integration, a “Comité d’écoute” to serve as a forum to address the grievances of
ECOWAS residents in Cote d’Ivoire. The Committee comprises representatives of
various ECOWAS communities who will deliberate with officials from various
government ministries (Foreign affairs, Interior, Finance, Trade, Health, in particular).
The institution of this forum is a positive signal to the ECOWAS residents of the
intention of the Ivorian Government to improve relations with its neighbours and
ensure ultimately the general welfare of foreign residents, as recommended under the
Linas-Marcoussis Agreement.

6

S/2004/748

Preparations for DDR
17. On 31 August 2004, the CNDDR held a meeting with the national stakeholders and
partners to review the preparations for the DDR programme, which is due to begin on
15 October 2004. A revised draft of the DDR roadmap was circulated to the
stakeholders and partners. The roadmap and related-funding issues were to be finalized
subsequently. A number of issues were raised:
• The World Bank representative focused on linking the DDR roadmap to
financing. In light of the suspension of the Bank’s disbursement to Cote d’Ivoire,
he reiterated that the Bank could not presently fund the DDR process. Even the
possibility of reimbursing funding retroactively is unlikely unless the suspension
is lifted before year-end. Although the Government is planning to use World
Bank funding for the reinsertion and the reintegration phase, the President of the
CNDDR noted that the Government is now also looking at alternative means of
funding.
• The World Bank representative also raised concerns that the higher paymentlevels for ex-combatants in Cote d’Ivoire ($900 in three instalments: the first
$225 paid in the beginning of the process, $225 after one month and $450 after
three months) would attract foreign fighters who would attempt to undergo the
Ivorian DDR process. Instead, the Bank proposed $400 as the payment amount,
with the remainder of the funds being used for vocational training. The President
of CNDDR stated that the payments were in line with the higher cost of living in
Cote d’Ivoire and that the Bank’s concerns were unjustified as the current
deployment of ONUCI peacekeepers along the borders, combined with the unit
disarmament approach would likely prevent significant cross-border movement
of foreign fighters to join the DDR.
• The UNICEF representative at the meeting indicated that the number of child
soldiers eligible for the DDR process is unlikely to exceed 3,000.
Observations
18. These periodic “partners meetings” chaired by CNDDR, which involve all the
national stakeholders and international partners, are proving to be a useful mechanism

7

S/2004/748

for co-ordination of a complex exercise. However, it is already apparent that a number
of issues will need close attention, namely:
• Financing
It is essential that the funding problem be resolved well before the DDR
completes its operative phase. The Government was counting on the World Bank
to finance the “filet de sécurité” (security net), which is essential to ensure the
immediate reintegration or resettlement of the ex-combatants. However, with the
suspension of the Bank’s lending operations, this is now uncertain. The
disarmament should not begin until this problem is resolved as it would be very
dangerous to begin a process that would create expectations that would not be
fulfilled.
• Security in the North
The assignment of ONUCI trained security auxiliaries to the North during and
after DDR has been agreed in principle by all concerned but their status after the
disarmament is still to be confirmed. This matter is under discussion with the
national authorities with the aim of ensuring their reintegration into the police
and gendarmerie on the understanding that the proper selection and training
procedures will be applied from the outset. At the same time, the Forces
Nouvelles now appear willing to accept that the national command of the police
and gendarmerie is present in the North to ensure effective supervision and to
train security auxiliaries during their initial 45 days of training. However, the
presence of police and gendarmerie is only part of a broader set of measures
including the assignment of judicial officers that will need to be taken to ensure
that a security and governance vacuum does not emerge post DDR.
• Post- September 2002 recruits
Linas-Marcoussis called for the discharge of all recruits to the army after
September 2002. Some 4,000 soldiers are involved. The President of CNDDR
has taken this issue up with the Minister of Defence. Although not strictly linked
to the issue of recruits, the broader question of the restructuring of the security
forces has also been raised in this context. The Prime Minister has created an

8

S/2004/748

informal working group to begin a process of reflection on this topic. We
understand that ONUCI will be asked to contribute to this initiative.
• Status of Combatants
Two problems are likely to emerge. The first is how to identify combatants as
nationals of Cote d’Ivoire in the absence of proper documentation. The second
relates to the treatment of foreign combatants in the immediate period after
disarmament. While CNDDR does not expect a large, cross-border influx of
foreign fighters, there are undoubtedly combatants of foreign origin already in
Cote d’Ivoire. The procedures for identifying and dealing with these cases need
to be reviewed to ensure that they are easily understood and applicable. If not
there is a danger that the DDR process could be disrupted by ex-combatants who
may feel excluded from benefits.
19. At another meeting on DDR on 7 September 2004, with the national stakeholders
and partners, a number of issues were raised:
• The issue of the recruitment of personnel for the regional DDR bureaus was
raised. There will be three bureaus in the North and three in the South; each will
be staffed with 5-6 officers. The CNDDR noted that it had already recruited
50% of the personnel for its bureaus in the South and that recruiting in the North
will be completed by mid-September.
• There are 11 DDR zones throughout the country; each will have four or five sites
focusing on the various aspects of regrouping, disarmament and/or
demobilization. UNDP is rehabilitating the demobilization sites while the
Government is rehabilitating the remaining sites. UNDP is also assisting
CNDDR with recruiting staff for all the DDR sites. The terms of reference for
these staff positions (including for doctors, psychiatrists and administrators) have
been prepared and the recruitment process will soon begin.
• A synopsis plan (hereto attached as Annex 3) has been prepared by the CNDDR
planning committee. This plan sets out the DDR timeframe, starting with the first
phase of DDR, in the eastern, central and western regions of the country, and
continuing through the second phase, in the North and South of the country. It
was agreed that financial details still needed to be worked out. The World Bank

9

S/2004/748

representative re-echoed some of his concerns highlighting the need for linking
up financial and budgetary considerations to the plan. A special meeting has been
scheduled for this. It was agreed that once all these details are finalized, all the
partners would sign on to the plan.
• An initial plan for securing the DDR zones and sites, during the various stages of
the disarmament and demobilization process, has been presented.
• The Forces Nouvelles expressed their concerns about the nationality status of
individual combatants entering the DDR process. They insisted that combatants
should be identified as Ivorian or not during the regrouping phase and not after
the disarmament phase. This demand has serious implications given the ongoing political debate on the nationality issue. The CNDDR President noted that
this was a political matter and that he would consult on this with the
Government.
• In response to a question from the FN, the President of the CNDDR indicated
that it was not planned that combatants of foreign origin would receive any post
disarmament allowances. This response was vigorously contested by the FN
representatives.
• The issue of the security auxiliaries was raised, in particular their post-DDR
status. The Forces Nouvelles re-iterated their demand that these auxiliaries
should be fully integrated in the national police and gendarmerie after the DDR
is completed. The CNDDR President has undertaken to raise this issue with the
Prime Minister.
Observations
20. The identification problem is a critical one that must be resolved before the DDR
exercise begins. Also the absence of any material benefits is likely to discourage
foreign combatants to disarm. There is a danger that combatants who are disappointed
may react in a negative manner when learning that they will not receive any benefits
from their disarmament especially if this were to happen when they are already in
cantonment sites. This is a complicated issue because the CNDDR obviously does not
want to link disarmament to the award or otherwise of nationality. These are serious
concerns, which we intend to discuss again with the CNDDR in order to encourage

10

S/2004/748

solutions acceptable to all concerned bearing in mind that the initial planning and
financial estimates were based on an estimated total number of combatants without
distinction by national origin.
21. The security issue for the north following the DDR is also a major preoccupation.
We have set up an internal group to look at this in more depth, as we clearly must
ensure that no security vacuum develops with the risk of lawlessness spreading in the
areas where disarmament has taken place.
22. Following the CNDDR meeting, ONUCI convened an internal coordination
meeting, with representatives of all relevant ONUCI components, as well as
representatives from UNDP and UNICEF. It is intended to have these meetings
regularly to ensure that the various components of the UN family in Cote d’Ivoire are
able to tackle the DDR process in a coordinated and cohesive fashion.

III. HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
23. Following the Accra III Agreement, there have been some encouraging
developments in the field of human rights. Checkpoints, number of arrest and
detention, disappearances, abuses at the checkpoints has decreased in their frequency.
However, concerns continue to be raised particularly in the west of the country where
pro-government militia activities, the circulation of small arms in the hands of the
civilian population, inter-community and ethnic tensions continue to be reported. In the
North of the country, rivalries between factions within the Forces Nouvelles have
rendered the overall human rights situation fragile. The settling of scores between the
different factions has led to cases of arrest and incommunicado detention, summary and
extra-judiciary executions as well as forced disappearances.
24. During the reporting period, the International Commission of Inquiry established in
accordance with the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement to investigate human rights
violations committed since 19 September 2002 in Cote d’Ivoire visited different parts
of the country as well as Mali, Burkina Faso, Ghana and Liberia. While the
Government of Côte d’Ivoire fully cooperated with the International Commission of
Inquiry, some key leaders of the Forces Nouvelles failed to respond positively to the
invitation of the Commission. The Forces Nouvelles, however, facilitated the work of
the Commission in the parts of the country under their control. The Commission

11

S/2004/748

members were received in a farewell audience by President Gbagbo on 13 September
2004 before leaving Abidjan on 15 September for Geneva where they will finalize their
report within a month. Meanwhile, two National Commissions of Inquiry, established
by the Ivorian National Assembly, began their investigations in the week of 6
September 2004.
25. The newly established National Human Rights Commission of Côte d’Ivoire has
not yet started operating. The Government of National Reconciliation should be
encouraged to issue a decree nominating the members of the Commission to enable it
to start implementing its mandate.
26. As enclosure 2 to this report is a Synopsis of the Status of implementation of the
Accra III Agreement.
IV. CONCLUSION
27. Judging by the proceedings in the National Assembly, it is self-evident that the
timetable set by the Accra III Agreement for the passage of the legislative texts
envisaged under the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement might not be met by 30 September
2004. This should come as no surprise as the legislative procedures and power play in
these matters all too often demonstrate.
28. In any event, however, the Monitoring Group would recommend that President
Kufuor, President Obasanjo and Secretary-General Kofi Annan should plan their
immediate move to ascertain from President Gbagbo what obstacles he has been facing
in implementing the Accra III Agreement, in particular the issue of Article 35. It is now
also time to see what other demarches could be undertaken to get the four major
political leaders, President Gbagbo, Mr. Konan Bedie, Mr. Alassane Ouattara and Mr.
Guillaume Soro, to meet and concert with a view to taking yet another critical look at
what political formula can be found to resolve the issue of Article 35.
Signed on behalf of the Group
Ambassador Raph Uwechue
Chairman
Abidjan, 15 September 2004

12

Enclosure 1*

SYNOPTIC TABLE
STATUS OF PROGRESS OF LEGISLATIVE TEXTS ENVISAGED UNDER THE LINAS-MARCOUSSIS
AGREEMENT

Legislation

Adopted by the
Government

Submitted to
the National
Assembly

Adopted in
Committee of
Assembly

Passed by the
National
Assembly

Promulgated

1) Legislation on the amendment to
Article 35 of the Constitution

Yes

No

No

No

No

2) Legislation on the Ivorian
Nationality Code as amended by Law
No 72-852 of 21 December 1972
3) Legislation on the Land tenure
regime

Yes

Yes 1

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

4) Legislation on the National Human
Rights Commission

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

5) Legislation relating to the disclosure
of the personal assets of the Head of
State
6) Legislation on the public funding of
political parties and groups and
electoral campaigns

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

1 The President of the Republic has, by letter, requested the National Assembly to temporarily remove from its agenda the draft

text of legislation on the Nationality Code.
1

* Provided in language of submission only.

S/2004/748

__________________

2

Adopted by the
Government

Submitted to
the National
Assembly

Adopted in
Committee of
Assembly

Passed by the
National
Assembly

Promulgated

7) Legislation authorising the President
of the Republic to ratify the additional
protocol A/SP1/6/89 amending and
completing the provisions of article VII
of the protocol, signed in Ouagadougou
on 30 June 1989, concerning the free
circulation of persons, the right of
residence and settlement.

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

8) Legislation authorising the President
of the Republic to ratify the additional
protocol A/SP2/5/90 relating to the
implementation of the third step (right
of settlement) of the protocol
concerning the free circulation of
persons, the right of residence and
settlement signed in Banjul on 29 May
1990
9) Legislation on Amnesty
10) Legislation on Identification of
persons and Residence of foreign
nationals
11) Legislation on the establishment,
organization and functions of the
Independent Electoral Commission
12) Legislation on the regime
governing the Radio and Television
media
13) Legislation on the regime
governing the Press
14) Legislation on the Status of the
opposition parties

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

15) Legislation on the disclosure of the
personal assets of political leaders
16) Legislation on illegal personal
enrichment

S/2004/748

Legislation

DECREES

Draft decree

Adopted by the
Government

1) Decree on the establishment, organisation, functions of the National Identification Commission

Yes on 6 January 2004

2) Decree on the acquisition and format of the National identity card

Yes on 7 January 2004

3) Decree relating to the amendment of the decree on the establishment of the National Identification Office
4) Decree relating to the appointment of the Chairman of the National Identification Commission

Yes in January 2004
Yes on 29 January 2004

5) Decree relating to the appointment of the Secretary General of the National Identification Commission

Yes on 29 January 2004

6) Decree relating to the establishment of the Inter-ministerial Commission on the Media and its technical
Secretariat

Yes on 19 August 2003

S/2004/748

3

4

S/2004/748

Enclosure 2*
STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF THE ACCRA III AGREEMENT
As of 15 September 2004
Action required
1. Delegation of powers to the
Prime Minister

To be taken by

Timeline

Status of
implementation

President Gbagbo to issue a decree
specifying the areas covered by his
delegations of powers to Prime Minister
Diarra (text agreed in Accra).

Decree issued on
9/8/04

President Gbagbo to issue a decree
reinstating the three Ministers.

Decree issued on
9/8/04

2. Resumption of the work of the
Government of National
Reconciliation (GNR)
2.1. Reinstatement of the three
Ministers dismissed by
President Gbagbo
2.2. Convening of Council of
Ministers

President Gbagbo (and/or the Prime Minister)
to convene a meeting of the Council of
Ministers and to extend invitations to all
Ministers.

Within 7 days after
signature of the
agreement

First meeting held
on 9/8/04.
Subsequent
meetings held on
12 and 19 August,
2 and 9
September 2004

3. Article 35 and other legal reforms
3.1. Facilitation of the adoption by
the National Assembly of the
legal reforms provided for in
the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement

President Gbagbo to convene an
extraordinary session of the National
Assembly to adopt all legal reforms in
accordance with the letter and spirit of the
Linas-Marcoussis Agreement.

__________________

* Provided in language of submission only.

Done on 28/7/04
Session began on
11/8/04

Action required

3.2. Implementation of the
provisions of section III of the
programme of the GNR,
annexed to the LinasMarcoussis Agreement, on
eligibility (article 35 of the
Constitution)

To be taken by

Timeline

All Ivorian parties to ensure that their
respective representatives in the National
Assembly support the adoption of these
legislative texts, as stipulated in the LinasMarcoussis Agreement.

By 31 August 2004

President Gbagbo to use his constitutional
powers to implement the relevant provisions
on eligibility.

By 30 September
2004

The Prime Minister, the National Commission
on DDR and the Ivorian parties concerned,
with the support of international partners,
including ONUCI, to make all necessary
preparations for the commencement of DDR.

By 15 October 2004

Status of
implementation
Work schedule
adopted by the
National Assembly
to end by 30/9/04

4. Disarmament, Demobilisation,
Reintegration (DDR)
4.1. Commencement of the DDR
programme in accordance with
the Linas-Marcoussis
agreement and the decisions
adopted in Yamoussoukro and
Grand Bassam
4.2. Commencement of the
restructuring of the defence
and security forces on the
basis of the Grand Bassam
road map

The Prime Minister and the Ivorian parties
concerned, with the support of international
partners, to ensure the early commencement
of the security sector reform.

S/2004/748

5

6

5. Restoration of State
administration and public
services

To be taken by

Timeline

Status of
implementation
Ongoing

The Prime Minister and the GNR to draw up a
timetable for the restoration of State
administration and public services throughout
the country.
All parties concerned to facilitate the effective
and timely restoration of State administration
throughout the country.

6. Respect for human rights and the
rule of law
6.1. Establishment of the National
Human Rights Commission

6.2. Investigations by the
International Commission of
Inquiry into human rights
violations in Côte d’Ivoire since
19 September 2002.

The Prime Minister and the GNR to take all
necessary measures for the establishment of
the National Human Rights Commission, as
provided for in the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement, and for the commencement of its
work.

As soon as possible

Ongoing
All parties to cooperate fully with the
International Commission of Inquiry.

S/2004/748

Action required

Action required

To be taken by

Timeline

Status of
implementation

7. Monitoring of the implementation
of the Accra III agreement

The Monitoring Group to submit fortnightly
reports on the implementation of the
agreement to the Chairperson of ECOWAS,
the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the UN Secretary-General.

Every 2 weeks from
30/7/04

First report
submitted by the
MG on 10/08/04
Second report
submitted on
31/08/04
Third report
submitted on
15/09/04.
Next report as a
special update for
the Security
Council’s
discussions on
Cote d’Ivoire to be
submitted on
22/09/04

S/2004/748

7
