A /72/PV.70

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

70th plenary meeting

Monday, 11 December 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 73 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
Report of the Secretary-General (A/72/490)
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/72/76,
A/72/348 and A/72/358)
Draft resolutions (A/72/L.22, A/72/L.23 and
A/72/L.24)
(b) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Report of the Secretary-General (A/72/87)
Draft resolution (A/72/L.25)
(c) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Shawesh (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): Having
considered the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to the Palestinian people (A/72/87), covering
the period from 28 July 2016 to 27 July 2017, I wish
to thank the Secretary-General and his team for their
efforts in preparing the report, which covers all aspects
of the economic and social lives of the Palestinian

people. I should also like to thank all the United
Nations agencies and programmes that continue to
grant assistance to the Palestinian people. Furthermore,
I should like to thank all donor countries individually
and collectively for their efforts.
The 17 Sustainable Development Goals entered
into force on 1 January 2016, which is why we now
need to start practical work aligning our national plans
with them and thereby doing our utmost to ensure that
no one is left behind. The Palestinian Government, for
its part, with the aim of implementing the Goals, has
established a five-year national development plan for
the period from 2017 to 2022, entitled “Citizens First”.
It is a national action plan for humankind, freedom and
prosperity, based on the three pillars of independence,
governance reform and sustainable development.
Many of its priorities are aligned with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. In formulating
it, we conducted broad consultations with local and
international partners, as well as those United Nations
entities that are working in Palestine.
With the exception of some funding for education,
all United Nations aid to the Palestinian people is
allocated for relief, as it has been in the past and as
the Secretary-General’s report (A/72/87) repeatedly
confirms. It cannot be used for genuine development
purposes that would improve the Palestinian people’s
ability to remain on what is left of their land and
establish sustainable peace in the future. There is no
guarantee that the Palestinians will not be left behind
as long as the Israeli occupation still exists in the West

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-43429 (E)

*1743429*

A/72/PV.70

Bank, including occupied East Jerusalem and the
Gaza Strip.
Our development challenges are also global,
inclusive and overlapping. Climate change, pollution,
desertification, ocean acidification, water issues,
transnational epidemics and others touch everybody.
Their impact varies from one country to another
and depends to a large extent on preparations for
mitigating and adapting to these effects on a basis of
three pillars — appropriate planning, the necessary
capabilities and implementation and follow-up.
My country has a five-year plan in place focusing
on adaptation to address inclusive development
challenges. In addition, we are working on mobilizing
local and international financing in order to implement
it. As a result, the first two pillars — planning and
mobilizing funds — have been successful, but the
third — implementation and follow-up — is being
seriously undermined by the Israeli occupation.
At the High-level Political Forum on Sustainable
Development to be held in July, the State of Palestine
will submit its voluntary national review related to the
implementation of Sustainable Development Goals,
despite our chronic challenges resulting from the Israeli
occupation and its impact on us at every level. Palestine
remains unshakeably determined, however, as shown in
various reports of international institutions, especially
the United Nations and World Bank. We will prove to
everybody that we are capable of doing the impossible,
overcoming all difficulties and prevailing in Palestine,
where we will never tire of making sacrifices. As the
great poet Mahmoud Darwish said, “We have on this
Earth that which makes life worth living”.
The President: I now call on the observer of the
International Committee of the Red Cross.
Mr. Spoerri (International Committee of the
Red Cross): This year, the new Secretary-General
has begun sharing his vision for a renewed United
Nations. He has made it clear that the United Nations
is reforming to focus on three strategic priorities:
prevention, development and peace. The simplicity
of the new approach is refreshing and means that all
United Nations agencies must pull together towards
collective outcomes.
This year has also seen important diplomatic work
get under way around the world on the global compacts
for safe, orderly and regular migration and on refugees.
2/9

11/12/2017

The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
has been actively involved in both. We view the
increasing needs and numbers of people forced to leave
their homes and cross international borders as a global
humanitarian crisis.
The year 2017 has also seen two important
humanitarian milestones, the fortieth anniversary of the
Additional Protocols to the Geneva Conventions and the
twentieth anniversary of the United Nations Guiding
Principles on Internal Displacement. Both continue
to be essential instruments for protecting some of the
world’s most vulnerable people during armed conflict.
This year has also seen significant developments in
the Organization’s approach to counter-terrorism, a
global policy that will continue to intersect with armed
conflict and humanitarian action in several ways.
We expect 2018 to see a consolidation of the
Secretary-General’s reforms. We also anticipate that
it will be another demanding year for humanitarian
action, and so today the ICRC will focus on three
key policy areas. First, we will comment on the
Secretary-General’s vision of United Nations reform
and what it means for humanitarian action. Secondly,
we will remind States of the particular importance of
the Additional Protocols in today’s armed conflicts.
Thirdly, we will reiterate our position on counterterrorism and humanitarian action.
First, I will address United Nations reform and
the risk of a protection gap. The Secretary-General’s
reform is based on a firm belief in the indivisibility
of prevention, development and peace, embraced in
several emerging United Nations policies. The ICRC
understands the important connections between
humanitarian action, development and peace, especially
in protracted conflicts. Our humanitarian work shares
many intermediate objectives of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), such as reducing violence,
malnutrition and disease and increasing people’s access
to clean water, livelihoods and education. We work
with those left furthest behind in armed conflict and
urban violence. Our humanitarian efforts often act as
development holds, maintaining people’s basic services
and preventing further development reversals.
Humanitarian action complements broader efforts
towards achieving the SDGs, which is why we are
pleased to be working in partnership with the World
Bank in Somalia. Development finance should lean
into countries struggling with protracted conflict
17-43429

11/12/2017

and violence, where the SDGs are weakest. Our
humanitarian dialogues with all parties sometimes
serve as confidence-building measures between
warring parties that are valuable to peace.
But the ICRC sees two worrying gaps in the
indivisible policy of the United Nations on prevention,
development and peace. The first is a protection gap.
Current United Nations policy focuses too simply
on development and peace, without recognizing that
protection is essential to both. Protecting people’s is
a precondition for development and peace. If people,
including groups in need of special protection, such
as women and children, are being attacked, forcibly
displaced, looted, impoverished, besieged or unlawfully
detained, or are too afraid to go to hospitals and schools,
they cannot get close to development or peace.
Protection is also indivisible from development
and peace. For example, many thousands of people are
missing because of armed conflict; their families live
in the agony of an ambiguous loss. The pain and anger
around missing people represent a wound that threatens
peace. Governments must work together to find answers
about missing people and support their families. States
must make the missing and their families a humanitarian
priority. Inadequate detention policies also pose a risk
to development and peace because inhumane detention
practices may increase political grievances.
The second gap is in neutral, impartial and
independent humanitarian action. Neutral action risks
being lost from view in the new, integrated United
Nations vision of prevention, development and peace.
This essential humanitarian practice, rooted in the
Geneva Conventions, must be respected and facilitated
by States so that vulnerable people — whether under or
beyond the control of the State — can be protected and
assisted impartially on the basis of need.
It is essential to ensure that impartial humanitarian
organizations such as the ICRC can work with all
parties to conflict and reach all populations in need.
Today, the ICRC calls on States to ensure that protection
and impartial humanitarian action keep their rightful
place in policymaking on armed conflict and violence,
because if there is no protection, there is no health
care, no food, no livelihood, no education, no home, no
family, no development and no peace.
I would now like to speak briefly about the
Additional Protocols. The fortieth anniversary of
the Additional Protocols to the Geneva Conventions

A/72/PV.70

coincided with a renewed interest on the part of States
in the humanitarian issues at the heart of these two vital
instruments of international humanitarian law — the
distinction between military and civilian populations;
conflict-related hunger and starvation; sexual violence;
and attacks on the infrastructure and services that are
essential to a civilian population’s survival, not the
least of which are health care, water, electricity and
education facilities.
Respecting international humanitarian law is the
best way to ensure people’s protection in armed conflict.
International humanitarian law sets clear standards
for the protection of individuals and the natural
resources, infrastructure and services indispensable to
their survival.
I would like to say a final word on counter-terrorism
and the criminalization of humanitarian action. The
Additional Protocols also entail clear obligations for
States and parties to conflict to facilitate the delivery
of principled humanitarian assistance, even in areas
where listed terrorist groups are active. The ICRC has
repeatedly underscored the potential adverse effects
on humanitarian action of counter-terrorism measures
taken by States, both internationally and nationally.
Activities that are exclusively humanitarian
and impartial should be excluded from the scope of
application of criminal laws dealing with terrorism.
Failure to do so implies a rejection of neutral,
independent and impartial humanitarian action. This
could jeopardize the mission of impartial humanitarian
organizations to protect and assist people affected by
armed conflict, particularly in areas controlled by
non-State armed groups.
The President: I now call on the observer of
the International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies.
Ms. Christensen (International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies): On behalf of the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to address this important debate.
We live in a time of unprecedented humanitarian
requirements in the face of conflicts, disasters and
displacement. It seems that regardless of our best
endeavours to do more and to work together to overcome
humanitarian challenges, the needs go up, not down.
Among the significant challenges we face is a changing

17-434293/9

A/72/PV.70

climate. More than 90 per cent of natural disasters are
climate-related: famine, flood, fire and more. We have
been dealing with the effects of the strongest Atlantic
hurricanes in more than a decade and with the worst
South Asian floods in a century, which have affected
millions of people. In each of these events, and in
disasters large and small globally, our Red Cross Red
Crescent volunteers are there, delivering vital assistance
and helping people recover and rebuild their lives.
We are conscious of what climate change means
and how we have to respond to it, including by reducing
risk and building resilience. That is why we welcome
the increased attention that the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change has brought to building resilience to
climate extremes. A holistic effort to make progress
under the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015-2030 is crucial, aligning disaster risk
reduction, the Sustainable Development Goals and the
Paris Agreement.
We know that the risks driven by climate change
will be unevenly weighted against poorer people living
in areas of low development, such as those crowded
in urban slums without access to reliable water and
electricity sources and displaced persons living in
disaster-prone and climate-exposed areas. Addressing
these risks will require increased investment in local
action and strong efforts to ensure that we do not bypass
the very people who will suffer the most.
Within the Red Cross Red Crescent, we have found
that in order to see real progress, we must find ways to
effectively link science to policy, decision-making and
action on the ground — for instance, finding ways to
address rising climate extremes through early warning
systems that reach all the way to the most vulnerable
communities and enable them to act. One way in
which we have been working on this is by developing
an innovative method of advance financing based on
weather forecasts. We saw this method at work recently
in Bangladesh as it braced itself for the impacts of
Tropical Cyclone Mora. The day before the cyclone
hit, the Bangladesh Red Crescent activated its forecastbased financing mechanism, under which nearly 2,300
households received grants to take their own actions
to prepare.
The IFRC welcomes the recognition in several of
the draft resolutions to be adopted today of the need
to strengthen early warning and early action efforts,
including through innovative financing mechanisms
4/9

11/12/2017

such as forecast-based financing. We stand ready to
support Member States in realizing these efforts. For
our part, we have committed to ensuring predictable
humanitarian financing for early action through the
establishment of a new forecast-based financing
window to our Disaster Relief Emergency Fund in 2018.
November marked the 10-year anniversary of the
Guidelines for the Domestic Facilitation and Regulation
of International Disaster Relief and Initial Recovery
Assistance (IDRL). The IDRL Guidelines are a resource
for Governments seeking to put in place dedicated
rules and procedures for avoiding common regulatory
problems in international disaster assistance, thereby
eliminating delays, expenses and complexities in
delivering aid while also improving oversight, regulation
and coordination of international relief efforts. Since
the IDRL Guidelines were adopted, national societies
have provided advice to their Governments on how to
plug these gaps in over 100 countries, and there are
currently projects in over 50 countries. The IFRC will
continue to support Governments, regional bodies and
other stakeholders interested in strengthening legal
preparedness for disasters.
Last month, the International Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement came together in its biannual
statutory meeting. Among other things, we adopted a
call for action on the humanitarian needs of vulnerable
migrants, pointing out some basic issues that we fear
are drifting away from the main debates about the
global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration,
including recognizing and directly addressing the
extreme levels of vulnerability faced by irregular
migrants. Moving forward from the recent preparatory
meeting held in Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, we call on
States to guarantee that all migrants have access to
humanitarian assistance and protection, irrespective of
legal status, and that their rights are respected.
Letting down the millions of people trapped
in humanitarian crises, as well those vulnerable to
tomorrow’s emergencies, is not an option. We need
to be smarter and work harder as humanitarians and
development actors, as Governments, as donors and as
an international community.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on agenda item 73 and its sub-items (a) to (c).
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/72/L.22, A/72/L.23, A/72/L.24 and A/72/L.25.
17-43429

11/12/2017

Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote or position before the vote, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Pritchard (Canada): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of Australia, Iceland, Lichtenstein,
New Zealand, Norway, Switzerland and my own
country, Canada.
We take the floor today because we understand that
a vote has been called for on two paragraphs of draft
resolution A/72/L.22, specifically the twenty-eighth
preambular paragraph and operative paragraph 7. We
consider a call for a vote on these paragraphs to be most
unfortunate, especially as it seeks to remove paragraphs
that have been agreed language for years. The vote is
even more troubling because we have been witnessing
repeated violations of international humanitarian law
in recent years, one of the most disturbing expressions
of which is attacks on humanitarian and medical
personnel in conflict situations. As such, the relevance
of the agreed text is even higher than in past years.
The
twenty-eighth
preambular
paragraph
addresses attacks intentionally directed at personnel
involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping
mission in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations. It recalls that such attacks may, under certain
circumstances, be considered a war crime under the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
This paragraph further underscores the role that the
Court can play in bringing to justice those responsible
for serious violations of international humanitarian
law. It is a simple statement of fact.
Paragraph 7 calls on all States to consider becoming
parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court. The ICC has a key role to play in ending
impunity where national courts are unwilling or unable
to exercise jurisdiction. The paragraphs do not seek
to target any one country but rather recall one of the
tools available to the international community in such
circumstances, and encourage States simply to consider
joining the Rome Statute. We therefore find it deeply
disturbing that the paragraphs are now being attacked
to the detriment of our common causes. We call on all
delegations to vote in favour of retaining the paragraphs
when they are put to the vote. We will do the same.
Mr. Pronin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We too would like to explain our position with regard

A/72/PV.70

to the two paragraphs of draft resolution A/72/L.22 that
are to be put to a recorded vote.
We are voting on those paragraphs for the second
year. It is also the second year that our delegation, like
others, is calling on other delegations to review the
agreed language because it can no longer be considered
consensual. The Russian Federation has always urged
that those guilty of the most severe war crimes be held
accountable. We have always been in favour of the
Tokyo Tribunal. We helped to draft the main documents
on this issue.
Once the International Criminal Court was
established, the international community had a strong
expectation that we would address impunity, settle
existing conflicts and ensure that new hotbeds of
tension did not arise. Regrettably, although the Court
has existed for many years now, we have simply been
compelled to conclude that it has not fulfilled the hopes
that were placed in it. It has not become an authoritative
organ of international justice. On various platforms,
including at the General Assembly and the Security
Council, we have seen that the Court’s investigations
have been ineffective and biased in terms of principle.
We stated our position clearly from the beginning
of the talks on draft resolution A/72/L.22, on the safety
and security of humanitarian personnel and protection
of United Nations personnel. We, along with several
other delegations, do not agree that the twenty-eighth
preambular paragraph and operative paragraph 7 should
be included in the text. We believe that the alternative
wording that has been proposed should be endorsed
because it takes into account issues that a number of
delegations would like to see included in the paragraphs.
At the same time, they resolve existing contradictions
that do not allow the rest of the negotiating group to
support the inclusion of those paragraphs. We believe
that the amendments proposed should be supported
because they would allow the draft resolution to be
consensus-based, if adopted.
Mr. Nagan (Netherlands): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
We deeply regret that the Sudan has again called
for the twenty-eighth preambular paragraph and
operative paragraph 7 of draft resolution A/72/L.22, on
the safety and security of humanitarian personnel and
the protection of United Nations personnel, to be put
to the vote. References to the International Criminal

17-434295/9

A/72/PV.70

Court (ICC) have existed in both the preambular
and operative sections of the resolution since it was
first adopted in 1999. The EU and its member States
reiterate their unwavering support for the ICC as the
world’s first permanent international criminal court
and an important tool for the international community
in the fight against impunity, as well as a contribution
to peaceful societies.
The gross violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law that we have witnessed
worldwide are a sharp reminder of the increasing
relevance of the Court, whose role is to complement
rather than replace existing national judicial systems.
The primary responsibility to investigate and prosecute
crimes remains with individual States. All perpetrators
of such crimes must be held accountable for their
actions. A key element of the Rome Statute is its equal
application. In that regard, the creation of the ICC has
given millions of victims of atrocity crimes new hope
that justice will be done.
States from all over the world have begun to unite in
that endeavour. The EU and its member States believe
that the fight against impunity for the most serious
crimes is critical to ensure a fair and just society by
holding the perpetrators accountable and ensuring
justice for victims. We also believe that peace and
justice are complementary, not mutually exclusive. It is
for those reasons that the 28 States members of the EU
support the retention of the two paragraphs. We call on
all other States to vote in favour of them.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan): At the outset, we would like
to extend our heartfelt condolences to the peoples and
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Tanzania, following the deaths of peacekeepers
from those and other sisterly countries.
We would like to welcome and commend those
involved in the humanitarian efforts in the Sudan
from the United Nations, individual countries and
non-governmental organizations.
We have serious reservations about the inclusion
of references to the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in draft resolution A/72/L.22 and
other resolutions as a means for exerting unacceptable
pressure on the States Members of the United Nations
to include such references and language. We refer the
Assembly to the twenty-eighth preambular paragraph
and operative paragraph 7 of draft resolution A/72/L.22,
and we move that both paragraphs be put to the vote. We
6/9

11/12/2017

reject the inclusion of the jurisdiction of the ICC in the
draft resolution and others for the following reasons.
First, the Court is not an organ of the United Nations.
In spite of the fervent attempts of some parties to paint
it otherwise in meetings of the main committees of the
General Assembly, we continue in that belief, which is
supported by practice and law.
Secondly, the Rome Statute and other international
treaties are somewhat incompatible and contain
contradictions. Article 26 of the Vienna Convention on
the Law of Treaties states that every treaty in force is
binding only on the parties to it, based on the principle
of free consent, which is observed and applied by the
General Assembly.
Thirdly, according to the policy papers of the Office
of the Prosecutor, the Court’s practice since 2002 has
driven a wedge between the principle of justice and
peace. Unfortunately, as far as the ICC is concerned,
those principles are not connected. A wedge has been
driven between the principle of justice and peace and
one of the fundamental principles of international
humanitarian law related to internal conflicts was
suspended, namely, amnesty.
Fourthly, since 2003, the International Criminal
Court has been only an impediment to peace in Darfur.
The ICC is bound to create a serious conflict between
peace and justice and, to the extent that the Darfur
issue may result in arrest, it remains the main challenge
facing the international community and the national
Government of the Sudan in the area. It jeopardizes
both peace and security. At best, the ICC is a threat to
stability and peace in my country, in Africa and in so
many parts of the world, not to mention the problems
created by its disruptive history since its inception. The
ICC has been fraught with one corruption scandal after
the other.
Fifthly, the policy papers of the ICC Prosecutor
clearly state that the Court exercises its jurisdiction
by deciding on admissibility based on two criteria,
possibility and feasibility. Selectivity in the practice of
the Court is therefore not incidental; it is institutional
and inevitable. That is why the authority and jurisdiction
of the International Criminal Court are a menace to the
tenets of peace and the sovereign equality of States,
which includes pre-emptive norms of international law.
Sixthly, the ICC lacks independence, as half of its
budget is drawn from voluntary contributions from
17-43429

11/12/2017

the States and non-governmental organizations that
exercise control over it.
We tried our best to meet the interests of the
proponents and sponsors of this draft resolution. With
respect to the twenty-eighth preambular paragraph, we
proposed the replacement of the phrase
“as a war crime in the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, and noting the role
that the Court can play in appropriate cases in
bringing to justice those responsible for serious
violations of international humanitarian law”
with the following phrase: “as a war crime in relevant
international criminal justice instruments”. That was
not accepted.
In the same vein, in paragraph 7, we proposed
replacing the phrase: “calls upon all States to
consider becoming parties to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court”, with the following:
“calls upon all States to consider becoming parties to
relevant international criminal justice instruments”.
We have opposed the International Criminal Court
since the beginning because of all these considerations.
The means by which we express our opposition, of
course, have changed according to circumstances
and our decision as a sovereign State Member of
this Organization.
Finally, we reiterate hereby our full subscription to
the overall draft resolution. Humanitarian assistance is
a vital and instrumental means to address humanitarian
crises, whether man made or the result of natural
causes. That is why the lofty goals of humanitarian
assistance should not be disturbed and mixed with such
politically driven language, which will lead only to
discord and division. We call on Member States to vote
against the inclusion of the twenty-eighth preambular
paragraph and operative paragraph 7 as they stand in
the draft resolution.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The meeting was suspended at 10.50 a.m. and
resumed at 11 a.m.
The President: The Assembly will now take
decisions on draft resolutions A/72/L.22, A/72/L.23,
A/72/L.24 and A/72/L.25.

A/72/PV.70

We turn first to draft resolution A/72/L.22, entitled
“Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and
protection of United Nations personnel”. For the
Assembly’s information, the draft resolution has closed
for e-sponsorship.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/72/L.22: Armenia, Bangladesh, Belize,
Cabo Verde, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Liberia, Malawi,
Morocco, Nigeria, Peru, the Philippines, the Republic
of Moldova, San Marino, the State of Palestine, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Ukraine, Uruguay and Zambia.
The President: A separate, recorded vote has been
requested on the twenty-eighth preambular paragraph,
together with operative paragraph 7.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Central African
Republic, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia,
Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan,
Kazakhstan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Montenegro, Namibia, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Zambia

17-434297/9

A/72/PV.70

Against:
Burundi, China, Cuba, Egypt, Eritrea, Iraq, Oman,
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syrian
Arab Republic, Yemen
Abstaining:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam,
Congo, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Papua
New Guinea, Qatar, Singapore, Togo, Turkey,
United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam
The twenty-eighth preambular paragraph and
operative paragraph 7 were retained by 95 votes to
12, with 17 abstentions.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.22
as a whole?
Draft resolution A/72/L.22, as a whole, was adopted
(resolution 72/131).
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Israel on a point of order.
Ms. Fisher-Tsin (Israel): Israel believes that
resolution 72/131, on the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and protection of United Nations
personnel, reaffirms the unique role played by the United
Nations when providing humanitarian assistance.
Paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 52/250,
dated 13 July 1998, entitled “Participation of Palestine
in the work of the United Nations”, determines “[t]he
right to co-sponsor draft resolutions and decisions on
Palestinian and Middle East issues”.
The subject matter of resolution 72/131, on the
safety and security of humanitarian personnel and the
protection of United Nations personnel, clearly does
not fall within the parameters of the annex to resolution
52/250. I would like to stress the importance we attach
to following the rules of procedure of the Organization.
The rules of sponsorship have been clearly laid out in
the rules and regulations governing this Organization.
Any decision to disregard them acts in violation of the
relevant United Nations resolutions and undermines the
work of this institution.
The President: We turn next to draft resolution
A/72/L.23, entitled “International cooperation on
humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters,
from relief to development”.
8/9

11/12/2017

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/72/L.23: Albania,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cabo
Verde, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, the Maldives, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Romania, the
Russian Federation, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and
the United Kingdom.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.23?
Draft resolution A/72/L.23 was adopted (resolution
72/132).
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/72/L.24, entitled
“Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/72/L.24: Algeria, Cabo Verde, Chad, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ecuador, Haiti,
Jamaica, Malawi, the State of Palestine, the Sudan,
Togo and Zambia.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.24
without a vote?
Draft resolution A/72/L.24 was adopted (resolution
72/133).
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Israel on a point of order.
17-43429

11/12/2017

A/72/PV.70

Ms. Fisher-Tsin (Israel): Once again, I will have
to repeat what I have already said. Paragraph 5 of the
annex to resolution 52/250, adopted on 13 July 1998, on
the participation of Palestine in the work of the United
Nations, determines that it has “[t]he right to co-sponsor
draft resolutions and decisions on Palestinian and
Middle East issues”. Again, clearly the subject matter
of resolution 72/133 does not fall within the parameters
of the annex to resolution 52/250, and we would again
like to stress the importance that we attach to following
the rules of the Organization. The rules of sponsorship
have been clearly laid out in the rules and regulations
that govern the Organization and any decision to
disregard them, time and again, acts in violation of the
United Nations resolutions and undermines the work of
the institution.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/72/L.25, entitled
“Assistance to the Palestinian people”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
on the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/72/L.25: Albania,
Andorra, Australia, Chad, the Gambia, Georgia, Haiti,
Japan, Liechtenstein, Montenegro, New Zealand, the
Niger, Norway, Pakistan, the Philippines, the Republic
of Korea, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, South Africa,
the Sudan, Switzerland, Ukraine and Zimbabwe.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.25
without a vote?

Draft resolution A/72/L.25 was adopted (resolution
72/134).
The President: I now call on the observer of the
Holy See.
Monsignor Grysa (Holy See): My delegation
would like to thank the facilitator and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for their
commitment and hard work in achieving consensus
during this year’s informal negotiations on resolution
72/133, “Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations”. We
commend the open and fruitful cooperation of many
delegations, which made it possible to reach consensus
and make progress, in particular with regard to
migrants, refugees, internally displaced persons and
the protection of women and children. However, the
Holy See, in conformity with its nature and particular
mission, would like to reiterate its reservations on the
following concepts used therein.
First, the Holy See does not consider abortion,
access to abortion or access to aborted patients as a
dimension of the terms sexual and reproductive health
and sexual and reproductive health care services.
Secondly, with reference to gender, the Holy See
understands the term to be grounded in biological
sexual identity and difference, not in a psychological
state, nor to be interpreted as a social construction.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
73 and its sub-items (a) to (c).
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

17-434299/9
