United Nations

S/PV.6584

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6584th meeting
Monday, 18 July 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wittig . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Čolaković
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Ms. Ziade
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Laher
Mr. Tatham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire
Twenty-eighth report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (S/2011/387)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-41823 (E)

*1141823*

S/PV.6584

part of the country, by and large, the former proGbagbo armed elements and supporters are not likely
to mount a substantial challenge to law and order.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire
Twenty-eighth report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire (S/2011/387)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Côte d’Ivoire to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Choi
Young-jin,
Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/387, which contains the twentyeighth report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire.
I now give the floor to Mr. Choi Young-jin.
Mr. Choi: The Ivorian people demonstrated
unfailing determination during the post-electoral crisis.
With the contribution of the international community, a
painful chapter in the history of Côte d’Ivoire has now
been closed. At the same time, a new chapter, with
multiple challenges, has been opened.
There exists a very fortunate window of
opportunity for the Ouattara Administration and the
international community. Efforts are now under way to
address the following four major post-crisis tasks: the
restoration of law and order; national reconciliation;
the holding of legislative elections; and economic
recovery.
First, the restoration of law and order in the south
of the country is of primordial importance. Currently,
the Forces républicaines de Côte d’Ivoire provide the
security environment, with some gendarmerie and
police assistance. Although challenges remain in the
Yopougon district of Abidjan, as well as in the western

2

Secondly, with regard to national reconciliation,
it benefits from the deep-rooted Ivorian political
culture, characterized by tolerance, non-violence and
compromise. The appointment of the Chair of the
Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation Commission and
the meltdown of Mr. Gbagbo’s supporters augur well
for the achievement of reconciliation in the country.
Thirdly, the legislative elections are planned to
take place before the end of the year. Preparations
began as the Independent Electoral Commission Chair,
Mr. Youssouf Bakayoko, started work towards the end
of last month. However, as Ivorian protagonists
envisage a somewhat ambitious plan for the legislative
elections, including an increase in National Assembly
seats and the inclusion of people who have now
attained the age of majority on the voters list, a strong
commitment by the electoral management body is
necessary to meet the challenge of holding the
elections before the year is out. It goes without saying
that the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
(UNOCI), with the international community, is ever
ready to assist the Electoral Commission.
Fourthly, with regard to the country’s economic
recovery, despite some concerns, most experts bank
their optimistic views for a positive economic recovery
in Côte d’Ivoire on the resourcefulness of the Ivorian
people, the fundamental robustness of the Ivorian
agricultural sector and the willingness of the
international community, including the Bretton Woods
institutions, to cooperate with the Ouattara
Administration.
All such efforts related to those four tasks appear
to be moving in the right direction. However, there is a
need for a rapid restoration of law and order
throughout the country, as that is the precondition for
the other tasks to be carried out successfully. For that,
a clear vision for the establishment of a national
security structure, including command and control, has
to be developed. That would allow for the effective
deployment of police and gendarmerie elements
throughout the country, which, in turn, would allow the
military elements to be rolled back to their barracks.
The Ivorian authorities are doing their best to
expedite the restoration of law and order throughout
the country. The appointment, on 7 July, of all top

11-41823

S/PV.6584

commanders of the Ivoirian security structure,
including the military, the gendarmerie and the police,
was quite an encouraging sign.
To accompany the Ivorian Government, UNOCI
has taken two safeguard measures in the western part
of the country, where we see a certain degree of
security deficit.
The first measure relates to the establishment of
eight new UNOCI military camps in the west,
including four in the border area with Liberia. UNOCI
has also begun work to set up a military camp in
Aboisso, along the Abidjan-Accra axis road, given the
presence of former pro-Gbagbo supporters in Ghana.
UNOCI intends to complete that project before the end
of the month. Once completed, the nine military camps
will be reinforced, with UNOCI civilian staff working
on human rights, the rule of law, civil affairs, child
protection, gender equality and HIV/AIDS with their
colleagues from the United Nations country team.
The second safeguard measure relates to the
rehabilitation and equipment of a number of prefect
and sub-prefect offices in the west. UNOCI has been
consulting with the United Nations Peacebuilding
Office for the Peacebuilding Fund to finance the
project with around $5 million dollars.
We feel confident, as President Ouattara and his
team, who showed remarkable patience and sangfroid
during the crisis, are working day and night to
successfully meet the post-crisis challenges for the
benefit of the Ivorian people.
The President: I thank Mr. Choi for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to convey my delegation’s
congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July. The Ivorian delegation is pleased
to participate in this debate on the situation in Côte
d’Ivoire, which demonstrates the international
community’s great interest in my country. My
delegation takes this opportunity to congratulate the
Secretary-General on the excellent report contained in
document S/2011/387, which serves as the basic
document for our discussions.

11-41823

The official investiture on 21 May in
Yamoussoukro, the political capital of Côte d’Ivoire, of
His Excellency Mr. Alassane Ouattara, which formally
gave him full powers as President of the Republic of
Côte d’Ivoire, represents the official return to
constitutional order in Côte d’Ivoire after 10 years of
military and socio-political crisis and five months of
post-electoral crisis, whose human cost was estimated
at 3,000 deaths. Those crises ended with the arrest of
the former President, who had obstinately refused to
peacefully give up the power that he had lost in the
vote.
Today Côte d’Ivoire is gradually returning to
normal life. A new Government has been formed that
includes all political entities with the exception of the
Front populaire ivoirien, the party formerly in power,
which has refused to participate. The Government set
to work immediately, emphasizing the search for
effectiveness. During a governmental seminar held on
5 and 6 July and chaired by the head of State himself,
the Government laid out a framework for action based
on 14 strategic points, which also represent our
challenges. The President’s programme d’urgence, as it
is called, unites six-month short-term plans of action
for each sector in one overall framework, to which all
Government ministers will contribute their responses
and optimal solutions to the immediate needs of the
people, who have been so painfully affected by these
years of crisis.
The Government’s assessment of the country’s
general situation and those conducted by the various
United Nations missions and our partners all point to
the necessity for understanding the numerous
challenges that confront us and that must be tackled
speedily in order not to lose the momentum gained
from the current normalization. Progress must be made
on the following fronts: stabilizing the security
situation;
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration (DDR); security sector reform; national
reconciliation; the humanitarian situation; the human
rights situation; organizing elections; and economic
recovery.
As far as stabilizing the security situation is
concerned, generally speaking, we can be pleased with
some areas of genuine progress, particularly removing
all lawless checkpoints; the complete re-establishment
of the police and gendarmerie, despite enormous
equipment and material problems; and an increase in
mixed patrols that include forces from the United

3

S/PV.6584

Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI), helping
to reassure the people.
However, despite that progress, serious concerns
persist over the situation in the country’s western
region, mainly in the area bordering Liberia, where
activity has been observed by militias and mercenaries
associated with the pro-Gbagbo former Forces de
defense et de sécurité. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the Council’s decision, based on resolution
1992 (2011), which brings forward to 30 September
2011 the redeployment to UNOCI of three armed
helicopters and their teams from the United Nations
Mission in Liberia. Similarly, we are pleased with the
summit of Mano River Union heads of State held
yesterday in Monrovia, which was attended by
Presidents Alassane Ouattara of Côte d’Ivoire, Ellen
Johnson-Sirleaf of Liberia and Alpha Condé of Guinea.
The leaders reiterated their desire for closer
cooperation in order to strengthen peace and security in
the subregion. My delegation therefore seeks increased
support from UNOCI and the French Operation
Licorne force for the efforts by the Forces
républicaines de Côte d’Ivoire (FRCI) to stabilize the
security situation, since there is no doubt that
command of the security situation is essential to
successfully achieving the other goals necessary to
normalizing the situation as a whole.
With regard to DDR, the reunification of the
army under the single umbrella of the New Army of the
FRCI is now a reality. A workshop has been organized
to instruct the New Army’s personnel and soldiers in
the values of unity, cohesion, republican morality and
the principles of respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law. We expect to see other
initiatives of this type, aimed at inculcating a genuine
culture of respect for international humanitarian law
and human rights. We have seen the integration of
11,000 troops into the New Army, of whom 8,700 are
former members of the Forces armées des Forces
nouvelles, in accordance with the Ouagadougou
Agreements, and 2,300 associated with the FRCI.
With regard to disarmament, progress appears
slow, due to the complexity of the process. However,
UNOCI continues to encourage the voluntary surrender
of weapons held by unauthorized persons. We were
very pleased to see that, in Yopougon on 15 July, about
100 people surrendered light weapons, grenades and
ammunition to UNOCI under an operation conducted
by the Mission’s division for disarmament,

4

demobilization and reintegration. My delegation
therefore hopes for continued support from UNOCI
and our partners for the DDR programme, and
certainly, as indicated in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2011/387), for the establishment of a new DDR
programme adapted to the new situation.
With regard to security sector reform and the
maintenance of law and order, the lack of equipment,
particularly handguns, is seriously affecting the
effectiveness of the police and gendarmerie, which, as I
mentioned, are now fully functioning again. The entire
handgun arsenal for the forces of law and order in Côte
d’Ivoire stands at the ridiculous total of 15 pistols.
That is why my delegation is seeking approval from
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572
(2004), in accordance with paragraph 8 (e) that
resolution, for the authorization to import handguns to
quip our national police and gendarmerie personnel. By
the same reasoning, we ask that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations speed up the return to the
Ministry of the Interior of arms collected by UNOCI
from Ivorian weapons stocks. It is understood that such
returns must be based on a coherent plan that includes
the registering and marking of the weapons.
The
situation
regarding
the
physical
infrastructure of the judiciary is a serious concern.
Seventeen of 37 courts were looted and 23 out of 33
prisons vandalized. That is why my delegation fully
subscribes to the spirit of the report’s recommendation
for setting up and implementing a multi-year shared
aid programme for the justice sector with the aim of
strengthening police services, the judicial apparatus
and the penal system, and improving access to justice
in Côte d’Ivoire, as well as for initial emergency
reconstruction of the relevant infrastructure and
equipment supplies, taking into account the assistance
given by other partners in those areas.
In the area of national reconciliation things are
also gradually falling into place. The basic framework
of the Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation Commission
has been established by ministerial council decree. The
Chair of the Commission, former Prime Minister
Charles Konan Banny, has begun intensive
consultations at all social, professional and even ethnic
levels. In that context, I was able to be witness to a
meeting held last Saturday in Abidjan between
Mr. Banny and the traditional heads of former
President Gbagbo’s native region. I myself was able to
talk briefly with them at that meeting, where they

11-41823

S/PV.6584

expressed their confidence in Mr. Banny and their
optimism about the reconciliation process, which, they
said, was already beginning to ease tensions in their
region.
For Mr. Banny, it is important that the Ivorian
people themselves take ownership of the process,
bringing to it their sensibilities and our shared
traditional values. That is why he hopes that, after all
necessary consultations have been held, we will
observe a major period of mourning in order to honour
the memory of all those who perished. Such mourning,
grounded in our traditions, will to some degree prepare
the way for fostering truth in dialogue. However, the
Chair of the Commission is not minimizing the
difficulties that are arising concerning the availability
of the means, particularly the financial means, needed
to achieve the success of an effort of such scope. The
Commission will be undertaking information missions
in South Africa, Morocco and Rwanda to take
advantage of their experiences. My delegation seeks
the help of UNOCI and the Commission’s partners in
the areas of expertise, financing, capacity-building,
devising and financing of a communication plan and
every other relevant form of support.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, of the
200,000 displaced persons and refugees, 60,000 have
returned to their homes. Some 140,000 remain, mainly
in refugee camps on the Liberian border. The pace of
return is slow, due to the lack of sufficient means to
address their needs. We have occasionally been helped
by individual private initiatives in repatriating whole
groups. In that connection, Côte d’Ivoire’s Minister of
Commerce, Mr. Dagobert Banzio, who is a native of
the Liberian border region, organized the repatriation
of 5,000 refugees at his own expense. My delegation is
seeking a substantial increase in international
assistance for aid to Ivorian refugees, and agrees with
the recommendation in the report indicating the
necessity for support for the establishment of a national
humanitarian coordination structure, which would, in
particular, ensure a unified assessment of needs and of
the deployment of humanitarian entities, as well as of
follow-up to efforts on the ground.
With regard to the health and sanitation situation,
my delegation reminds the Council that during the
most turbulent time of the crisis, President Ouattara
launched a free health care programme for the most
neglected sector of the population, in particular women
and children. This programme has been operating since

11-41823

March and has cost the Government $10 million per
month, equivalent to 4.1 billion CFA francs per month.
This programme will later be taken over by a selfsustaining medical coverage system. I here and now
make an urgent request to all partners to support this
programme, which helps in the fight against poverty,
and I invite charitable organizations and the major
philanthropic organizations to support this initiative.
The human rights situation in Côte d’Ivoire is
rooted in the culture of impunity that marked the 10
years of power of the regime of former President
Gbagbo. It is also important to note that it was under
that regime that female protestors who were arrested
and detained in October 2000 in areas surrounding the
police academy were raped by law enforcement
personnel. At that time, a high-ranking member of the
regime made a comment completely lacking in
compassion that remains a sad part of the collective
Ivoirian memory. He said, “They should have not gone
out to demonstrate”.
It was also under that regime that a famous
foreign journalist was killed in cold blood in public by
a policeman, who was hailed as a hero by a club
formed in his support and on T-shirts bearing his
image. I also recall that it was under that regime that
an investigative journalist researching the coffee and
cocoa industry disappeared and has still not been
found. He was last seen with a person who was close to
the former First Lady.
With regard to the former regime, all of the
atrocities and massive human rights violations suffered
by the population over the past 10 years were in the
normal order of things. We can easily understand why
there were 3,000 victims during the five months of
post-electoral crisis in Côte d’Ivoire.
I note and reaffirm that President Ouattara and
his Government have inherited a lawless State of
impunity where everything must be reconstructed. That
is why we created the Ministry for Human Rights and
Civil Rights within the current Government, whose
goals are, among others, first, to reform the security
sector in line with international norms; secondly,
ensure that human and civil rights are perceived as a
civic duty and instil a culture of forgiveness so that the
internally displaced and refugees may return to their
homes; thirdly, make the courts more accessible
pursuant to the Ivoirian Code of Civil Procedure; and

5

S/PV.6584

fourthly, align national legislation with international
norms.
With respect to the detention conditions for
politicians of the former regime who are under house
arrest, I can assure the Council that they are in no way
being treated in an inhuman or degrading fashion. I
returned from Côte d’Ivoire on Saturday after having
spent two weeks there. During that time, I met with the
Minister of Justice, the Minister of Human Rights and
the Minister of the Interior. The allegations that have
been made are based on no valid or irrefutable
evidence. The Minister of Human Rights visited one of
the detention centres as I was leaving Côte d’Ivoire.
I take this opportunity to reaffirm once again the
determination of the President of the Republic, His
Excellency Mr. Alassane Ouattara, to work resolutely
to ensure respect for human rights in Côte d’Ivoire and
the emergence and strengthening of a State based on
respect for the rule of law and transparency and that
will fight to end impunity. My delegation would
therefore ask that the Government’s efforts to promote
a culture that respects human rights be substantially
supported by UNOCI.
With regard to legislative elections, we must now
move to the second phase of the electoral process, in
particular for the legislative elections, as provided for
in the Ouagadougou Political Agreement. In that
respect, my Government seeks the support and
logistical and technical aid of UNOCI. The electoral
process is part of a whole, and my delegation requests
that the certification role of the United Nations be
maintained, taking into account, of course, the
specificities of the legislative elections. There is no
reason why a demonstrably valuable process that has
enabled us to affirm the respect of the people should
not be maintained. Therefore, we reiterate and insist on
the ongoing certification role of UNOCI.
Furthermore, the composition of the Independent
Electoral Commission will of course be adapted to take
recent changes into account. There too, the
Government wishes it to remain representative and
inclusive in order to guarantee the credibility of the
electoral process. We would ask UNOCI to continue to
support the entire process, as it did during the
presidential elections, at all stages.

6

With regard to the economic situation, the
economy of Côte d’Ivoire was derailed in the postelectoral phase, but it retains a firm foundation and
shows potential for recovery that only requires
reconstruction to begin in order to take off. In the
short-term, however, the creation of revenuegenerating jobs, particularly for young people and
women, will be indispensable to ensuring harmonious
transition
towards
major
agro-industry
and
infrastructure projects that can bring major growth. My
delegation hopes for increased funding through
UNOCI’s quick-impact project in order to stabilize that
transition.
In conclusion, from its perspective of building
peace, my Government has welcomed the majority of
the relevant recommendations contained in the report
of the Secretary-General before us. The report stresses
the compelling need for the international community to
continue to help Côte d’Ivoire. We must avoid
obstacles that could undermine the efforts and
everything that has been achieved at such a high cost.
During my audience with President Alassane
Ouattara in Abidjan before I returned, the President
asked me to convey to the members of the Council the
hopes that Côte d’Ivoire entertains with respect to
UNOCI and Operation Licorne over the next 12
months. Côte d’Ivoire requires a substantial and robust
peacekeeping operation to consolidate its restored yet
fragile peace.
Côte d’Ivoire will do everything possible to build
its own capacities to fully guarantee its own security as
soon as possible, but for the moment we must
recognize that we will not succeed without the help of
the United Nations. That is why the mandates of
UNOCI and of Operation Licorne must be extended.
That support and assistance are indispensable as the
Government implements its goal of putting the country
back onto the path of progress for the next 12 months.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

11-41823
