52

General Assemhly-Thirty-second Sessiou

----------------------32/87.

General and complete disarmament

A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its rcsolution 2660 (XXV) of 7 December 1970, in which it commended the Treaty on the
Prohibition of the Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons
and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction on the SeaBed and the Ocean Floor and in the Subsoil Thereof, 23
Convinced that the Treaty constitutes a step towards
the exclusion of the sea-bed, the ocean floor and the
subsoil thereof from the arms race,
Recalling that the States parties to the Treaty met
at Geneva from 20 June to 1 July 1977 to review the
operation of the Treaty with a view to assuring that
the purposes of the preamble and the provisions of
the Treaty were being realized,
Noting with satisfaction that the Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Prohibition of the
Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons
of Mass Destruction on the Sea-Bed and the Ocean
Floor and in the Subsoil Thereof concluded that the
obligations assumed under the Treaty had been faithfully observed by the States parties,
Noting that in its Final Declaration24 the Review
Conference aflirmed its belief that universal adherence
to the Treaty would enhance international peace and
security,
Noting furthermore that the States parties to the
Treaty reaflirmed their strong support for and continued
dedication to the principles and objectives of the Treaty,
as well as their commitment to implement effectively
its provisions,
Recognizing that in the Final Declaration the States
parties to the Treaty reaflirmed the commitment undertaken in article V to continue negotiations in good
faith concerning further measures in the field of disarmament for the prevention of an arms race on the
sea-bed, the ocean floor and the subsoil thereof,
Bearing in mind that, in this connexion, they have
addressed specific requests to the Conference of thc
Committee on DisarmamenL
Having considered the report of the Conference of
the Committee on Disarmament/:;
Noting the comments with respect to furthcr measures in the field of disarmament for thc prevention of
an arms race on the sea-bed, the occan tloor and the
subsoil thereof, as well as relevant documents submitted
to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session,

l. Welcomes with satisfaction the positive assessment by the Review Conference of the Partics to thc
Treaty 011 the Prohibition of the Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction on the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor and in thc
Subsoil Thercof of the effectiveness of the Trcaty since
its entry into force;
23 For the text of the Treaty, sce resolution 2660 (XXV),
annex.
24 See A/C.1/32/4.
25 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/32/27).

~--------- ------

2. Invites all States that have not yet done so, particularly those possessing nuclear weapons or any
other types of weapons of mass destruction, to ratify
or accede to the Treaty as a significant contribution
to international confidence;
3. Affirms its strong interest in avoiding an arms
race in nuclear weapons or any other types of weapons
of mass destruction on the sea-bed, the ocean floor or
the subsoil thercof;
4. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament-in consultation with the States parties
to the Treaty and taking into account thc proposals
made during the Review Conference and any rclevant
tcchnological developments-to proceed promptly with
thc considcration of further measures in the field of
disarmamcnt for the prevention of an arms race in
that environment:
5. Calls upan ali States to refrain from any action
which might lead to the extcnsion of the arms race
to the sea-bed and the occan floor;
6. Requests the Secretary-Gcneral to transmit to
the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament ali
documents of the thirty-second session of the General
Assembly relevant to further measures in the field of
disarmament for the prevention of an arms race on the
sea-bed, the ocean floor and the subsoil thereof;
7. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to report on its negotiations to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1977

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31 / 189 C of 21 December
1976, in which it requested the nuclear-weapon States,
as a first step towards a complete ban on the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons, to consider undertaking, without prejudice to their obligations arising
from treaties establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones,
not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against
non-nuclear-wcapon States not parties to the nuclear
security arrangcments of sorne nuclear-wcapon Powers,
Deeply concerned at the continuation of the arms
race, in particular the nuclear arms race, and the threat
to mankind duc to the possibility of the use of nuclear
weapons,
Considering that, until nuclear disarmament is
achieved on a universal basis, it is imperative for the
international community to devise effective measures to
ensure the security of non-nuclear-wcapon States against
thc use or thrcat of use of nuclear wcapons from any
quarter.
Noting that the non-nuclear-weapon States have
called for assmances from nuclear-weapon Powers
tha'. thcy will not use or thrcaten to use nuclear weapons
agamst them.
Considering that thc existence of credible and binding rcstraints against the use or threat of use of nuclear
wcapons against non-nuclear-weapon States would contribute towards strengthening the international nonproliferation régimc and creating a suitable climatc for
disarmamcnt,
Recalling its rcsolution 3261 G (XXIX) of 9 Decc·mber 1974, in which it rccommcndcd that Member

111.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

States should consider in all appropriate forums, without loss of time, the question of strengthening the
security of non-nuclear-weapon States,
l. Reaffirms the provisions of its resolution
31/189 C;
2. Urges the nuclear-weapon Powers to give serious
consideration to extending the undertaking proposed
by the General Assembly in its resolution 31 / 189 C
and to take expeditious action in all relevant forums
to strengthen the security of non-nuclear-weapon States;
3. Recommends that all possible efforts be made
at its special session devoted to disarmament, to be
beld in May and June 1978, to evolve binding and
credible security assurances to non-nuclear-weapon
States, taking into account resolution 31/189 C.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1977

e
The General Assembly,
Mindful that, according to Article 1, paragraph 1, of
the Charter, the primary purpose of the United Nations
is to maintain international peace and security,
Convinced that the relationship of international peace
and security to disarmament is a close one and that a
determination of this relationship can promote peace,
security and disarmament,
Considering that for the special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, to be held in
May and June 1978, the Preparatory Committee proposed that one agenda ítem be a review and appraisal
of the close interrelationship between disarmament,
international peace and security and economic development,
Considering further that it has examined at the current session a proposal for a study of experts on the
interrelationship between disarmament and development,26
Bearing in mind the need for a parallel study of
the interrelationship between disarmament and international security,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to initiate a
study on the interrelationship between disarmament and
international security;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit a progress report thereon to the General Assembly
at its special session devoted to disarmament.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1977
D

The General Assembly,
Concerned at the fact that the armaments race is
accelerating and that the world figure for expenditures
on armaments continues to increase,
Convinced of the need to intensify and diversify the
efforts to promote general and complete disarmament
under strict and effective international control,
Reaffirming the right of each State, in the exercise
of its sovereignty, to determine the appropriate conditions, and to take all the necessary measures, for
26 See

resolution 32/88 A.

53

ensuring its security, in accordance with the purposes
and principies of the United Nations,
Mindful of the importance which new regional measurcs takcn on the initiative of the States conccrned
may have,
Convinced of the usefulness for the international
community of a study on al! regional aspects of disarmament,
1. Invites all States to inform the Secretary-General, not later than 15 April 1978, of their views and
suggestions concerning the regional aspects of disarmament, including measures designed to increase confidence and stability as well as means of promoting
disarmament on a regional basis;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
communications received by him from Governments
as official documents to the General Assembly at its
special session devoted to disarmament, to be held in
May and June 1978;
3. Decides to consider at its thirty-third session
the desirability of requesting the Secretary-General to
prepare, with the collaboration of a special group of
qualified governmental experts, a comprehensive study
of all the regional aspects of disarmament, bearing in
mind, ínter alía, the decisions and recommendations that
may be adopted by the General Assembly at its special
session.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1977

E
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/90 of 14 December 1976,
in which it endorsed the agreed proposals made by
the Ad H oc Committee on the Review of the Role of
the United Nations in the Field of Disarmament, 27
H aving considered the report on the measures taken
by the Secretary-General as recommended by the Ad
Hoc Committee, 28
Noting that the Secretary-General has carried out
the request in resolution 31/90 to implement as soon
as possible the measures recommended by the Ad Hoc
Committee falling within bis area of responsibilities,
Noting with satisfaction the publication of the first
volume of the United Nations Disarmament Yearbook,29
Recognizing the vital interest of ali Governments
and world public opinion to be kept properly informed
on ali efforts in the field of disarmament,
Recalling the recommendation of the Ad Hoc Committee to the effect that the General Assembly, on the
basis of the report of the Secretary-General, should
consider publication of a disarmament periodical,
l. Emphasizes the need for a disarmament periodical presenting in highly readable form current facts
and developments in the field of disarmament, such
as summaries of new proposals, of important relevant
statements and communiqués and of in-depth studies
undertaken by the United Nations or the Conference
of the Committee on Disarmament, annotated
2 7 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-firsl
Session, Supp/ement No. 36 (A/31/36), para. 18.
2 ~ A/32/276.
2ll United Nations publication, Sales No. E.77.IX.2.

54

Genera] Assemb]y-Thirty-second Session

bibliographies and brief surnrnaries of important books
and articles on disarmament questions and related
rnatters;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to initiate the
publication of a disarrnament periodical in all the working languages of the General Assernbly.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1977
F

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the danger of nuclear warfare remains a grave threat to the survival of mankind,
Convinced that the prevention of proliferation of
nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices,
especially in those areas of the world where the rnaintenance of international peace and security is endangered, rernains an irnportant elernent in thc efforts to
avert nuclear warfarc,
Recalling resolution 31/189 D of 21 December
197 6, in which the General Assembly requested the
Jnternational Atomic Energy Agency to give special
attention to its programme of work in the non-proliferation area and to give careful consideration to all relevant suggestions airned at strengthening the safeguards
régirne that have been presented to the Agency, including the cornrnunication frorn the Governrnent of Finland, 30 and to report on the progress of its work on
this question to the Assernbly at its thirty-second session,
Noting the annual report for 1976 of the International Atomic Energy Agency, 31
Recalling also its resolution 31/75 of 1O December
1976 on the irnplernentation of the conclusions of the
first Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the recommendations, proposals and statemcnts made at the
Conference, 32
Recalling its resolution 2373 (XXJI) of 12 June
1968, in which it cornmended the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons 33 and expressed the
hope for the widest possible adhcrence to that Treaty,
Noting that more than one hundred States are now
parties to the Treaty on thc Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Underlining the importance of the nuclear-weapon
States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons responding positively-by participating in the fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and technological information for
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, as provided in
article IV of the Treaty-to the proposals and preoccupation of the non-nuclear-weapon States in order
to facilitate the adherence of all non-nuclear-weapon
States to the Treaty,
Noting also the importance of the establishment of
nuclear-weapon-free zones in various parts of the
world as a possible means of contributing to the preven-

ªº A/C.1/31/6.

31 International Atomic Energy Agency,

The Annual Report
for 1976 (Austria, July 1977); transmitted to the mernbers of
the GenemJ Assembly by a note of the Secretary-General
(A/32/ 158 and Add. 1).
32See A/C.1/31/4.
33 For the text of the Treaty, see resolution 2373 (XXIl),
annex.

tion of the proliferation of nuclear weapons as recognizcd by the General Assembly in its resolution 31/70
of 10 Deccmber 1976 on the cornprehensivc study of
the question of nuclear-weapon-free zoncs in all its
aspccts,
Recognizing the need to ensure, on a non-discriminatory basis in accordance with article IV of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and in keeping with the promotion of peaceful uses of
nuclear energy, a supply of nuclear technology, materials and facilities to meet the world's encrgy necds,
Noting the dcliberations of the International Conference on Nuclear Power and Its Fuel Cycle, held
at Salzburg, Austria, from 2 to 13 May 197784 under
the auspices of the International Atomic Energy
Agency, and the Conference on the Transfer of Nuclear Technology, held at Persepolis, Iran, from 10 to
14 April 1977, which confirmed the important and
growing contribution that nuclear energy will make
to meeting the energy nceds of ali countries, including
thc developing countries,
Noting also that the Organizing Conference of thc
1nternational Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation, held in
Washington, D.C., from 19 to 21 October 1977,8 ~
rccognized that nuclear energy should be made widely
available for peaceful purposes, that effective measures
could and should be taken at the national leve! and
through international agreements to minimize the danger of the proliferation of nuclear weapons and that
the evaluation would not jeopardize the respective fue!
cycle policies or international co-operation, agrecments
and contracts for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
provided that agreed safeguard measures were applied,
Anxious that the accelerated spread and development
of nuclear technology should not increase the danger
of proliferation of nuclear weapons or other nuclear
cxplosive devices, and convinced that these two objectives are not contradictory,
Underlining again the important role of the International Atomic Energy Agency in promoting the contribution of nuclear energy to economic progress, bearing in mind the special needs of developing countries,
and in implementing safeguards in the interest of nonproliferation,
Noting that the International Atomic Energy Agency
has made further progress in its safeguards activities
by increasing its preparedness to reach with States
which are not parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons, if they so desirc,
universal and non-discriminatory safeguards agreemcnts no less effective than those concluded by the
1nternational Atomic Energy Agency with States parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, by keeping under scrutiny the strengthening
of its safeguards, by completing this year a study on
the establishment of regional fuel cycle centres and by
presenting a draft convention for physical protection
of nuclear materials,
Determined that similar progress could be made in
exploring possibilities of increased assistance to the developing areas of the world,
34 For the proceedings of the Conference, see Intemational
Atomic Energy Agency, Nuclear Power and its Fue/ Cycle
(STI/PUB/465).
35 For the final communiqué of the Conference, see A/C.1 /
32/7.

111.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Cornrnittee

l. Urgently calls for determined efforts by all
nuclear-weapon States:
(a) To bring about the cessation of the nuclear
arms race;
( b) To undertake effective measures in the direction of nuclear disarmament;
(e) To find an early solution to the remammg
problems in reaching agreement to discontinue all test
explosions of nuclear weapons as a step towards the
realization of these objectives;
2. Emphasizes in this connexion the particular
responsibility of those nuclear-weapon States that have
already accepted international obligations, namely in
article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, with respect to the cessation of the
nuclear-arms race and the discontinuance of nuclearweapon tests and notes as encouraging the recent efforts
under way towards these ends;
3. Underlines the importance of determined efforts,
especially by the nuclear-weapon States, to ensure the
security of non-nuclear-weapon States;
4. Reaffirms that all States have the right, as provided for, inter alia, in article IV of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to acquire and
develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes under
effective and non-discriminatory safeguards against the
proliferation of nuclear weapons, and underlines the
importance of increased efforts in this field, particularly
for the needs of the developing countries and areas;
5. Recognizes the importance of the technical assistance provided by the International Atomic Energy
Agency to the developing countries and areas of the
world within an effective and comprehensive safeguards
system, and emphasizes the urgent need for common
efforts towards an essential increase of this assistance;
6. Urges States that as yet have not adhered to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
in the first instance, to do so at an early date or, at a
minimum, to accept other arrangements involving the
application of safeguards to their complete nuclear
fuel cycle that would provide satisfactory assurances
to the international community against the dangers of
proliferation while guaranteeing to the States concerned
unhindered and non-discriminatory access to the peaceful benefits of nuclear energy;
7. Emphasizes the importan ce of common efforts
to study satisfactory arrangements for an adequate supply of nuclear fuels and other materials and facilities
necessary to the efficient implementation and operation
of national nuclear power programmes without jeopardizing the respective fuel cycle policies or international co-operation agreements and contracts for the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, provided that agreed
safeguard measures are applied;
8.

Solemnly affirms the following principies:

(a) States should not convert civil nuclear matcrials
or facilities to the production of nuclear weapons;
( b) All States have the right, in accordance with
the principie of sovereign equality, to develop their
programmes for the peaceful use of nuclear technology
for economic and social development in conformity
with their priorities, interests and needs and should
have, without discrimination, access to, and be free
to acquire, technology and materials for the peaceful

55

use of nuclear energy under effective and non-discriminatory safeguards against the proliferation of nuclear
weapons;
9. Expresses its strong support for the efforts of
the International Atomic Energy Agency to increase
thc effcctiveness of its safeguards system in arder to
ensure that the peaceful uses of nuclear energy will
not lead to the proliferation of nuclear weapons or
other nuclear explosive devices;
1O. Recognizes the nced adequately to ensure the
physical protection of nuclear materials, facilities and
transport;
11. Requests the International Atomic Energy
Agency to continue the consideration of reaching an
international agreement for such protection;
12. Expresses its support for the continuation of
the studies by the International Atomic Energy Agency
on the question of multinational fuel cycle centres and
an international régime for plutonium management as
possible means of promoting the use of nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes and the interests of the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive de vices;
13. Requests the International Atomic Energy
Agency to report on the progress of its work on these
questions to the General Assembly at its thirty-third
session.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1977
G

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2602 A (XXIV) of 16 December 1969 relating to the initiation of bilateral negotiations between the Governments of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America on the limitation of offensive and defensive
strategic nuclear-weapon systems,
Recalling also its resolutions 2932 B (XXVII) of
29 November 1972, 3184 A and C (XXVIII) of 18
December 1973, 3261 C (XXIX) of 9 December 1974,
3484 C (XXX) of 12 December 1975 and 31/189 A
of 21 December 1976,
Regretting the absence of definitive results during
the last three years of those bilateral negotiations,

I. Notes with satisfaction that, in his address to
the General Assembly on 4 October 1977, the President of the United States of America stated, ínter alía,
the following:
"The United States is willing to go as far as possible, consistent with our security interests, in Iimiting and reducing our nuclear weapons. On a reciproca! basis we are willing now to reduce them by 10 per
cent, 20 per cent or cven 50 per cent. Then wc
will work for further reductions with a view to a
world truly free of nuclear weapons.";~ 0
2. Notes with identical satisfaction that, in his
address to the Joint Session of the Supreme Soviet
and Central Committee of the Communist Party on
2 Novcmber 1977, the Prcsident of the Supreme Soviet
3 6 Ofjicial Records of the General Assemb/y, Thirty-second
Scssion, Plcnary Matings, 18th meeting, para. 15.

56

General Assembly-Thirty-second ~sion

of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics stated the
following:
"Today we are proposing a radical step: that
agreement be reached on a simultaneous halt in the
production of nuclear weapons by all States. This
would apply to al! such weapons-whether atomic,
hydrogen or neutron bombs or missiles. At the same
time, the nuclear Powers could undertake to start
the gradual rcduction of existing stockpiles of such
weapons and move towards their complete, total
destruction.";
3. Stresses the necessity and urgency that the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America strive to implement as soon as possible the
foregoing declarations of their respective heads of
State and invites the Governments of both countries
to adopt without delay all relevant measures to achieve
that objective;
4. Reiterates with special emphasis its invitation to
both Governments to keep the General Assembly informed in good time of the results of their negotiations
and trusts to be able to receive from them appropriate
information in this regard during the special session of
the Assembly devoted to disarmament, to be held in
May and June 1978.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1977

l. Endorses the recommendation by the Preparatory
Committce for the Special Session of the General Assembly Devoted to Disarmament that the General Assembly should initiate a study on the relationship between disarmament and development, the terms of
reference of the study to be determined by thc Assembly itself at its special scssion; 40
2. Requests the Secretary-General to appoint, at
the earliest possible date, an ad hoc group of governmental experts with the task of elaborating a possible
framework and terms of reference for the abovementioned study; 41
3. Requests the Secretary-General to make available to the Ad Hoc Group on the Relationship between
Disarmament and Development all the relevant materials, including proposals made by Member States, as
well as previous and current United Nations studies
on the subject;
4. Requests the Ad Hoc Group to report on its
work not later than 1 April 1978;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
report of the Ad Hoc Group to Member States not
later than a month before the opening, on 23 May
1978, of the special session.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1977

B
32/88.

Special session of the General Assembly
devoted to disarman1ent=17
A

The General Assembly,
Gravely concerned that vast human and material
resources are spent on armaments,
Rea[firming the need to allocate greater resources
to economic and social progress, particularly having
in mind the needs of the developing countries,
Firmly believing that a curtailment of expenditures
on armaments in keeping with the objectives of the
Disarmament Decade would facilitate the availability of
greater resources for economic and social development,
particularly to the developing countries,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the aforementioned matters and the specific studies carried out at
its request,
Noting the declaration made by the Fifth Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to 19 August 1976,
on this matter, 38
Noting also the proposal for a United Nations study
presented to the Preparatory Committee for the Special
Session of the General Assembly Devoted to Disarmament, 39
Sharing the view that decisions on concrete action
would be facilitated through an in-depth analysis on
the relationship between disarmament efforts and measures to achieve economic and social progress,
37 See also se,ct. X.B.1, dedsion 32/403, and sect. X.B.2,
decisions 321423 A and B.
ss See A/31/197.
39 Oflicial Records of the General Assembly, Tenth Special
Session, Supplement No. 1 (A/S-10/1), vol. V, document
A/ AC.187 /80.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/189 B of 21 December
197 6, in which it decided to convene a special session
of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament,
Having considered the report of the Preparatory
Committee for the Special Session of the General Assembly Devoted to Disarmament,42
l. Endorses the report of the Preparatory Committee for the Special Session of the General Assembly
Devoted to Disarmament and the recommendation contained therein for the special session to be held between
23 May and 28 June 1978 in the General Assembly
Ha!l;4ª
2. Requests the Preparatory Committee to continue
its work in arder to prepare a draft final document or
documents for consideration and adoption by the General Assembly at its special session and to submit to
the Assembly its final report;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the members of
the Preparatory Committee for their constructive contribution to its work;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
Member States the records of the thirty-second session
of the General Assembly relating to the special session;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to render
the Preparatory Committee all necessary assistance as
may be required for the completion of its work.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1977
40 [bid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 41 (A/32/41
and Corr.l), para. 32.
4 1 For the composition of the Ad Hoc Group on the Relationship between Disa.rmament and Development, see
A/S-10/9, annex.
42 Oflicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 41 (A/32/41 and Corr.1).
43 /bid., para. 19.
