S/2003/931

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 October 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 2 October 2003 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
convey the attached report on the international security presence in Kosovo,
covering the period from 1 to 31 August 2003 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

03-53971 (E) 061003
*0353971*

S/2003/931

Annex
Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
Kosovo Force
1.
During the reporting period (1-31 August 2003) there were just over 22,100
Kosovo Force (KFOR) troops in-theatre.
Security
2.
The general situation in Kosovo during August 2003 saw a continuation of the
trend towards an increasing number of inter-ethnic incidents begun in July: a total of
42 such incidents were reported, with a large number of shootings and
grenade/bomb attacks. This situation represented a slight decrease from a year ago
(48 incidents in August 2002).
3.
On 2 August, four men armed with automatic rifles opened fire near a Kosovo
Police Service (KPS) station in Pec and shot dead 3 Kosovo Albanians (a girl aged
11, a woman aged 24 and a man aged 30). Five other people were injured. Some
shots hit the KPS station, prompting the police to shoot back. Officials of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) are of the view that
the attack was aimed at Rexhep Kelmendi, who was a prosecution witness in the
trial of the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) leader Daut Haradinaj.
4.
On 3 August, an UNMIK police officer, Satish Menon (India), was killed in
the vicinity of Mitrovica while driving to Leposavic. The driver of the patrol car, a
British UNMIK police officer, was slightly injured. The investigation into this
murder suggested that this attack was well-organized and planned in advance. The
investigation continues.
5.
On 9 August, a man was killed and two others seriously injured in Jablanica
when they were ambushed while travelling from Pec in a van. Following the
shooting, UNMIK police requested helicopter support from KFOR to assist in
tracking down the suspects, who had fled into mountainous terrain in the direction
of the Kulina border crossing point. Two suspects are currently in custody, and
several other persons are being interviewed by the police.
6.
On 13 August, an unknown individual or individuals opened fire with an
automatic weapon on a group of six Kosovo Serb teenagers swimming in the
Bistrica River between Zahac and Gorazdevac. One 19-year-old died immediately,
and a 12-year-old boy died on the way to hospital. A third teenager received a
severe head wound and was taken to the military hospital in north Mitrovica before
being transferred to a hospital in Belgrade. The perpetrator or perpetrators escaped,
and the motive for the attack remains unclear. In response to this incident, KFOR
issued a warming order and fragmentation order aimed at increasing the visible
presence of KFOR with a view to deterring any further violence.
7.
Serbian politicians strongly condemned the attack and criticized UNMIK for
failing to protect the Kosovo Serb minority. On 14 and 15 August, several
demonstrations were held, the larger of which was in Mitrovica, where 1,000 people
gathered peacefully for a candlelight vigil. Following that demonstration, a hand
grenade was thrown at an ethnic Albanian residence in Mitrovica. No injuries
resulted from the explosion. On 15 August, the two victims of the shooting were
buried in Gorazevac, with nearly 300 people attending the service, among them well

2

S/2003/931

known politicians and members of the Orthodox Church. The Serbian Prime
Minister and Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Zivkovic and Mr. Covic, attended the
memorial service.
8.
On 18 August, a Kosovo Serb, Tonic Dragan, who had been shot seven days
before in Skulanovo while fishing, died in Belgrade. The funeral was held on 19
August without incident; the UNMIK investigation continues.
9.
On 26 August, a group of Kosovo Serbs were shot at in Bica, a Kosovo Serb
majority village. Two of the group were injured, one seriously. A KFOR patrol in
the vicinity of the village assisted in the evacuation of the wounded to the KFOR
Spanish hospital in Istok. One of the victims was later transferred to the French field
hospital in Mitrovica. UNMIK police are continuing their investigation.
10. The detention order of Shefket Musliu, who is being held by UNMIK while
awaiting trial on racketeering and intimidation charges, has been extended for
another 60 days, until 5 October 2003.
Attacks against the Force and its operational activities
11. On 10 August, an unknown person fired a 9-mm bullet into the camp airfield
in Multinational Brigade (South-West), hitting a building but injuring no one.
12. Operation “Dynamic Response ‘03” and additional operations were launched
concurrently by KFOR, seizing a substantial quantity of weapons and ammunition.
The visibility of KFOR throughout Kosovo while conducting operations allowed it
to address concerns of security in the province and ease tensions among Kosovo
Serbs. KFOR is showing its determination to improve security in-theatre, and its
increased presence may have prevented the escalation of retaliatory actions by
Kosovo Serbs.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
13. The armed forces of Serbia and Montenegro and the Ministry of Internal
Affairs Special Police continued to remain in compliance with the terms and
conditions of the Military Technical Agreement.
14. During the period under review, four roll calls involving 20 Kosovo Protection
Corps (KPC) units were carried out at short notice. The results continue to show a
low rate of unauthorized absenteeism, with 17 out of a total of 1,053 persons absent
without permission (1.6 per cent). However, the results also show that the number of
persons on leave was still unacceptably high. KPC was informed that leave for
personnel, including time earned for exercises and training, should be spread out on
a planned basis over the holiday season. The minimum required presence of KPC
(set at 75 per cent at all times) was not met, with 60.5 per cent present on average.
Out of the 20 units mustered, only 10 were considered to be operational.
15. On 13 August, a Kosovo-wide roll call was conducted. Of the 2,874 persons
involved in the muster, 40 per cent were on duty in their barracks and 9 per cent
were on duty elsewhere in Kosovo. This muster showed 58 per cent present
(including duty in barracks and elsewhere in Kosovo) of the 75 per cent directed.
The previous muster, conducted in May 2003, had resulted in 87 per cent present.
The Kosovo-wide muster verified that there was no proper leave planning in place

3

S/2003/931

within KPC, and out of the 84 KPC units mustered, only 11 could be considered
operational.
16. Nine cases of non-compliance were reported in August. These include three
weapon violations, two criminal acts, two acts of disobeying orders and two appeals.
A total of 47 cases remained open, of which 35 were due to be closed pending
signature and UNMIK approval.
Outlook
17. The general situation in Kosovo, while stable, is less secure since the middle
of 2003. The murders at Zahac and Skulanovo heightened tensions within the
province. This resulted in an escalation in inter-ethnic aggressiveness. These acts,
coupled with the fact that several organized crime groups and ethnic Albanian armed
groups are not interested in stabilizing Kosovo, contributed to a less secure
environment. These groups oppose the strengthening of any State institutions
dealing with law and order. The high level of organized crime activities can extend
to altercations between criminal gangs.

4
