A /77/PV.95

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

95th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 1 August 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 72 (continued)
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft resolution (A/77/L.82)
Draft amendment (A/77/L.83)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Singapore to introduce draft resolution
A/77/L.82.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): I have the honour
to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.82, entitled
“Agreement under the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable
Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond
National Jurisdiction”. On behalf of my delegation,
I would like to thank all Member States for their
constructive engagement during the consultations on
the draft resolution.
Member States will recall that the recently concluded
Intergovernmental Conference on a legally binding
instrument under the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea for the conservation and sustainable use
of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national
jurisdiction (BBNJ) adopted the BBNJ Agreement by
consensus on 19 June. The draft resolution that we
have submitted today is essentially a procedural draft
resolution that aims to follow up on the initial essential

matters pertaining to the eventual operationalization
and implementation of the BBNJ Agreement.
Operative paragraph 1 of the draft resolution
welcomes the adoption of the BBNJ Agreement.
As everyone here knows, the adoption of the BBNJ
Agreement was the culmination of nearly two decades
of work in the General Assembly and was of course
commended and widely celebrated by members of
the international community. In essence, the BBNJ
Agreement constitutes a major milestone for the rule
of law in ocean governance, and I should also add
that its adoption has strengthened multilateralism and
the role of the United Nations in finding solutions to
global challenges.
Please allow me to continue to explain the draft
resolution that we submitted.
Operative paragraphs 2 to 4 relate to the SecretaryGeneral’s functions under the BBNJ Agreement. In line
with the recommendations of the Intergovernmental
Conference to the General Assembly, operative
paragraph 2 approves the assumption by the SecretaryGeneral of the functions assigned to him under the
BBNJ Agreement, including the depositary functions
and the performance of the interim secretariat
functions under the Agreement. Operative paragraph
3 requests the Secretary-General to make budgetary
proposals for the additional work that the Secretariat
will undertake in connection with the Agreement, and
operative paragraph 4 requests the Secretary-General,
as depositary of the Agreement, to open it for signature
on 20 September 2023.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-22646 (E)

*2322646*

A/77/PV.95

Based on the strong support for the BBNJ
Agreement and for its early entry into force, operative
paragraph 5 calls for States and regional economic
integration organizations to consider becoming party to
the Agreement as soon as possible. Operative paragraph
6, which provides for the inclusion of a new sub-item
on the Agreement in the provisional agenda of the next
session of the General Assembly, was included based
on the expressions of support at the further resumed
fifth session of the Intergovernmental Conference
for consideration to be given to efforts to support the
early entry into force of the Agreement and its early
implementation, including through a preparatory
process such as a preparatory commission.
Singapore calls on all Member States to vote in
support of draft resolution A/77/L.82, as submitted
and without any amendments. I would like to take this
opportunity to share with everyone here that Singapore
will vote in favour of the draft resolution, as submitted,
and will also vote against the proposed amendments to
it contained in document A/77/L.83. In our view, the
proposed amendments are not in line with the spirit
and substance of the draft resolution that we have
presented. We believe that the amendments seek to
delete important elements of the draft resolution and
that they are at odds with what the draft resolution
seeks to achieve and aimed at minimizing the attention
and consideration that ought to be given to the great
collective achievement of Member States that the BBNJ
Agreement represents.
We once again call on all Member States that
support the BBNJ Agreement and its early entry into
force to accordingly give their kind support to the
draft resolution, as submitted by Singapore, without
any amendments.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation to introduce
draft amendment A/77/L.83.
Mr. Leonidchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Draft resolution A/77/L.82, which is
before us today, concerns an agreement that has not
yet entered into force. At the diplomatic conference
devoted to its consideration, our delegation showed
significant flexibility. We understood how important
the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable
Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond
National Jurisdiction is to developing countries. For
2/13

01/08/2023

that reason, despite the fact that the Agreement was
totally unacceptable to our delegation, we displayed
unprecedented flexibility. My country distanced
itself from the consensus in the adoption of the text
of the international agreement in question. We also
emphasized that our flexibility should not imply that
our position is a weak one. We stated quite clearly
that we had no plans to participate in the forthcoming
international agreement.
Considering that today’s draft resolution was
presented by its Singapore facilitators as a purely
technical document, we were again prepared to show
reasonable flexibility. If indeed the draft text had gone
no further than addressing the administrative and
budgetary issues related to the new Agreement, my
delegation could have limited itself to distancing itself
from the consensus, and we said that very clearly from
the very beginning of the consultations. Regrettably,
the draft text under consideration today cannot be seen
as a technical document. It goes significantly further
and includes several elements of a political nature,
specifically operative paragraphs 1, 5 and 6, in which
the adoption of the Agreement is welcomed, there is
a call for considering the possibility of ratifying the
Agreement as soon as possible to ensure its early entry
into force and provision is made for adding a sub-item
on the new Agreement to the item “Oceans and the law
of the sea” on the draft agenda of the General Assembly
at its seventy-eighth session.
Considering the position of the Russian delegation
on the Agreement, those provisions are completely
unacceptable to us and demand that the draft resolution
be put to a vote, where we would vote against it. We
have no choice. However, we have decided to try to
find a way to give consensus another chance. The sole
purpose of Russia’s draft amendment A/77/L.83 is
removing the politicized elements I mentioned from
the draft resolution and restoring its purely technical
nature. We hope that all delegations will support
that approach.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/77/L.82 and draft amendment
A/77/L.83.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I will read out two oral
statements. The first is about draft resolution A/77/L.82
23-22646

01/08/2023

and the second is about draft resolution A/77/L.82 as
amended by draft amendment A/77/L.83.
The present oral statement is made in the context
of rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly and has also been distributed to Member
States. Under the terms of operative paragraphs 2, 3 and
6 of the draft resolution, the General Assembly would
“Approve the assumption by the SecretaryGeneral of the functions assigned to him under the
Agreement under the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and
Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity
of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction, including
the depositary functions and the performance
of the secretariat functions under the Agreement
until such time as the secretariat to be established
under article 50 of the Agreement commences its
functions [paragraph 2];
“Request the Secretary-General to make
proposals in the context of the proposed programme
budget for 2024 in order to strengthen the capacity
of the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of
the Sea of the Office of Legal Affairs to undertake
activities to promote a better understanding of
the Agreement and to prepare for the entry into
force of the Agreement and perform the secretariat
functions under the Agreement until such time
as the secretariat to be established under article
50 of the Agreement commences its functions
[paragraph 3]; and
“Decide to include on the provisional agenda of
its seventy-eighth session, under the item entitled
‘Oceans and the law of the sea’, a sub-item entitled
‘Agreement under the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and
Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of
Areas beyond National Jurisdiction’ [paragraph 6].
“In order to meet the request to undertake
activities to promote a better understanding of the
Agreement to prepare for the entry into force of the
Agreement, perform the secretariat functions under
the Agreement until such time as the secretariat to
be established under article 50 of the Agreement
commences its functions and support any informal
consultations of Member States, including under
the proposed sub-item, ‘Agreement under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine

A/77/PV.95

Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National
Jurisdiction’, as per operative paragraphs 2, 3 and 6,
the Secretariat would need to significantly expand
its activities under subprogramme 4, ‘Oceans and
the Law of the Sea’ of the Office of Legal Affairs.
“The
implementation
of
the
request
to undertake activities to promote a better
understanding of the Agreement, prepare for the
entry into force of the Agreement and support
any informal consultations of Member States,
including under the proposed sub-item, ‘Agreement
under the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use
of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond
National Jurisdiction’, will give rise to programme
budget implications in the context of the proposed
programme budget for 2024. At this stage, it is
estimated that the annual budget implications
for 2024 and beyond would be in the range of
$2.5 million and $3.2 million on an ongoing basis,
until the secretariat to be established under article
50 of the Agreement commences its functions. The
budget implications would cover both non-post
resources and temporary post resources. The
preparation of a detailed cost estimate will require
further consultations with the relevant offices
and will therefore be presented at a later stage,
through a revised estimates report for 2024, during
the main part of the seventy-eighth session of the
General Assembly.
“The further implementation of the request
to prepare to perform secretariat functions under
the Agreement until such time as the secretariat to
be established under article 50 of the Agreement
commences its functions and to perform such
functions will give rise to additional programme
budget implications. However, the extent and
nature of these requirements will be informed
by future decisions of the General Assembly —,
including a possible decision on the convening
of a preparatory process, which are expected to
be taken during the seventy-eighth session of the
General Assembly, either under the agenda item
entitled ‘Oceans and the law of the sea’ or under
the proposed sub-item, entitled ‘Agreement under
the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use
of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond
National Jurisdiction’. The General Assembly will

23-226463/13

A/77/PV.95

be advised on the specific budgetary implications
prior to taking such future decisions, in line with
rule 153 of the Assembly’s rules of procedure.”
I will now read out the oral statement in connection
with draft resolution A/77/L.82, as amended by
A/77/L.83.
The present oral statement is made in the context
of rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly and has also been distributed to Member
States. Under the terms of operative paragraphs 2 and
3 of draft resolution L/77/L.82, as amended by draft
amendment A/77/L.83, the General Assembly would
“Approve the assumption by the SecretaryGeneral of the functions assigned to him under the
Agreement under the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and
Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity
of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction, including
the depositary functions and the performance
of the secretariat functions under the Agreement
until such time as the secretariat to be established
under article 50 of the Agreement commences its
functions [under paragraph 2];
“Request the Secretary-General to make
proposals in the context of the proposed programme
budget for 2024 in order to strengthen the capacity
of the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of
the Sea of the Office of Legal Affairs to undertake
activities to promote a better understanding of the
Agreement and to prepare for the entry into force of
the Agreement and perform the secretariat functions
under the Agreement until such time as the secretariat
to be established under article 50 of the Agreement
commences its functions [under paragraph 3].
“In order to meet the request to undertake
activities to promote a better understanding of
the Agreement, to prepare for the entry into force
of the Agreement and to perform the secretariat
functions under the Agreement until such time as
the secretariat to be established under article 50
of the Agreement commences its functions, and
to support any informal consultations of Member
States [under operative paragraphs 2 and 3], the
Secretariat would need to significantly expand its
activities under subprogramme 4, ‘Oceans and the
Law of the Sea’, of the Office of Legal Affairs.
4/13

01/08/2023

“The
implementation
of
the
request
to undertake activities to promote a better
understanding of the Agreement, to prepare for the
entry into force of the Agreement, and to support
any informal consultations of Member States, will
give rise to programme budget implications in the
context of the proposed programme budget for
2024. At this stage, it is estimated that the annual
budget implications for 2024 and beyond would be
in the range of $2.5 million to $3.2 million on an
ongoing basis until the secretariat to be established
under article 50 of the Agreement commences
its functions. The budget implications would
cover both non-post resources and temporary
post resources. The preparation of detailed cost
estimates will require further consultations with
relevant offices and will therefore be presented at
a later stage through a revised estimates report for
2024, during the main part of the seventy-eighth
session of the General Assembly.
“The further implementation of the request
to perform the secretariat functions under the
Agreement until such time as the secretariat to
be established under article 50 of the Agreement
commences its functions, and to perform such
functions, will give rise to additional programme
budget implications. However, the extent and nature
of these requirements will be informed by future
decisions of the General Assembly, including a
possible decision on the convening of a preparatory
process, which are expected to be taken during the
seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly.
The General Assembly will be advised on the
specific budgetary implications prior to taking
such future decisions, in line with rule 153 of the
General Assembly’s rules of procedure.”
The President: Delegations wishing to make a
statement in explanation of vote before the voting
on draft resolution A/77/L.82 and draft amendment
A/77/L.83 are invited to do so now in one intervention.
Before giving the floor for explanations of vote or
position, I would like to remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Bellmont Roldán (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honour to make this statement on behalf
of the European Union and its member States. The
candidate countries North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Albania, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Bosnia
23-22646

01/08/2023

and Herzegovina; and the members of the European
Economic Area, Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway, as
well as Monaco, align themselves with this statement.
The European Union and its member States thank
Singapore for the proposing draft resolution A/77/L.82.
We strongly support it and call on all States to vote in
favour of it. We were disappointed by the proposed draft
amendment A/77/L.83 seeking to undermine the draft
resolution and cannot support them. The draft resolution
is fully in line with the outcome of the fifth session of
the Intergovernmental Conference on a legally binding
instrument under the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use
of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national
jurisdiction. The outcome document was adopted
by consensus.
The draft resolution meets three important
goals. First, the Agreement under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation
and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity
of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction is a historic
achievement of multilateralism. It is the most recent
agreement to implement the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea, which establishes the legal
framework within which all activities in the oceans and
seas must be carried out. It is clear to everyone that the
Agreement is key to achieving the overall aspiration for
more sustainable management of the oceans and their
ecosystems. The Assembly’s adoption of today’s draft
resolution will underscore that the international order
based on norms, with the United Nations at its core,
performs when it matters most.
Secondly and very importantly, the draft resolution
provides for the next steps towards the Agreement’s
signature, rapid entry into force and effective
implementation. In particular, it enables the SecretaryGeneral to assume the functions assigned to him under
the Agreement and to fund the interim secretariat of the
Agreement to be provided by the Division for Ocean
Affairs and the Law of the Sea. We stand ready to support
the work of the Secretary-General in any way we can.
Lastly, the draft resolution calls for the signature,
ratification, approval and acceptance of the Agreement
as soon as possible to enable its entry into force and
ensures that the General Assembly will regularly
follow up on the Agreement through an agenda
sub-item dedicated to it. That is a key priority for
the European Union and its member States. We are

A/77/PV.95

committed to signing and concluding the Agreement as
soon as possible, and we urge others to do the same. To
that end, the European Union has pledged €40 million
to support the Agreement’s ratification and speedy
implementation. For all those reasons, we encourage
Member States to vote against the draft amendment and
in favour of the draft resolution submitted by Singapore.
Mr. Fuller (Belize): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 14 member States of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM).
CARICOM
participated
actively
in
the
negotiations on resolution 72/249, which mandated
the Intergovernmental Conference on an international
legally binding instrument under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction (BBNJ). Over the
course of the five sessions of the Conference, from 2018
to 2023, our group engaged in good-faith negotiations,
sharing the common and near-universal hope for a
new treaty that would address long-standing gaps in
ocean governance and reinforce the principles of the
fair and equitable sharing of benefits from the global
commons that is our oceans. The journey was arduous,
the process interrupted, the learning curve steep, the
details complex and the interests varied. Yet in a true
victory for multilateralism, all the negotiating parties
arrived at a mutually acceptable and satisfactory
outcome, which led to the consensus adoption in June
of the new BBNJ treaty. As with all global treaties, it is
not a perfect document. None of us got everything we
wanted. However, it was a win for all. More importantly,
it was a win for our ocean and its biodiversity. It was
also a win that we welcome not just in this Hall but
across the world — from the islands of the Pacific to the
great continent of Africa and from the vast coastlines of
the Americas to the peaks of Europe and Asia. From the
tropical belt to the Arctic seas, the BBNJ Agreement
has been hailed as a major step forward.
Having fulfilled the mandate given it by the
General Assembly, the Intergovernmental Conference
has transmitted its report and the text of the adopted
agreement to us. Since we all participated in good faith,
it is quite perplexing — at least for CARICOM — that
the General Assembly’s acceptance of the outcome
and endorsement of the Agreement should be subject
to a vote. Draft resolution A/77/L.82, presented by
the delegation of Singapore, reflects the outcome of
the negotiations and includes the required requests

23-226465/13

A/77/PV.95

and approvals to give effect to what we all agreed on
mere weeks ago. Our delegations therefore completely
reject draft amendment A/77/L.83, proposed by
one delegation, and unequivocally support the draft
resolution as presented in document A/77/L.82.
CARICOM looks forward to the opening for
signature of the Agreement on 20 September, as set
out in paragraph 4. Our countries will be working
towards signature and ratification in hopes of see the
Agreement enter into force as soon as possible. We also
anticipate the proposal of the Secretary-General for
the continued engagement of the Division for Ocean
Affairs and the Law of the Sea in that process, this time
serving as the interim secretariat for the Agreement.
Very importantly, our delegations look forward to the
continued discussions on the next steps for the BBNJ
under a dedicated sub-item during the seventy-eighth
session of the General Assembly.
I would like to take this opportunity on behalf of the
delegations of the CARICOM member States to place on
record our sincere congratulations to Ambassador Rena
Lee of Singapore, who, as President of the Conference,
steered a vessel with a somewhat rowdy crew across
vast and often stormy seas to bring the Agreement into
harbour and without a mutiny. With that work done, it
is CARICOM’s hope that we can all turn our collective
attention towards the implementation of the Agreement.
Let us unite our efforts to ensure its speedy entry into
force, its adequate financing and the readiness of all
States to pursue the conservation and sustainable use of
our ocean and its resources more effectively, especially
in areas beyond national jurisdiction, for which we
share a common responsibility.
Mr. Mitchell (Palau): On behalf of the Pacific
small island developing States, we align ourselves with
the statement to be delivered by the representative of
Samoa on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States.
I have the honour to deliver an explanation of vote both
on draft resolution A/77/L.82 and the draft amendment
to it contained in document A/77/L.83.
Our group is proud to have actively engaged in
the negotiations on an international legally binding
instrument on the conservation and sustainable use of
marine biological diversity beyond areas of national
jurisdiction (BBNJ) and its final outcome, but more
work remains ahead. We commend Singapore on
introducing the draft resolution before us, which
6/13

01/08/2023

represents an important step in turning the BBNJ
Agreement into a reality.
The draft resolution welcomes the adoption of
the BBNJ Agreement, on which we have all worked
tirelessly. Among other things, it will begin the process
of funding what is essentially the interim secretariat for
the BBNJ Agreement and create an agenda sub-item,
enabling us to further define modalities during the
next session of the General Assembly, including for
possible preparatory work for the BBNJ Agreement. We
strongly support that approach. We were disappointed
that a draft amendment was presented to delete those
very elements, which are crucial to operationalizing
the treaty. Our delegations will vote against the draft
amendment and support the resolution as drafted. We
call on other delegations to do the same.
Mrs. Bartley (Samoa): The Alliance of Small Island
States (AOSIS) would like to explain its vote before
the adoption of draft resolution A/77/L.82, entitled
“Agreement under the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable
use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond
national jurisdiction” (BBNJ).
As small island developing States (SIDS), we
remain deeply concerned about the potential impact
that activities in areas beyond national jurisdiction will
have within our territorial waters, extended continental
shelves and exclusive economic zones that we rely on
for our sustainable development. For SIDS, it is also
critical to ensure equity in the implementation of the
Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable
Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond
National Jurisdiction so that we are all able to harness
the benefits that would arise. Against that background,
AOSIS has been actively engaged in the BBNJ process
since the preparatory-committee stage, and we
believe that the text adopted at the conclusion of the
Intergovernmental Conference process is an accurate
reflection of the common landing zones that we reached
after a decade of comprehensive negotiations. We
allocated additional time as needed and ensured that
there was consensus on moving ahead every step of the
way. We take this opportunity to once again thank the
President of the Conference, Ambassador Rena Lee, for
her stellar work in guiding us through that challenging
process with such integrity and transparency.
23-22646

01/08/2023

A/77/PV.95

However, that is just the beginning of our work
to conserve and sustainably use marine biodiversity
in areas beyond national jurisdiction. As specified in
the Agreement, it first has to be ratified by 60 Member
States in order to enter into force. Following that, a
number of important decisions also have to be adopted
by the Conference of the Parties in order to start
operationalizing the agreement. It is therefore a matter
of urgency to put in place the procedural arrangements
enabling that in order to move things ahead with haste
and not lose the momentum we have gained.

the delegation of Singapore, and thanks Ambassador
Gafoor for introducing it. The adoption of the
Agreement under the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable
Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond
National Jurisdiction was and remains a triumph
for multilateralism. My delegation congratulates all
participants in the Conference and expresses profound
gratitude to its President, Ambassador Rena Lee of
Singapore, for her exceptional leadership and skill in
bringing it to a successful conclusion.

In that regard, we are pleased with draft resolution
A/77/L.82, introduced by Singapore, which welcomes
the adoption of the Agreement and calls on all the
relevant actors to consider signing, ratifying, approving
or accepting it as soon as possible. Similarly, we see
great merit and utility in including a sub-item entitled
“Agreement under the United Nations Convention on
Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use
of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national
jurisdiction” under the agenda item “Oceans and the
law of the sea” during the seventy-eighth session of the
General Assembly, which would enable the Assembly
to consider and provide further guidance on the next
steps in an inclusive and transparent manner.

Sierra Leone has had the honour to coordinate
the Group of African States since the fourth round
of negotiations in the Intergovernmental Conference.
Throughout the negotiations, my delegation had
the honour to convey that the African Group had
emphasized the importance of a global and holistic
framework for adopting conservation measures
and ensuring equity in the sustainable use of ocean
resources, with the firm position of concluding an
instrument that is implementable, future proofed, fair,
equitable and universal, an instrument that will achieve
its core objectives of conservation and sustainable use
of marine biodiversity.

AOSIS therefore fully endorses the adoption of the
draft resolution as introduced by Singapore, and rejects
the draft amendments proposed to delete those critical
elements (A/77/L.83), which will inevitably hinder the
process from moving forward. We also want to take
this opportunity to urge all countries to maintain the
spirit of solidarity and unity that we observed during
the Intergovernmental Conference process, as our
collective efforts are integral to ensuring the success
of the new treaty.
Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone): The delegation of Sierra
Leone, speaking in its national capacity, would like to
make this statement in explanation of its position before
the voting.
Following the milestone conclusion of the
negotiations on an international legally binding
instrument under the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) on the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction (BBNJ) and the
monumental achievement of the adoption of the BBNJ
Agreement on 19 June, the delegation of Sierra Leone
welcomes draft resolution A/77/L.82, introduced by

We were conscious of the undeniable fact that the
BBNJ Agreement, the third UNCLOS implementing
agreement, must allow us, those with limited activities
in the high seas, to also commit to conserve and
sustainably use ocean resources to address the marine
biodiversity crisis. Significantly, the BBNJ Agreement
must be aligned with the global goal of ensuring ocean
sustainability for present and future generations,
consistent with Goal 14 of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, thereby rekindling hope for
a healthy ocean, planet and human life.
Fundamentally, the BBNJ Agreement must
also ensure access to ocean resources, in particular
marine genetic resources and related digital sequence
information, for the benefit of all humankind, with
such benefits to be shared fairly and equitably.
The concrete commitments made on capacitybuilding and the transfer of marine technology to level
capacities and to support the effective implementation
of the BBNJ Agreement must be immediately and
fully operationalized and fulfilled. Importantly, in the
financing and implementation of the BBNJ Agreement, it
will be vital to recognize the unique needs of developing
States parties, including small island developing States,

23-226467/13

A/77/PV.95

least developed countries, landlocked
countries and coastal African States.

01/08/2023

developing

therefore vote for draft resolution A/77/L.82 without
any amendment and urge all other States to do same.

For the BBNJ Agreement to have real impact on
the ocean, people and the planet, its implementation
must be effective, equitable and fair. The adoption of
draft resolution A/77/L.82 is an important step in that
regard. We accept the view that the draft resolution is
procedural and also pertains to the implementation and
the operationalization of the BBNJ Agreement.

Mr. Madeleine (Seychelles): Seychelles aligns
itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the
Alliance of Small Island States.

My delegation has also taken note of proposal for
amendment contained in document A/77/L.83 submitted
by the Russian Federation. I thank the Legal Adviser
for the introduction of the amendment. During the
negotiations, the Russian Federation clearly expressed
its approach and vision for the BBNJ Agreement
and the important need to balance the objectives of
conservation and sustainable use. The engagement with
the delegation of the Russian Federation during the
negotiations proved valuable in ensuring the attainment
of the progress towards unprecedented fairness and
equity in the BBNJ Agreement.
The important issues of financing the implementation
of the BBNJ Agreement and potential circularity of the
BBNJ Agreement-related economy even for the adoption
of conservation measures were underscored. Those are
important considerations even at this stage for which
due account must be taken in the ratification movement,
including the availability of funds to developing States
and non-State actors to promote the understanding and
ratification the BBNJ Agreement.
The delegation of Sierra Leone is of the firm view
that a critical balance was struck in the negotiations. As
we undertake the relevant work to operationalize many
of the provisions in the BBNJ Agreement, there must
be concerted efforts to ensure regional balance in the
signing of the Agreement and regional representation to
safeguard the balance struck and for greater legitimacy
in its implementation.
In noting the important work ahead, the delegation
of Sierra Leone believes draft resolution A/77/L.82
submitted by the delegation of Singapore represents the
fair position on the relevant procedural issues and the
views expressed in the intergovernmental conference
on an international legally binding instrument under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction. We will
8/13

Seychelles would first like to thank the President of
the intergovernmental conference on an international
legally binding instrument under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction (BBNJ), Mrs. Rena
Lee, and her team for their exemplary work in steering
us through the delicate and important process which
has now brought us to adopting this procedural draft
resolution A/77/L.82 in the General Assembly. The
culmination of the process in the successful adoption of
the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable
Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond
National Jurisdiction is a testament not only to her
diligence but also to the efforts and contributions of all
Member States, the Secretariat, the Division for Ocean
Affairs and the Law of the Sea, intergovernmental
organizations, civil society organizations and academia.
That we are here today to adopt the draft resolution
on the treaty, which was itself adopted by consensus,
shows solidarity and widespread commitment to
protecting our oceans and the sustainable use of the
resources contained within them. This is more than a
symbolic triumph for multilateralism. It should serve as
a practical model for how we may address present and
future challenges collectively.
Seychelles understands the importance of the
treaty as not only a driver for conservation objectives
but also as a legal framework that will be critical to
our survival as small islands and large ocean States.
Without marine resources, we would cease to exist.
That is why Seychelles achieved the 30 by 30 ocean
protection target 10 years early and continues to
advocate for the upscaling of the blue economy. We
have the political will to implement the objectives set
out within the BBNJ Agreement and reaffirm the rule
of law in ocean governance.
The special circumstances of small island
developing States (SIDS) must be acknowledged and
understood as hurdles for our ability to implement this
treaty, particularly as we are biodiversity hotspots that
carry a high conservation burden. SIDS, least developed
23-22646

01/08/2023

countries and the global South require adequate and
reliable means of implementation to ensure that we are
not disproportionately affected by the climate crisis.
We are on the front lines of global conservation
efforts. The governance of this treaty must ensure
fair and equitable representation whereby we, who
are entirely reliant on the ocean for our sustainable
development, are not left on the sidelines. SIDS and
the global South must have equitable representation in
forthcoming committees to help steer efforts away from
the current path of ocean degradation to one of effective
ocean stewardship and prosperity. Moreover, SIDS
must have access to the capacity-building and transfer
of marine technology programmes, as well as adequate
and reliable finance. That will enable us to meet our
internal obligations and enhance our capacities in the
fields of science and research.
The adoption of the treaty and the draft resolution
is a stepping stone in this process. Seychelles has
every faith that the Secretary-General and the interim
secretariat will discharge their duties mandated in the
Agreement with diligence.
Seychelles will vote in favour of the draft resolution,
as submitted by the delegation of Singapore.
Mr. Webson (Antigua and Barbuda): I align
our national statement with that presented by the
representative of Belize on behalf of the Caribbean
Community and that presented by the representative of
Samoa on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States.
Antigua and Barbuda welcomes draft resolution
A/77/L.82 and will vote in support of the original text
submitted by Singapore. In that regard, we thank and
congratulate Singapore, the Singapore delegation for
the very hard work leading us through this turbulent
process and the able leadership of Ambassador Lee.
For my delegation, it is a priority to make
arrangements to prepare for the entry into force through
the Secretary-General and the Division for Ocean
Affairs and the Law of the Sea. We have waited too long.
We have waited long enough. The Agreement under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the
Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological
Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction has
been and will be adopted, we hope, and it is time to
swiftly shift towards implementation as soon as we
have achieved the threshold of the entry into force.
That is why we strongly support the proposal to include

A/77/PV.95

considerations for the international legally binding
instrument under the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use
of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national
jurisdiction (BBNJ) under the annual resolution on
oceans and the law of the sea in the Sixth Committee.
We also see the provisions for the relevant home for
discussions and developments regarding the BBNJ
Agreement’s adoption for ratification status, which we
believe to be essential. We strongly support the draft
resolution as originally presented by Singapore and
urge all Member States to vote in support of it.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/77/L.82 and draft amendment A/77/L.83.
In accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure,
before we proceed to take a decision on draft resolution
A/77/L.82 the Assembly shall first take a decision on
draft amendment A/77/L.83.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Belarus, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Syrian
Arab Republic
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Kiribati, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands (Kingdom of the), New Zealand,
Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of

23-226469/13

A/77/PV.95

Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Bahrain, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Madagascar, Mali, Nigeria, Oman, Saudi
Arabia, Togo, Tunisia, Türkiye, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Yemen, Zambia
Draft amendment A/77/L.83 was rejected by 119
votes to 4, with 24 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Zambia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended not to
participate.]
The President: Since draft amendment A/77/L.83
has not been adopted, we shall now proceed to take a
decision on draft resolution A/77/L.82. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium,
Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
10/13

01/08/2023

Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands
(Kingdom of the), New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Türkiye, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against:
Russian Federation, Syrian Arab Republic
Abstaining:
None
Draft resolution A/77/L.82 was adopted by 150
votes to 2 (resolution 77/321).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the voting, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Guerra Sansonetti (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, during the seventy-first plenary meeting
of the resumed fifth session of the Intergovernmental
Conference on an international legally binding
instrument under the United Nations Convention on
the Law of Sea on the conservation and sustainable use
of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national
jurisdiction, joined the consensus that enabled the
adoption of that agreement without a vote.
However, our participation in today’s meeting,
during which resolution 77/321, concerning the
instrument, has been adopted, and in which our
delegation has once again demonstrated flexibility
and a constructive spirit, cannot and should not be
interpreted as a modification of our traditional position
23-22646

01/08/2023

on the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
to which Venezuela is not a party, for reasons that have
been repeatedly stated in different forums. The State of
Venezuela is therefore not bound by norms that do not
apply to it except those that it has expressly recognized,
or will recognize in the future, by incorporating them
into its national legislation, while taking into account
the fact that the reasons that have prevented the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela from becoming party
to such instruments are still pending. The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela hopes that more meaningful
action will be taken to meet the goal of ensuring the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction through
greater international cooperation and coordination for
the benefit of all humankind.
Lastly, we would like to state for the record that
our comments are not exhaustive, and that we therefore
reserve the right to make future comments on the
adopted Agreement.
Mr. Ghorbanpour Najafabadi (Islamic Republic
of Iran): My delegation would like to express its
gratitude for all her tireless efforts to Ms. Rena Lee
of Singapore, President of the Intergovernmental
Conference on a legally binding instrument under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea for the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction, as well
as to the delegation of Singapore to the United Nations,
for introducing resolution 77/321.
My delegation joined the processes for the adoption
of both the Agreement and the resolution in a spirit of
constructive engagement and with the understanding
that bearing in mind article 5, paragraph 3, of the
Agreement under the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable
Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond
National Jurisdiction, joining the processes for the
adoption of those instruments does not prejudice the
legal status of non-parties to the Convention, including
my Government.
Ms. Solano Ramírez (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): With regard to resolution 77/321, which
we have just adopted, I have the honour to make
the following explanation of vote on behalf of the
delegations of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, the
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay

A/77/PV.95

and my own country, Colombia, members of the core
Latin American group (CLAM).
At the outset, our delegations would like to express
their sincere appreciation to delegation of Singapore
for its efforts as coordinator of the resolution that we
have just adopted and for its leadership, not only in
relation to the resolution, but throughout the process of
negotiating an international legally binding instrument
under the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of the
marine biological diversity of areas beyond national
jurisdiction (BBNJ).
As the countries that make up CLAM, we
participated in the entire negotiation process, especially
the adoption of the resolution, in a constructive spirit
and with a serious interest in the protection of the ocean
and its resources, with a view to an equitable agreement
focused on the conservation and sustainable use of
marine biodiversity in the high seas. We in the CLAM
delegations are proud of our contribution throughout
the entire negotiation process to reaching a consensus
and showing the necessary flexibility. Our delegations
believe that the instrument will have a positive impact
on ocean governance for present and future generations.
We are therefore pleased with the resolution’s language
welcoming the adoption of the Agreement under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the
Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological
Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction, as
well as all of its operative paragraphs, which we believe
are important.
However, we are aware that the most difficult stage
has only just begun. That is why we believe that now
that the resolution has been adopted, it is vital to lay
the foundations so that until the Agreement enters
into force, the process is inclusive and as simple as
possible, while showing us a clear path that facilitates
the ratification process at the domestic level in terms of
the perspectives and the work of each of our delegations
here in New York. That is why we voted in favour of
including language in the resolution inviting States
and regional economic integration organizations to
consider signing, ratifying, approving and accepting
the agreement as soon as possible to enable its swift
entry into force.
We also believe that it is extremely important to
include on the provisional agenda of the seventy-eighth
session of the General Assembly, under the item “Oceans

23-2264611/13

A/77/PV.95

01/08/2023

and the law of the sea”, a sub-item entitled “Agreement
under the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of
Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National
Jurisdiction”, so that we can focus our discussions
on truly facilitating the process until the Agreement
enters into force. We urge all States to participate
constructively in discussions under the new sub-item
of the agenda in order to adopt the decisions that will
be key to the speedy implementation of the Agreement.

The President: We have heard the last speaker
in explanation of vote after the voting. The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 72.

Lastly, in the light of the constructive spirit that
guides our countries concerning issues related to
environmental issues and the law of the sea, we would
like to reiterate our firm commitment to the BBNJ
instrument and its future entry into force. We are
pleased with the adoption of this important resolution,
which will enable us to continue working together with
other nations to address the challenges facing our seas
and oceans.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines to introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.90.

Mrs. Hackman (Ghana): My delegation would
like to thank Singapore for its leadership in proposing
resolution 77/321.
Ghana welcomes the adoption of the resolution
as a further and necessary measure to realizing our
collective commitment to the sustainable management
of ocean resources. The Agreement under the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the
Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological
Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction stands
today as a multilateral feat and an expression of our
shared commitment to the ocean as a common good.
It also represents for us the further development
of international law, building on the fundamental
principles and values outlined in the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea.
We support the interim arrangement in the
Agreement and the enabling provisions under the
resolution just adopted. In that regard, we encourage
Member States to sustain the momentum leading
up to the adoption of the agreement in June and add
our voice to call on all Member States and regional
economic integration organizations to sign and ratify
the Agreement, with a view to enabling its speedy entry
into force. Within the context of the Group of African
States, Ghana was a keen participant in the negotiations
on the Agreement and will continue to work for its
signature and ratification accordingly.
12/13

Agenda item 127 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
Draft resolution (A/77/L.90)

Mr. Lagdameo (Philippines): On behalf of a core
group of countries that includes Australia, Egypt,
Guatemala, Hungary, Thailand and my own country,
the Philippines, I have the honour to introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.90 to commemorate next year
as the 125th anniversary of the Permanent Court
of Arbitration.
The year 2024 marks an important milestone in
the Court’s service to the international community
through the pursuit of peace and justice through law.
In its 125 years, the Court has successfully adapted
to the international community’s changing needs in
the area of dispute resolution. Originally intended as
a mechanism for the settlement of disputes between
States, the Court has evolved into a robust, modern
international dispute-settlement institution with one of
the heaviest caseloads of all the international courts.
The zero draft of the draft resolution was first
circulated on 22 June via a letter from the core group
to all States Members of the United Nations, and it
is also published as an official document on the
e-deleGATE portal as document A/77/L.90. The text
of the draft resolution is based on that shepherded by
the Philippine Embassy in The Hague and endorsed by
the Administrative Council of the Court, with further
revisions based on views expressed by States at the
informal consultations on 26 June in New York and
in subsequent bilateral discussions, which continued
until 10 July.
The draft resolution consists of eight preambular
and five operative paragraphs. Among other things,
the preambular paragraphs reaffirm the shared mission
between the Court and the United Nations in the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
peaceful settlement of international disputes and the
23-22646

01/08/2023

progressive development of international law; recall
the General Assembly’s invitation to the Court to
participate in its sessions and work in the capacity of
observer and note with appreciation the Court’s support
and participation in the work of organizations of the
United Nations system. The preambular paragraphs
further recognize the Court’s important contribution
to the peaceful settlement of disputes and reaffirm the
1982 Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement
of International Disputes; its evolution into a modern,
multifaceted arbitral institution in response to the
dispute resolution needs of the international community
and its efforts to make its dispute resolution services
more widely accessible.
The operative paragraphs welcome the 125th
anniversary of the establishment of the Court;
encourage Member States to make use of the Court’s
services and support its activities and programmes;
encourage Member States to accede to the 1899
and 1907 Conventions for the Pacific Settlement of
International Disputes, as appropriate; invite Member
States and organizations of the United Nations system
to commemorate the Court’s 125th anniversary; and
request the Secretary-General to bring the resolution to
the attention of Member States, the organizations of the
United Nations system and all relevant stakeholders.
We hope that everyone will join us in the joint
effort to commemorate the Court. The core group
would like to express its deep appreciation to the
delegations that have expressed support for the draft
resolution, including through the sponsorship of the

A/77/PV.95

draft resolution by, as of this reading, 116 Member
States via the e-deleGATE portal.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/77/L.90.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations already listed in the
document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/77/L.90: Angola,
Barbados, Belarus, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Fiji,
Gabon, the Gambia, Georgia, Ghana, Jordan, Kenya,
Malaysia, the Maldives, Mongolia, Myanmar, Namibia,
Pakistan, Palau, Sierra Leone, the State of Palestine,
Togo, Turkmenistan, Yemen and Zimbabwe.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/77/L.90, entitled
“Commemoration of the 125th anniversary of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.90?
Draft resolution A/77/L.90
(resolution 77/322).

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 127.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

23-2264613/13
