United Nations

A/RES/56/128

General Assembly

Distr.: General
30 January 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 112

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/56/576)]

56/128. Traditional or customary practices affecting the health of
women and girls
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 54/133 of 17 December 1999 and its other relevant
resolutions and decisions, and bearing in mind those of the Economic and Social
Council, the Commission on Human Rights and the Subcommission on the
Promotion and Protection of Human Rights,
Taking note of the reports of the Special Rapporteur of the Subcommission on
the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights on traditional practices affecting the
health of women and the girl child 1 and of the Special Rapporteur of the
Commission on Human Rights on violence against women, its causes and
consequences, 2
Reaffirming the obligation of all States to promote and protect human rights
and fundamental freedoms as stated in the Charter of the United Nations, and
emphasizing the obligations contained in human rights instruments, in particular
articles 5 and 12 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, 3 article 24 of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child 4 and article 12 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, 5
Bearing in mind article 2 (a) of the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence
against Women, 6 and article 5, paragraph 5, of the Declaration on the Elimination of
All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief, 7
Recalling the provisions pertaining to traditional or customary practices
affecting the health of women and girls contained in the outcome of the World
_______________
1

E/CN.4/Sub.2/2001/27.
E/CN.4/2001/73 and Add.1 and 2.
3
Resolution 34/180, annex.
4
Resolution 44/25, annex.
5
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
6
See resolution 48/104.
7
See resolution 36/55.
2

01 48285

A/RES/56/128

Conference on Human Rights, 8 the International Conference on Population and
Development, 9 the Fourth World Conference on Women 10 and the twenty-first, 11
twenty-third 12 and twenty-sixth 13 special sessions of the General Assembly,
Recalling also general recommendation 14 concerning female circumcision
adopted by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women at
its ninth session, 14 paragraphs 11, 20 and 24 (l) of general recommendation 19
concerning violence against women adopted by the Committee at its eleventh
session, 15 paragraphs 15 (d) and 18 of general recommendation 24 concerning
article 12 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women on women and health adopted by the Committee at its twentieth
session, 16 and taking note of paragraphs 21, 35 and 51 of general comment
No. 14 (2000) concerning article 12 of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights adopted by the Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights at its twenty-second session, 17
Reaffirming that harmful traditional or customary practices, including female
genital mutilation, constitute a serious threat to the health of women and girls, and
may have fatal consequences,
Expressing concern at the continuing large-scale existence of these practices,
Reaffirming that such harmful traditional or customary practices constitute a
definite form of violence against women and girls and a serious violation of their
human rights,
Emphasizing that the elimination of harmful traditional or customary practices
will contribute to reducing the vulnerability of women and girls to human
immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) and
other sexually transmitted infections,
Stressing that the elimination of such practices requires greater efforts and
commitment from Governments, the international community and civil society,
including non-governmental and community-based organizations, and that
fundamental changes in societal attitudes are required,
Noting with appreciation the work done in the context of the Organization of
African Unity to prepare a draft protocol to the African Charter on Human and
Peoples’ Rights 18 on the rights of women in Africa,

_______________
8

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
10
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
11
Resolution S-21/2, annex.
12
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
13
Resolution S-26/2, annex.
14
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 38 and corrigendum
(A/45/38 and Corr.1), chap. IV, para. 438.
15
Ibid., Forty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/47/38), chap. I.
16
Ibid., Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/54/38/Rev.1), part one, chap. I, sect. A.
17
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2001, Supplement No. 2 (E/2001/22), annex IV.
18
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1520, No. 26363.
9

2

A/RES/56/128

Welcoming the call for the elimination of all harmful traditional practices
which are detrimental to girls’ and women’s rights and health made by the
Pan-African Forum on the Future of Children, held in Cairo from 28 to 31 May
2001, 19
1.

Welcomes:

(a) The report of the Secretary-General, 20 which provides encouraging
examples of national and international developments;
(b) The efforts undertaken by United Nations bodies, programmes and
organizations, including the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations
Population Fund, the World Health Organization, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Development Fund for
Women and the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, to address the issue
of traditional or customary practices affecting the health of women and girls, and
encourages them to continue to coordinate their efforts;
(c) The work carried out by the Special Ambassador for the Elimination of
Female Genital Mutilation of the United Nations Population Fund and her
continuing contribution to the campaign to eliminate female genital mutilation;
(d) The work carried out by the Inter-African Committee on Traditional
Practices Affecting the Health of Women and Children and other non-governmental
and community organizations, including women’s organizations, in raising
awareness of the harmful effects of such practices, in particular of female genital
mutilation;
(e) The fact that the elimination of harmful traditional or customary
practices will be considered during the special session of the General Assembly on
children;
2.
Emphasizes the need for technical and financial assistance to those
developing countries working to achieve the elimination of traditional or customary
practices affecting the health of women and girls from United Nations funds and
programmes, international and regional financial institutions and bilateral and
multilateral donors, as well as the need for assistance to non-governmental
organizations and community-based groups active in this field from the international
community;
3.

Calls upon all States:

(a) To ratify or accede to, if they have not yet done so, the relevant human
rights treaties, in particular the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women3 and the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 4 to
consider signing and ratifying or acceding to the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 21 and
to respect and implement fully their obligations under any such treaties to which
they are parties;

_______________
19

See A/S-27/4, annex, para. 32 (g).
A/56/316.
21
Resolution 54/4, annex.
20

3

A/RES/56/128

(b) To implement the international commitments made at relevant major
United Nations conferences and special sessions and summit meetings of the
General Assembly held since 1990 and their follow-up processes;
(c) To collect and disseminate basic data about the occurrence of traditional
or customary practices affecting the health of women and girls, including female
genital mutilation;
(d) To develop, adopt and implement national legislation, policies, plans and
programmes that prohibit traditional or customary practices affecting the health of
women and girls, including female genital mutilation, and to prosecute the
perpetrators of such practices;
(e) To establish, if they have not done so, a concrete national mechanism for
the implementation and monitoring of relevant legislation, law enforcement and
national policies;
(f) To establish or strengthen support services to respond to the needs of
victims by, inter alia, developing comprehensive and accessible sexual and
reproductive health services and by providing training to health-care providers at all
levels on the harmful health consequences of such practices;
(g) To address specifically in the training of health and other relevant
personnel traditional or customary practices affecting the health of women and girls,
also addressing the increased vulnerability of women and girls to HIV/AIDS and
other sexually transmitted infections due to such practices;
(h) To take all necessary measures to empower women and strengthen their
economic independence and protect and promote the full enjoyment of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms in order to allow women and girls better to protect
themselves from, inter alia, traditional or customary practices affecting the health of
women and girls;
(i) To intensify efforts to raise awareness of and to mobilize international
and national public opinion concerning the harmful effects of traditional or
customary practices affecting the health of women and girls, including female
genital mutilation, inter alia, by involving public opinion leaders, educators,
religious leaders, chiefs, traditional leaders, medical practitioners, teachers,
women’s health and family planning organizations, social workers, childcare
agencies, relevant non-governmental organizations, the arts and the media in
awareness-raising campaigns, in order to achieve the total elimination of those
practices;
(j) To address traditional or customary practices affecting the health of
women and girls in education curricula, as appropriate;
(k) To promote men’s understanding of their roles and responsibilities with
regard to promoting the elimination of harmful practices, such as female genital
mutilation;
(l) To continue to take specific measures to increase the capacity of
communities, including immigrant and refugee communities, in which female
genital mutilation is practised, to engage in activities aimed at preventing and
eliminating such practices;
(m) To explore, through consultations with communities and religious and
cultural groups and their leaders, alternatives to harmful traditional or customary
practices, in particular where those practices form part of a ritual ceremony or rite
4

A/RES/56/128

of passage, as well as through alternative training and education possibilities for
traditional practitioners;
(n) To cooperate closely with the Special Rapporteur of the Subcommission
on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights on traditional practices affecting
the health of women and the girl child, in particular by supplying all necessary
information requested by her and by giving serious consideration to inviting her to
visit their countries;
(o) To cooperate closely with relevant specialized agencies and United
Nations funds and programmes, as well as with regional intergovernmental
organizations, as appropriate, and relevant community and non-governmental
organizations, including women’s organizations, in a joint effort to eradicate
traditional or customary practices affecting the health of women and girls;
(p) To include in their reports to the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women, the Committee on the Rights of the Child and other
relevant treaty bodies specific information on measures taken to eliminate
traditional or customary practices affecting the health of women and girls, including
female genital mutilation, and to prosecute the perpetrators of such practices;
4.

Invites:

(a) Relevant specialized agencies, United Nations bodies, regional
intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations to exchange
information on the subject of the present resolution, and encourages the exchange of
such information between non-governmental organizations active in this field and
the bodies monitoring the implementation of relevant human rights treaties;
(b) The Commission on the Status of Women to address this subject at its
forty-seventh session under the priority theme “Women’s human rights and
elimination of all forms of violence against women and girls as defined in the
Beijing Platform for Action and the outcome document of the twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly”;
(c) Governments, organizations and individuals that are in a position to do so
to contribute to the trust fund that supports the work of the Special Ambassador for the
Elimination of Female Genital Mutilation of the United Nations Population Fund;
5.

Requests the Secretary-General:

(a) To continue to make his report available to relevant meetings within the
United Nations system;
(b) To report to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session on the
implementation of the present resolution, with a special focus on recent national and
international developments, including examples of national best practices and
international cooperation.
88th plenary meeting
19 December 2001

5
