C. LETTER FROM THE ACTING CHAIRMAN OF THE
DELEGATION OF GREECE TO THE SECRETARYGENERAL DATED 3 DECEMBER 1946, AND ENCLOSED MEMORANDUM CONCERNING THE SITUATION IN NORTHERN GREECE 1 0

C. LETTRE DU PRESIDENT PAR INTERIM DE LA
DELEGATION DE GRECE AU SECRETAIRE GENERAL, EN DATE DU 3 DECEMBRE 1946, AVEC UN
MEMORANDUM RELATIF A LA SITUATION EXISTANT DANS LE NORD DE LA GRECEl0

12 (1946). Resolution of 10 December 1946

12 (1946). Resolution du 10 decemhre 1946

The Security Council
Resolves that:
1. The representatives of Greece and Yugoslavia
are invited to participate in the discussion without
vote;
2. The representatives of Albania and Bulgaria are
invited to enable the Security Council to hear such
declarations as they may wish to make;
3. Should the Security Council find at a later
stage that the matter under consideration is a dispute,
the representatives of Albania and Bulgaria will be
invited to participate in the discussion without vote.

Le Conseil de sccurite
Decide que:
1. Les representants de la Grece et de la Y ougoslavie sont invites a participer a la discussion, sans droit
de vote;
2. Les representants de l' Albanie et de la Bulgarie
sont invites a faire entendre au Conseil de securite Jes
declarations qu'ils desireraient faire;
3. Si, par la suite, le Conseil de securite estime que
la question a l'etude constitue un diffe.rend, Jes representants de l'Albanie et de la Bulgarie seront invites
a participer a la discussion, sans droit de vote.

Adopted at the 82nd meetin,q_ll

Adoptee a la 82eme scanrtll_

Decision

Decision

At its 84th meeting, on 16 December 1946, the
Conncil decided to invite the representatives of Albania
and Bulgaria to participate, withont vote, in the remainder of the discussion of the question, provided
that they accepted. on behalf of their Governments, for
the purposes of the c;1se. the obligations of pacific
settlement provided in the Charter.

A sa 84eme seance, le 16 decembre 1946, le Conseil
a decide d'inviter Jes representants de I' Albanie et de
la Bulgarie a participer, sans droit de vote, au reste de
la discussion de la question, sous .reserve qu'ils acceptent, au nom de leurs gouvernements, aux fins de la
cause, Jes obligations de reglement pacifique prevues
par la Chart e.

15 (1946). Resolution of 19 December 1946
[S/3391

15 (1946). Resolution du 19 decembre 1946
[S/339]

Whereas there have been presented to the Security
Council oral and written statements by the Greek,
Yugoslav. Albanian ,md Bnlgarian Governments relating to disturbe<l con<litions in northern Greece along
the frontier between Greece on the one hand and
Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia on the other, which
conditions. in the opinion of the Council, should be
investiv.ated before the Council attempts to reach any
conclusions regarding the issues involved,

C onsiderant que des exposes oraux et ecrits ont ete
presentes au Conseil de securite par les Gouvernements
grec, yougoslave, albanais et bulgare, concernant la
situation troublee en Grece septentrionale le long de la
frontie~e entre la Grece, d'une part, et I' Albanie, la
Bulgane et la Yougoslav.ie, d'autre part, situation qui,
clans !'opinion du Conseil de securite devrait faire
l'objet d'une enquete, avant que le C~nseil ne ,tente
d'arriver a une conclusion, quelle qu'elle soit sur Jes
faits en question,
'
Le Conseil de securite
Decide:

The Security Council
Resolves:
That the Security Council under Article 34 of the
Charter establish a Commission of Investigation to ascertain the facts relating to the alleged border violations
along the frontier between Greece on the one hand
and 'Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia on the other;
That the Commission be composed of a representative
of each of the members of the Security Council as it
will be constituted in 1947 ;

Que, conformement a l' Article 34 de la Charte une
Commission d'enquete sera instituee afin de verifi;r Jes
£~its relatifs aux violations de frontiere qui auraient eu
l!eu le l~mg de la frontiere entre la Grece, d'une part, et
l Albame, la Bulgarie et la Yougoslavie, d'autre part;
Que la Commission sera composee d'un representant
de chacun des membres du ·Conseil de securite tel qu'il
sera constitue en 1947;
10 Ibid.,

Supplement No. 10, annex 16.
1 and 2 were adopted unanimously; paragraph 3 was adopted "by a majority vote". No vote was taken
on the draft resolution as a whole.
10 Ibid.,

Supplement No 10, annexe 16.
Les paragraphes 1 et 2 ont ete adoptes a l'unanimite · le
paragraphe 3 a ete adopte "a la majorite des voix". Ii 'n'y
a pas eu de vote sur !'ensemble du projet de resolution.
11

11 Paragraphs

6
