UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS
kJhJLbRiARy

THIRTIETH

YEAR

MEETING:

MAY 21884
29 SEPTEMBER

1975

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1843) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .

1

Letter dated 19 September 1975 from the President of the General Assembly
to the President of the Security Council (S/l 1826) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1843

Symbols,ofYnited ,Nations documents are composed of capital letters com.$$;)njin%d $$tbxi$urec Mantion of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
/ Nalions document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ , , ,) are normally published in
quarterly Supplcmnts
of the Offieicrl Rccortls of the Swwlty
Corrneil, The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolution
md
Decisions. CJ~ the Swrrrity
Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1965,became fully operative
on that date.

1843rd MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,
President:

Mr. Moulaye

EL HASSEN

29 September

(Mauritania).

2.. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom):
I shall be
brief, since my delegation addressed the Council on
this issue only las month [1834th and 1835th meetings]
and the views of my Government
on the three
requests for admission which were on the provisional
agenda are, I think, well known. My Government has
diplomatic relations with both the Government of the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam.
We voted
for their admission to the United Nations at our
earlier meeting [183&h meeting] and we shall do so
again. We also voted in the General Assembly in
support of resolution
3366 (XXX),
sponsored by
Algeria and others, which we are now considering.

Present:
The representatives
of the following
States: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China,
Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan,
Mauritania, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
United
Republic
of Cameroon,
United
Republic of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/l843)

of the agenda

Letter dated 19 September 1975 from the President
of the General Assembly to the President of the
.Security Council (S/l 1826)
The meeting

3. My Government
wishes to see the United
Nations developing into a truly representative world
organization
in which all countries can participate
without let or hindrance and in which the views of
all can be heard. It is in that belief that we have
supported and’ will continue to support the two
Vietnamese applications for admission to the Organization. It is also for that reason that we deplore the
decision taken once again in the Council not even
to consider the new application for admission from
the Republic of Korea. It is not the view of my
Government
only that the Republic
of Korea is
fully qualified for membership of the United Nations;
resolutions of the General Assembly have repeatedly
affirmed this and, as the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Korea has pointed out in his letter of 21 September [S/11828, annex], his country
is an active member of -almost all the specialized
agencies and other United Nations bodies. It has
diplomatic
relations with over 90 Members of the
United Nations.

was called to order at 11.20 a.m.
Adoption

1975, at 10.30 a.m.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 19 September 1975 from the President
of the General Assembly to the President of the
Security Council (S/11826)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with the decision of the Council
[1842nd meeting]
to invite the representatives
of
Algeria, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Dahomey, the German Democratic
Republic, Hungary, India, Madagascar, Mongolia, Poland, Senegal,
Sri Lanka and Yugoslavia
to participate
in the
discussion without the right to vote, under the terms
of Article 31 of the Charter and the relevant provisions of the provisional rules of procedure, I invite
those representatives
to take the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

4. Admission
and approval are not synonymous.
Indeed, if they were, the Organization
could not
survive. It is precisely those States of which we
do not approve that have-the right to belong to the
United Nations. Otherwise it becomes an unrepresentative club of like-minded
nations which, however
convenient that might be for those inside it, could
hardly be said to fulfil the universal aim of the
Charter.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Rahal
(Algeria), Mr. Ghelev (Bulgaria),
Mr. Sarin Chhak
(Cambodia),
Mr. Alarcdn
(Cuba), Mr. Vejvoda
(Czechoslovakia),
Mr. Adjibade (Dahomey), Mr. Florin (German
Democratic
Republic),
Mr. Hollai
(Hungary),
Mr. Jaipal
(India),
Mr. Rabetafika
Puntsagnorov
(Mongolia),
(Madagascar),
Mr.
Mr. Jaroszek (Poland), Mr. Fall (Senegal), Mr. Amerasinghe (Sri Lanka) and Mr. Petri6 (Yugoslavia)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Counct? chamber.

5. Where, then, do we go now on the Korean
application and why has it again been excluded from
the agenda? The problems of that unhappy peninsula
are manifold and will not be solved by admission
to the United Nations, nor will they be solved or
1

.’

brought nearer to solution by exclusion from the
United Nations. It cannot be’seriously argued that a
desire for reunification
is ,a good ground in itself for
non-admission.
Were that so, the two Viet-Nams
should be treated in the same way as Korea has
been, since reunification
was said to be one of their
major objectives.
6. The+failure of the Security Council even to consider Korea is lamentable.
I must say that my
country regards the hypocrisy of the manmuvres
which have kept this item off the agenda with great
concern and with not a little ‘c,ontempt.
7. The PRESIDENT
(interprdation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
8. Mr. PETRIC (Yugoslavia):‘Mr.
President, let me
first express to you and to the members of the
Council my delegation’s appreciation of your having
acted promptly on our request to address the Council on the matter before it. At the same time, may
I congratulate.you
on discharging the high responsibilities of President of the Council for the month .of
September. I do so with particular pleasure, conscious of the friendly and warm relations prevailing
between our two non-alignedcountries.
9. My delegation has already, and recently, stated
its views on the right of the Republic
of South
Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
to be admitted to the United Nations, both in the
Security Council [1835th meeting] and in the General
Assembly.’
What makes this present consideration
of this item special is that it comes after the General
Assembly’s vote affirming in resolution 3366 (XXX)
that the two Vietnamese States should be admitted
to the Organization
and that the’ Council .should
reconsider the matter immediately
and favourably.
No one can and no one should try to obstruct
their admission after such a ,decision by the only
major organ of the United Nations in which all
Member States are represented. In this connexion,
we have three main considerations in mind.
10. First, there has never before-in the history of
the Organization
been such a majority, without any
direct formal opposition by negative votes, .in favour
of the admission of any applicant as that expressed
in the momentous
vote of 123 in favour, none
against and only 9 abstentions. There could hardly
be a more compelling
expression of the categorical
will of .the collective membership of the community
of nations .as a whole,- enjoining
those who are
behaving most unfairly to desist from frustrating the
general will. We have never before had a situation
of one veto in the Security Council opposed to
123 affirmative
votes in the General Assembly,
including the votes of four of the permanent members of the Security Council. Indeed, the United

States is assuming a grave responsibility in doing that,
considering all the implications ,of such an ill-advised
deed. It is bad enough when a veto frustrates the
action of the Council and its overwhelming
majority
in favour of the admission of a new Member. But
it is infinitely worse and graver to do so after the
General Assembly has made the will of its absolute
majority formally known..
11. Secondly, as we were also eloquently reminded
by the representative of Mexico, Mr. Garcia Robles,
in his statement in the General Assembly ‘on the
19th of This month,’ the use of the veto to prevent
the admission of a State to the United Nations not
only goes directly against the spirit of the Charter
and the letter of ,the most specific advisory opinion
of the International
Court of Justice,z but also
directly flies in the face of the obligations
specifically and formally
assumed by the permanent
members .in their separate quadripartite
statement
of 8 June 1945, at San Francisco,3not to’use the veto
to impede the action of the Council, and certainly
not in a matter such as the ‘one before us today.
12. Thirdly, riding roughshod over the express will
of the General Assembly is still more grave and
unacceptable,
as Article 4 of, the Charter clearly
states that the General Assembly is the principal
organ which makes decisions about admissions,
while the Security. Council makes recommendations.
Thus, we have a situation ,of the veto being applied
by the United States, although the only organ that
makes decisions on’the matter has asked the Council
to make .a positive recommendation.
13. :It should be ‘recalled
the Charter states clearly:

here that Article

10 of

“The
General
Assembly
may discuss any
questions or any matters within the scope of .the
present Charter or relating to the powers and
functions of any organs provided for in the present
,Charter, and, except as provided in Article 12,
may make recommendations
to the ‘Members of
the United Nations or to the Security Council
,or to both.”
One also recalls that, when it was thought in the past’
that the Security Couneil was unduly prevented from
exercising cits responsibilities,
recourse ‘was found
through such methods as the General Assembly
“Uniting for peace” resolution 377 (V), which enabled
the General Assembly to act instead.
14. Urgent and fervent appeals were addressed to
the United States by several delegations in the debate
on Friday [1842nd meeting] not to continue to oppose
the will of the majority,
the practically ‘unanimous
request of the membership
of both the General
Assembly and the Council. We all heard, on Friday,
the statement of the United States delegation
to
the apparent effect that it would use the veto again.

“..

Is there any hope of their reconsidering their decision? Is-‘it. still too much to ‘expect, even from the
strongest, to realize that, they are stronger, and
‘not weaker, when they show that they, too., are
able to be reasonable, that they:pay.attention
to what
123 nations are urging them to do constructively
:
in the interest of all?
15. Before concluding let me very briefly draw the
attention of the members to the fact that of late
an argument is being used to the effect that the
majority
wants to discriminate
between applicants
for membership on ideological grounds, that so-called
“one-party
States” are favoured, while those with
“parliamentary
democracies”
are rebuffed. This, of.
course, is completely
untrue. There is really no
need here to go into such questions as what is
democracy and what is not; who’ supports and has
the best relations with totalitarian dictatorships;
who
with the results of
was, and where, interfering
parliamentary,
multiparty elections to transform them
into the worst terrorist police States, and so forth.
It is sufficient to recall that it was the non-aligned
countries-and
this is one of their greatest contributions to the peace of the world-that
prevented
the alignment of the world into two opposing ideological and military blocs, and that there were times
when such a position of theirs was called “immoral”.
Should we really go into the record about who was
blocking the -admission of so many countries on
ideological grounds and when? Is it not really better
not to go into all that? We are not here to score
debating points and, in the organs of the United
Nations, where every utterance is instantly scrutinized by many equally able minds, nothing that is
not well-founded and serious can survive, or have
effect, for very long.
16. In concluding I should like, even at this late
hour, even after their statement last Friday, to ‘ask
the United States delegation, to reconsider and go along
with all of US, with the overwhelming
majority of
the Member States, and refrain from using the veto.
It is the living experience of all members here, that
none can for long oppose the Organization
as a
whole, without damaging not only the interests of
others, but its own interests as well.
17. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
jlorn
French):
The next speaker is the representative of Mongolia,
whom I now invite to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
18.

Mr. ‘PUNTSAGNOROV
(Mongolia)
(interpreRlrssicrn):
Allow me first of all, Mr. President, to congratulate you warmly on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and wish
you all success in conducting
the work of this
important body of the ‘United Nations; I should like
also to thank you and the members of the Security
Council for having given me an opportunity to speak
here and set forth the position of my delegation on
the item under distussion.

tcrtion from

19. ’ The question of the .admission of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republic of South
Viet-Nam
to membership
in the United Nations
takes on particular significance and acuity in view
of the veto cast by one of the permanent members
of the Security Council. That act of injustice towards
the two sovereign Vietnamese States stands out in
stark contrast against the background
of positive
changes which have occurred in contemporary
international relations. The emergence in the international
arena of those two States, which sprang from the
ruins of colonialism,
as a result of the ,victory. of
the revolutionary
national liberation movements is a
characteristic feature of our times. The Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South
Viet-Nam
are the embodiment
of thk vital force
and indefatigability
of that phenomenon.
Essentially,
the action which has been directed against the
legitimate
rights of the Vietnamese
people affects
the vital interests of all peoples who have embarked
on the course of national independence
and the
aspirations of all people.of goodwill.
20. It is impossible ‘to justify in any way the
discriminatory
treatment of a people which, in its
heroic struggle against’ colonialism
and imperialist
aggression, at the cost of untold sacrifices, has made
a tremendous contribution
to strengthening peace and
international
security and to the triumph
of the
great cause of national and social liberation.
The
historic victory of the Vietnamese people removed
one of the most dangerous hotbeds of local war
which was threatening
to turn into a genera1ize.d
conflict, and. to a large extent served to strengthen
international
detente. The liberation struggle of the
Vietnamese people, relying on the comprehensive
assistance of the socialist countries, was widely supported by progressive world public opinion. As is
well known, solidarity with the patriotic forces in
Viet-Nam took the form of a powerful international
anti-imperialist,
anti-militarist
movement.
2 1. The Vietnamese ‘States are playing an important
part in international
life,. particularly
in Asian
affairs. It is perfectly obvious that in the present
circumstances it is impossible to attempt to solve the
most important problems of ensuring the safety and
security of South-East Asia without the participation
of the two Vietnamese
States. The fact that the
immediate admission of the Democratic Republic of
Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South ‘Viet-Nam
to
membership in the United Nations has been demanded
by the overwhelming
majority
of Member
States
representing a wide range .of political systems shows
the extent to which the international
role and authority of the Vietnamese States has grown. The foreign
policy of the Democratic
Republic
of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Nam
is helping to
improve the international
atmosphere and in that
way to achieve the lofty aims of the United Nations.
22. It is not necessary to attempt to prove that
the Democratic Republic of ‘Viet-Nam and the Repub-

lie of South Viet-Nam fully meet the requirements
of Article 4, paragraph 1, of the Charter of the
United Nations.
The international
legal standing
of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the
Republic of South Viet-Nam
cannot be called into
question by anyone--even
by the State which cast a
veto, whose representative,
as the Council knows,
has frequently had occasion to state that he was
prepared to vote in favour of their admission to the
United Nations. However, that Power, in its deeds,
by artificially
linking the question of the admission
of the two Vietnamese States with the question of
South Korea, which is completely
irrelevant to it,
has attempted to prevent the .two Vietnamese States
from becoming Members of the United Nations-an
attempt that is inconsistent with the Charter of the
United Nations.

South Viet-Nam
to the United
Nations
would
undoubtedly promote the strengthening of the effectiveness of what is being done by the United Nations
by way of preserving peace and security and further
enhance the prestige of the Organization.
It is only
the United Nations that stands to lose by the absence
of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the
Republic of South Viet-Nam, since they are important
factors for strengthening peace and stability in Asia
and throughout
the entire world. Another veto, if
one is in fact cast, will hardly shake the unanimous
opinion held by the overwhelming
majority of States
Members of the United Nations regarding membership of the two Vietnamese States in the Organization.
26. It is our belief that the United Nations must
reflect the realities of the present day and the spirit
of the new changes that should prevail over recurrences of the cold war. The Mongolian
People’s
Republic insists that an end be put to those actions
which are aimed at placing obstacles and delays
on the path of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Nam
to membership in the United Nations.

23. The statements
of representatives
of many
States in the Security Council and in the General
Assembly have convincingly
exposed the invalidity
of that tendentious approach. How can one really
overlook the qualitative
difference in the situations
on the Indochinese
and Korean peninsulas? Whereas
the Vietnamese people has successfully exercised its
right to self-determination,
the vital national problems
of Korea have not yet been solved and the two
parts of the country have no single view regarding
membership
in the United Nations. In a situation
where the two .parties involved in Korea, on the
initiative of the Korean People’s Democratic Republic, have already started a dialogue and laid down
the basic principles of national reunification,
it is
the duty of the United Nations to do everything
in its power to promote the peaceful and democratic
unification of the country .and its formation into a
single State.

27. The workers of Mongolia are linked with the
people of Viet-Nam by close ties of brotherly friendship and close co-operation.
During the liberation
struggle waged by the Vietnamese
people, the
Mongolian
People’s Republic,
together with other
socialist countries, resolutely upheld the just cause of
Viet-Nam,
both morally and materially.
We are
convinced that the representatives of the Vietnamese
people, a people that has won general respect for
its dauntlessness, its nobility and its heroism, should
be admitted to the United Nations without any conditions or reservations being attached to that admission. Our delegation would appeal to the members
of the Security Council to be bold and objective
and vote unanimously
in favour of the admission
of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the
Republic of South Viet-Nam to the United Nations.
That is precisely the kind of decision expected of us
by progressive mankind.

24. We should also recall the consensus adopted
by the General Assembly on 28 November
1973 in
support of negotiations between the parties “so as to
expedite the independent
peaceful reunification
of
the country” .4 The Korean question has for many
years been the subject of discussion in the United
Nations and is now a separate item on the agenda of
the thirthieth session of the General Assembly. The
United Nations will still have to discuss such important
aspects of the Korean problem as the withdrawal
of foreign troops from South Korea in order to help
to bring about a positive outcome. It is known also
that the Seoul regime is making every attempt to
impede a peaceful settlement. In such circumstances,
any unilateral actions aimed essentially at splitting
the country would have a deleterious effect on the
situation in Korea and in the Far East.

28. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Czechoslovakia.
I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
29. Mr. VEJVODA
(Czechoslovakia):
Mr. President, may I first of all, through you, thank the
members of the Security Council for their decision
enabling me to appear before this forum. It is both
an honour and a pleasure for me to attend the
Council’s deliberations
under your wise direction.
Czechoslovakia
was one of the sponsors of the
draft resolution adopted as resolution 3366 (XXX)
by the General Assembly at its thirtieth session, in
which it recommended
the admission of both Vietnamese States to the United Nations and called upon
the Security Council to reconsider without delay its
decision of 11 August 1975. The agenda of the Secu-

25. The urgent tasks which the United Nations is now
facing in order to strengthen and further consolidate
international
detente make it absolutely essential that
the ‘two Vietnamese
States should be represented
in this world forum. The admission of the Democratic Republic of. Viet-Nam
and the Republic of
4
.

rity Council includes but one issue, delineated in
that General Assembly resolution of 19 September
1975 and offering the Council an opportunity
to
redress the injustice perpetrated on the Vietnamese
people.

of Viet-Nam from exercising their inalienable rights,
has not added to the authority particularly
of that
great Power. Is it surprising then that the world
public understands the United States veto as an
effort by that Power to continue its hostile policy
towards the Vietnamese people, at least by diplomatic
means, after having .failed to break their will for
independence even by the use of the most up-to-date
machinery of war?

30. The statement of 19 September
1975 by the
two Vietnamese Permanent Observers to the United
Nations says:

33. In trying to justify the step taken by his Govemment in the Security Council, the representative
of
the United States connected the admission of the
two Vietnamese
States with the admission of the
South Korean regime to the United Nations. The top
priority task in Korea is the question of the withdrawal from the southern part of the country of all
foreign troops which are stationed there unlawfully
under the United Nations flag. There is no doubt
that, upon the withdrawal of the foreign troops from
South Korea, the Korean people will take advantage
of their sovereignty to settle the question of their
unification
as well as the question of joining the
United Nations. The #attempt somehow to connect
the admission of the, two Vietnamese States to the
United Nations with the settlement of the Korean
issue-which,
by the way, will also be dealt with
in due time at the current session of the General
Assembly-rests
on a completely artifical structure.

“We hope that the United States Government
will ultimately adopt an attitude which accords with
the wish, thus clearly reaffirmed, of the peoples
of the world to see the Republic of South-VietNam and the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
take their rightful places within the international
community.
Such an attitude, which is simply in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
will undoubtedly
contribute to the normalization
of relations between the United States and VietNam on the basis of the Paris Agreement,
on
Viet-Nam,
and to the development
of friendly
relations between the two peoples.“s
3 1. Through the heroic struggle of the Vietnamese
people for freedom and independence,
a glorious
chapter has been inscribed in modern history. For
many years the people of Viet-Nam fought for the
total exercise of the right of the Vietnamese people
to live in independence, to enjoy peace and prosperity
as equals among nations. The Vietnamese
people,
who enjoyed the support of all the progressive forces
of the world, came out of this struggle victoriously.
At the present time there are two sovereign States
in the territory of Viet-Nam.
Both are States of free
Vietnamese people, whose courage and skill in their
fight for freedom were admired by the whole world.
It was therefore quite natural that.not only the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam,
which had been a fully
recognized State for many years, but also the Republic of South Viet-Nam
should have achieved broad
international recognition within a short period of time.

34. This year one of ‘the most dangerous hotbeds
of war was liquidated in South-East Asia. The entire
world unanimously
welcomed the termination
of the
Indo-China
war as a significant contribution
to the
relaxation of tension in the continent of Asia and
throughout the world. Both Vietnamese States have
earned the right to become Members of the United
Nations, since they fully meet the requirements laid
down in the Charter of the United Nations for States
wishing to be admitted
to the Organization.
The
admission
of both these States into the United
Nations is a cause equally as just as the previous
struggle of their people *for their independence and
fully sovereignty. It will be a logical culmination
of
the herioic struggle of the Vietnamese people.

32. Both of those States have applied for admission
to membership in the United Nations. Through their
acts, both the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Nam
have demonstrated their willingness to assume the obligations
contained in the Charter of the United Nations and
to fight, together with other peace-loving countries
-also
within the Organization-for
the estabiishment of durable peace and international
security.
The fight of the Vietnamese people against foreign
aggression and for their freedom was fully in harmony
with the noble goals of the United Nations. The
world public therefore considers it logical, legitimate
and only just for the two Vietnamese States to be
admitted
to membership
in the United Nations.
The fact that so far this has not happened, because
of the negative attitude of the great Power which
only recently was still preventing-through
the use
of the most up-to-date means of war-the
people

35. The PRESIDENT
(interpretati&
from French):
The next speaker is the .representative of Cambodia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
SARIN
CHHAK
(Cambodia)
(interpreFrench): Mr.. President, my delegation
would like to express to you our sincere thanks for
having given us this opportunity to address the Security Council. My thanks also go to all members of
the Council. I am particularly
pleased to have an
opportunity
to make a statement at a time when the
representative of Mauritania
is exercising presidency
of this august assembly. I&extend my warm congratulations to you, Mr. President, and my best wisnes
for the successful accomplishment
of your task.

5

36.

Mr.

tation

from

.

37. My congratulations
.are also extended to your
country, Mauritania, which enjoys great international
prestige because of the wise ‘policies of its eminent
leader, the great pilgrim of peace in Africa, President
Mokhtar Ould Daddah, and thanks to the consistent
and tireless efforts of the Mauritanian
people to
co-operate in the cause of social progress and peace
throughout the world. Between Kampucheaand
Mauritania there exists deep and firm friendship built up
over the years and greatly strengthened during our
struggle for national liberation. -Mauritania, from the
beginning, gave its support to the struggle of the
people of Kampuchea,
and you, Mr. President,
keenly defended our just cause in this assembly.
I thank you sincerely once again.

41. There is no foundation
for linking the two
requests for admission of the ,Democratic Republic
of Viet-Nam and the Republic of South Viet-Nam to
the request for admission of Korea. The- Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South
Viet-Nam are sovereign States,‘fulfilling
all the conditions laid down in the Charter .and both wishingto join the United,Nations.
South Korea does not
fulfil any of those conditions. In fact, South Korea
is not an independent political entity; it is only a part
of Korea. The 38th parallel is only a provisional
demarcation line, not a border between States. .This
has been confirmed by the unanimous will of the
Korean people as a whole for reunification
of the
two parts of Korea. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea believes that Korea should not be
admitted to the United Nations before reunification.
Also, to accept the admission of South Korea would
be to violate the accepted jurisprudence
in this field
on the pretext of achieving
universality
in the
United Nations, and an attempt to interfere in the
internal affairs of the Korean people and to perpetuate the division of Korea.

38. With regard to the requests for admission to
the United .Nations of the Democratic
Republic of
Viet-Nam
and of the Republic of South Viet-Nam,
my delegation reiterates its full support. The Security Council and the General Assembly have already
considered the problem thoroughly. There are many
relevant arguments in favour of the admission of those
two sovereign States. The Vietnamese people struggled valiantly for several decades for its national
liberation and achieved an outstanding victory which
enabled it to regain its independence and sovereignty
and to rebuild its country in the new-found peace.
That long struggle of the heroic Vietnamese people,
carried on in close solidarity ‘with the struggles of
the peoples of Kampuchea and Laos was an important
contribution
to the cause of peace and progress
throughout
the world. That overwhelming
victory,
like that which the people of Kampuchea achieved
on 17 April 1975, is also that of all peoples of the,
world fighting for independence, freedom and dignity
against imperialism,
colonialism and neo-colonialism.

42. The reunification
of Korea, which is in consonance with the desire of all Korean people, cannot
yet be achieved because of the presence of American
troops in South Korea. To make possible the independent and peaceful reunification
of Korea, the
necessary favourable conditions must be established.
These conditions are the elimination-of
the United
Nations Command, the withdrawal of foreign troops
from South Korea, and the translation
of the
Armistice Agreement into a peace agreement. That is
the aim of the draft resolution sponsored by Algeria
and more than 40 other States, including
Kampuchea.‘j
43. My delegation
does hope that the Security
Council will reconsider favourably the requests for
admission of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Nam,
in accordance
with the unanimous desire of the General .Assembly.
The United States veto constitutes a challenge to the
overwhelming
majority of the members of the ,Security Council and to the General Assembly as a whole.

39. The Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the
Republic of South Viet-Nam fulfil all necessary conditions stipulated
in Article 4 of the Charter for
becoming Members of the United Nations. They are
able to meet their obligations and they have committed themselves to do so. ,Their long struggle and
their policy of independence,
peace and non-alignment are a guarantee of this. No Member of the
Organization can contest this fact. The entry of those
two sovereign States would be a valuable contribution
to the cause of peace and development,, and would
also constitute a factor of stability in South-East
Asia and in the world.

44. The PRESIDENT
(interpret&on
from French):
The next speaker is the representative
of Poland.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

40. Convinced of the relevance of these arguments,
the Security Council, on 11 August 1975, voted almost
unanimously in favour of admitting those two States
[183&h meeting]. The only obstacle was the veto of
the United
States of America.
In the General
Assembly there was a unanimous vote by the members in favour of resolution 3366 (XXX), sponsored
by more than 60 countries, requesting the Security
Council to reconsider favourably these two requests
for admission.

45. Mr. JAROSZEK
(Poland): Mr. President, allow
.me to extend to you and to members of the Council
the gratitude of the Polish delegation for having
provided us with the opportunity to present the position of my Government on the item now being dealt
with by the Security Council concerning the applications of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the
Republic of South Viet-Nam
for admission to the
United Nations.
The representative
of Poland in
fact already spoke on this matter at the meeting of
6

,I

_.:

,1

‘

.*

‘,

,_

..I-

the Security Council on 11 August. We have asked
to participate
in the debate again today in view
of the General Assembly’s request that the Security
Council reconsider the question. I should like to
express my particular satisfaction, Sir, at.being able
to. speak in this chamber under your able and competent guidance.

j

3

-.,.:.+

50. The Polish delegation would like to state again
that making the positive solution of this matter dependent upon pre-conditions which have nothing to do with
Article 4 of the Charter is groundless, harmful and
detrimental
to the functioning
of the Organization.
We are firmly convinced that the admission to the
United Nations of the two Vietnamese States would
only strengthen the Organization;
it would consolidate its universality and have a positive bearing upon
the further normalization
of the situation and detente
in South-East Asia.

46. The Polish Foreign Minister, Stefan Olszowski,
stated in the general, debate ,of the ,thirtieth session
of the General Assembly on 25 September:
“Among the newly admitted Member States we
miss the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the
Republic of South Viet-Nam,
in spite of these
two States’ applications for admission. By its heroic
struggle the people of Viet-Nam
has proved its
steadfast love of freedom and independence. The
two Vietnamese States have given ample evidence
of their respect for the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, and they are fully qualified
‘to become Members of the Organization.
Poland
firmly supports the admission of the two Vietnamese
States to membership in the United Nations.”

51. At the same time. the admission lo the United
Nations of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Nam would constitute
an act of historical justice towards the people of
Viet-Nam.
Finally, it. would be an act in harmony
with the growing atmosphere of detente, normalization of relations
and strengthening
of peaceful
coexistence in the world. For all those reasons, Poland
wholeheartedly
joins in. and supports the appeal to
the Security Council to give its positive recommendation for admission ,to the United Nations of the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republic
of South Viet-Nam.
j.

47. 1ndeed;a manifest expression of this support is
the fact that we are here today in the Council.
By the same token, together with more than 60
Member States, Poland sponsored the text adopted
as resolution
3366 (XXX),
in which the General
Assembly, inter alia, reaffhmed the legitimate right
of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and of the
Republic of South Viet-Nam
to be Members of the
United Nations; considered that the two Vietnamese
States should be admitted to membership in the United
Nations
and requested the Security
Council
to
reconsider their applications. That text was supported
by 123 Member States and not a single delegation
voted against it.

52. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
Before calling on the next speaker, I wish to inform
members of the Council that I have just received
letters from the representatives of Laos and Romania
requesting that they be permitted,
under the terms
of Article 31 of the Charter, to participate,
without
the right to vote, in the Council’s discussion of the
item on the agenda. Since there is no objection,
I
intend, in accordance with rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure of the Council, and as is customary, to invite those representatives to participate,
without the right to vote, in the Council’s discussions. I now invite the representatives of Laos and
Romania to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber, it being understood
that they will be invited to take a place at the
Council table when it is their turn to speak.

48. Those. facts serve to show that the international
community is determined to solve the matter quickly
and positive1.y and that it categorically
rejects all
artificial hindrances to the admission of the Vietnamese States to the United Nations which are outside
of the provisions
of the Charter and especially
Article 4.

At the invitution
of the President,
Mr. Sipruseuth (Laos)
and Mr. Datcu (Romunia)
took the
places reserved fir them at the side of the Cormcil
chamber.

49. At this juncture I should like to reiterate the
arguments raised ,a few days ago in the General
Assembly
by Polish
Deputy
Foreign
Minister
Stanislaw Trepczyhski,’
that both the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South
Viet-Nam fulfil all the conditions for becoming Members of the United Nations, as stipulated by the
Charter of the United Nations. They are peaceloving States, they both expressly declared acceptance
of the obligations contained in the Charter and they
are able and willing to carry them out in the best
of faith. Therefore, any delay in a positive solution
of the question of admission to the United Nations
of the Vietnamese States has no justification
whatsoever.

53. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I invite the representative of Romania to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
54.

Mr.

DATCU
(Romania)
(interpretation
from
I should like to extend both to you, Sir,
and to members of the Security Council the gratitude
of my delegation for having given us this opportunity
to set forth the position of Romania on the item
which the ,Council is now discussing. I feel that I
should also tell you, Sir, that it is particulary
gratifying for me to see you preside over the work
of this important body of the United Nations. I should

French):

7

of the United Nations. It is true that the Charter
confers special rights upon the permanent members
of the Security Council, but we do not believe it
accords with the letter and spirit of the Charter to
abuse those rights in order to promote injustice.

like to voice my conviction that through your qualities as an experienced
diplomat,
your devotion,
shared by your country as well, to the destiny of the
Organization,
you will thereby make a genuine contribution
to the fulfilment
of the tasks which are
incumbent upon the Security Council pursuant to the
Charter of the United Nations.

59. We hope the Security Council will not create
a situation that will damage its prestige and that of
the Organization
as a whole and which may have
a negative impact upon international
life. That is
why I should like on this occasion to reiterate that
the Romanian
Government
firmly
supports the
requests submitted by the Democratic
Republic of
Viet-Nam
and the Republic
of South Viet-Nam.
We would make a fresh appeal that, in accordance
with the recommendations
of the General Assembly
and in the spirit of justice and international
legality,
the Security Council now recommend the admission
to the United Nations of those two countries.

55. Romania has already had an opportunity to set
forth its views both before the Security Council and
the General Assembly in connexion with the admission to the United Nations of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republic of South Viet-Nam.
That is why it is not my intention to review this
position now or to dwell particularly
on the legal
and political arguments in favour of honouring their
requests for admission to membership in the United
Nations.
56. Furthermore,
both during the discussions which
took place on 11 August here [1836th meefing]
and in the General Assembly on 19 September,’
those delegations which spoke adduced convincing
arguments which fully justify honouring the requests
of these two Vietnamese States to become Members
of the Organization.
But my delegation would like
on this occasion to emphasize the fact that in addition to those political and legal arguments, which
are irrefutable and which, furthermore,
no one has
questioned,
we now have the moral and political
backing-expressed
in a most forthright way-of the
General Assembly. The vote taken on 19 September
in the General Assembly on resolution 3366 (XXX),
of which Romania was one of the sponsors, forcefully proves that the overwhelming
majority of the
States Members of the United Nations solidly supports the admission of the Democratic Republic of
Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Nam
to
membership in the United Nations.

60. The PRESIDENT
(interpretution
from French):
I invite the representative
of Bulgaria to take his
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
61.

Mr.

GHELEV
(Bulgaria) (interpretation
from
Mr. President, I should like to thank the
members of the Security Council for having given
me this opportunity to address the Council on behalf
of the Bulgarian delegation on a question to which
my Government
attaches great importance.
It is a
particular pleasure for me to extend to you, Sir, our
warmest congratulations
as you serve as President
of this high body during the month of September.
You are an outstanding representative of a country
with which Bulgaria enjoys links of friendly co-operation. We are convinced that under your guidance
the Council will be able to reach a decision that
accords with the principles of the Charter and with
justice on the matter that is again before it.
French):

62. The question of the admission to the United
Nations of the Republic of South Viet-Nam
and
the Democratic
Republic
of VietiNam
has been
transmitted
to the Council
in accordance
with
General Assembly resolution 3366, (XXX), adopted
by the General Assembly
by an overwhelming
majority. Bulgaria was one of the sponsors of that
resolution,
which was sponsored by an impressive
number of Member States. Moreover,
during the
debate in the General Assembly on that resolution,
many delegations
categorically
. underscored
the
fact that the Council
must immediately
and
favourably reconsider the requests for admission to the
United Nations of the two Vietnamese States.

57. There can be no doubt that the presence in the
United Nations of the two Vietnamese States as fully
fledged Members
would be consistent
with the
Charter of the United Nations and would constitute
an important contribution
to the efforts being made
by the Organization
to maintain international
peace
and security and to develop co-operation
among
peoples. As the Romanian delegation had an opportunity of stating during the debate in the General
Assembly, there can be no doubt that the only conditions that must be met in order to be admitted
to membership in the United Nations are those set
forth in Article 4 of the Charter.. It follows that
the imposition of any conditions over and above those
set forth in the Charter for the admission of a State
to the United Nations would appear to be an attempt
to go beyond the provisions of the Charter.

63. It should be pointed out that, during the general
debate of the thirtieth session, responsible representatives of the majority of States made similar statements in favour of the admission of the two Vietnamese States. The present discussion in the Security
Council
in accordance
with General
Assembly
resolution. 3366 (XXX) demonstrates the importance
and urgency attached to this problem.

58. The Security Council and each and every one
of,its permanent members cannot continue to ignore
an opinion that has been expressed in such an
unequivocal
and clear way in the supreme forum
8

68, The Bulgarian delegation had an opportunity to
express its position with regard to the admission of
the Democratic Republic of VietmNam and the Republic of South Viet=Nam in the debate in the Security
Council at the beginning of August [183&h meeting],
That position was reiterated by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria,
Mr, Petar Mladenov, in his statement on 26 September before the General Assembly.8

64, All these facts need no further comment. They
speak for themselves and demonstrate, if that is
necessary, that a positive solution to the question
of the admission of the two Vietnamese States must
not be further delayed, These facts also faithfully
reflect the will and demand of the overwhelming
majority of Member States and world public opinion.
It is extremely unfortunate that representatives of
the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and of the
Republic of South Viet-Nam were not among us
as fully fledged Members at the very beginning of the
thirtieth session of the General Assembly. No one
is unaware of why that was not the case, despite
the votes of 13 members of the Council for the
admission of the two countries to the United Nations,

69, My delegation hopes that the ufiustified and
unjustifiable obstacles to a just settlement of the
question of the admission of the Vietnamese States
will be eliminated, It is the only solution in accordance
with the Charter, justice and the cause of peace
and understanding among peoples, It would be
extremely difficult for the world public to understand a new postponement of this solution, Moreover,
it is obvious that such a postponement could not
be maintained, There can be no doubt that a decision
in favour of the admission of the two Vietnamese
States would answer the needs of international policy.
It would have most favourable effects on the evolution
of international relations and on the activities of the
United Nations, It can be said without any hesitation
that the two Vietnamese States would make a worthy
coptribution to those activities and that the Organization itself, by admitting those countries, would make
a stride forward towards true universality.
70. We salute the people of the Republic of South
Viet-Nam and the people of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam, and we support their desire to
participate in United Nations activities. We fully
support those aspirations and we firmly endorse their
candidacy. The international community and the
Organization have in effect, already expressed their
desire to have those two States admitted to the
United Nations.
71, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I thank the representative of Bulgaria for the very
kind words which he addressed to me and which
reflect the firm and ever-growing relationship between
Mauritania and Bulgaria. The visit made last year by
our head of State to Bulgaria was an important step
in the development of those relat.ions, and we are
particularly gratified that it took place.

65. The position adopted by a permanent member
of the Council has temporarily impeded a favourable
solution of this problem, We do not believe this
position is a reasonable one, In fact, it is untenable,
To continue along this path would be to persist in
error. It is more than certain that a repetition of
this idjustice would not diminish the authority or
nobility of the dauntless Vietnamese people. Even
less would it impinge, even momentarily, upon the
profound respect and immense sympathy felt for the
Vietnamese people throughout the world.
66. A people that for 30 years was the victim of
the greatest injustice, a people that has, dauntlessly
passed through thC most serious and cruel trials and
sufferings in fact long ago won its right to be a fully
fledged member of the international community.
We have already, stated, but we wish to stress once
more that the right to be admitted as a fully fledged
Member of the Organization was won by the peoples of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and
of the Republic of South Viet-Nam in the heroic
struggle in which they demonstrated their attachment
to the cause of peace and justice, that is, to the
mdst sacred principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
67. No one can doubt or.deny the fact that the two
Vietnamese States fully meet the conditions for
membership stipulated in the Charter of the United
Nations. The argumentation put forward to justify
the veto cast by a permanent member of the Security
Council on this problem is inaccurate. No rhetoric
could make such considerations any more convincing.
Now when the Council has made two procedural
decisions closely connexted with the substance of the
matter [/83&h and 1842rd meetings], and after the
adoption of General Assembly resolution 3366 (XXX)
thereon, one might hope attempts to connect the
question of the admission of the two Vietnamese
States with other questions would be abandoned. It
should now be more than crystal clear that the
excuse that has been made is not valid from the legal
viewpoint and even less so from the political or moral
viewpoints.

The meeting

rose at 12.35 p.m.
Nates

I See Oflciul
Rcwrds
of the Generul
Assembly,
Session, Plenary
Meetings,
2354th meeting.
a Admission
of a Stute ta the United Nations (Charter,
Advisory
Opinion:
I.C.J. Reports
1948, p. 57.

Thirtieth
Art.

4),

3 United Nations Conference on International Organization,
111/l/37.
* Official
Records
Session. SuDalement

of the General Assembly,
No. JO. P. 24. item 41.

Twenty-eighth

s See’Ali6257, annex.
e Subseauently adopted as General Assembly resolution 3390 B

(XXX,.
.
7 See Official
Records
Session,
Plenary
Meetings,
R Ibid., Plenary
Meetings,

9

of the Genera/
Assembly,
2361st meeting.
2363rd meeting.

Thirtieth

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore
or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

.. ..

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaims du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies. Section
des vent-es, New York ou Get&e.
KAK

IIO,?Y’KEITh

HJA~HIIR

JWHLX
uatue~
Hauwfi,

HaquA
~omuo
rcynnrh
B KHWW(HLIX SaraH ~~BHTCTBIX
BO BLXX patiorrax
pupa.
Hasonwre
cnpae~w
06 riWanuRx
B
KHRXCHOM Marasnne
nnn nuru~~e
no anpecy:
Oprauusauun
O~-MAUH~HH~IX
CeKIwR
no nponame
wsnaawfi,
Hero-mopa
wnu Xienesa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Oprmnx~qww

M3&AHHR

OPPAHM

3Al&tfH

OD%ELU~HEHHIDIX

HAWfEI

O~%~~HH~HH~IX

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consuhe a su Iibrero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Section de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00300

82-61202-November

1983-2,200
