A /75/PV.82

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

82nd plenary meeting

Friday, 18 June 2021, 9 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 9.05 a.m.
Agenda item 184
Appointment of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations
Letter dated 8 June 2021 from the President of
the Security Council addressed to the President
of the General Assembly (A/75/912)
Draft resolution (A/75/L.100)
The President: Members will recall that, in
2015, the Assembly established, in its resolution
69/321, of 11 September 2015, a new, transparent and
inclusive process for the selection and appointment
of the Secretary-General. That process culminated on
13 October 2016 (see A/71/PV.27) in the appointment of
Mr. António Guterres for a five-year term concluding
on 31 December 2021. With the term of Mr. Guterres
coming to an end this year, the process of selecting and
appointing the Secretary-General was set in motion by
a joint letter of the Presidents of the General Assembly
and the Security Council on 5 February 2021 (A/75/780),
in line with resolution 69/321.
On 24 February, a letter from the Permanent
Representative of Portugal to the United Nations
(A/75/789), presenting the incumbent SecretaryGeneral, Mr. António Guterres, as a candidate for
reappointment, was received and jointly circulated
to Member States. No other Member State presented
candidates. On 7 May, again in line with resolution
69/321, the General Assembly held an informal

interactive dialogue with Mr. Guterres, where the
incumbent candidate responded to questions from
Member States and other stakeholders, including civil
society, on his vision for a second term of office.
I now call on His Excellency Mr. Sven Jürgenson,
President of the Security Council and Permanent
Representative of Estonia to the United Nations, who
will report to the Assembly on the work undertaken
by the Council on the appointment of the SecretaryGeneral and the recommendation contained in
document A/75/912.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): It is an honour for me,
in my capacity as President of the Security Council for
the month of June, to address the General Assembly in
order to convey the recommendation of the Security
Council for the appointment of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations.
At its 8789th meeting (see S/PV.8789), held in
private on 8 June, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2580 (2021) concerning the recommendation
for the appointment of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations. The resolution reads as follows:
“The Security Council,
“Having considered the question of the
recommendation for the appointment of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations,
“Recommends to the General Assembly that
Mr. António Guterres be appointed SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations for a second term of
office from 1 January 2022 to 31 December 2026.”

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-16007 (E)

*2116007*

A/75/PV.82

18/06/2021

Following the adoption, this information was
conveyed to the President of the General Assembly in my
letter dated 8 June 2021, found in document A/75/912.
In the joint letter of the President of the Security
Council and the President of the General Assembly
dated 5 February 2021 (A/75/780), the Council pledged
to conclude its part in the selection process in a timely
manner, so that the appointment by the Assembly
would allow the appointed Secretary-General sufficient
time to prepare for the term in office. The Council is
pleased that by adopting its recommendation for the
appointment on 8 June, it met that objective.

The draft was prepared on the basis of resolution
71/4 of 13 October 2016. It reflects the historic advances
in the process of the selection and appointment of the
Secretary-General, in line with resolution 69/321
and subsequent relevant resolutions, guided by the
principles of transparency and inclusivity. It recognizes
that for the first time, an incumbent Secretary-General
was subject to the new process, including the holding of
an informal interactive dialogue. The draft also draws
on previous resolutions regarding the reappointment
of a Secretary-General in recognizing Mr. Guterres’s
service to the United Nations during his first term.

A communication was received by the Presidents
of the General Assembly and the Security Council from
the Permanent Mission of Portugal, dated 24 February
(A/75/789), presenting the candidature of Mr. António
Guterres for a second term as Secretary-General of the
United Nations. Mr. Guterres was the only candidate
presented by a State Member of the United Nations. An
informal dialogue with Mr. Guterres and the members
of the Security Council took place on 18 May, and the
members of the Security Council found the dialogue
meaningful and productive.

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.100
by acclamation?

The Security Council adopted resolution 2580
(2021) by acclamation. Accordingly, the members of
the Council expressed their unconditional support for
Mr. António Guterres. In the Council’s view, the work
of Mr. António Guterres meets the highest standards
of efficiency, competence and integrity, and he has a
firm commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

I now request the Chief of Protocol to escort
the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. António
Guterres, into the General Assembly Hall.

On behalf of the Security Council, I would like
to thank the President for his close cooperation
during this important process, which is guided by
the Charter, resolution 69/321, and subsequent related
Assembly resolutions. The Council approached this
process guided by the principles of transparency and
inclusivity. I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this meeting expeditiously following
the recommendation made to the General Assembly by
the Security Council.

Draft resolution A/75/L.100 was adopted by
acclamation (resolution 75/286).
The President: I have the honour to announce
that His Excellency Mr. António Guterres has been
appointed by acclamation Secretary-General of the
United Nations for a second term of office beginning
on 1 January 2022 and ending on 31 December 2026.

The Chief of Protocol escorted the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. António Guterres, to the platform.
The President: The General Assembly has just
appointed by acclamation His Excellency Mr. António
Guterres as Secretary-General of the United Nations
for a term of office beginning on 1 January 2022 and
ending on 31 December 2026.
I ask Mr. Guterres to repeat after me the oath
of office.

The President: I thank the President of the
Security Council for his statement, as well as for the
collaborative manner in which he and his predecessors
have worked with me on the process of the selection and
appointment of the Secretary-General since February.

The Secretary-General: I, António Guterres,
solemnly swear to exercise in all loyalty, discretion and
conscience the functions entrusted to me as SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, to discharge these
functions and regulate my conduct with the interests
of the United Nations only in view and, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, not to seek or
accept any instructions in regard to the performance
of my duties from any Government or other authority
external to the Organization.

The General Assembly will now turn to draft
resolution A/75/L.100.

The President: The General Assembly has just
appointed His Excellency Mr. António Guterres

2/11

21-16007

18/06/2021

Secretary-General of the United Nations for a term
of office beginning on 1 January 2022 and ending on
31 December 2026. I now invite him to make a statement.
The Secretary-General: This is a solemn moment.
I find myself experiencing a whirlwind of emotions and
thoughts. I am deeply honoured and grateful for the
trust placed in me to serve as the Secretary-General
of the United Nations for a second term. Serving the
United Nations is an immense privilege and a most
noble duty. I am also very grateful to Portugal for
nominating me again. I am a committed multilateralist,
but I am also a proud Portuguese. All I have learned and
become has been forged by working together with the
people of my country. It is a great honour for me to have
with us today the President of Portugal.
I am acutely aware of the immense responsibilities
that I am being entrusted with at such a critical moment
in history — dare I say, at the cusp of a new era. We are
truly at a crossroads, with consequential choices before
us. Paradigms are shifting. Old orthodoxies are being
flipped. We are writing our own history with the choices
we make right now. It can go either way — breakdown
and perpetual crisis, or breakthrough and the prospect
of a greener, safer and better future for all. There are
reasons to be hopeful. The pandemic has revealed
our shared vulnerability, our interconnectedness and
the absolute need for collective action. We feel a new
momentum everywhere for an unequivocal commitment
to coming together to chart a course towards a better
future. I pledge that I will do everything in my power
during my second term in office to contribute to the
positive, breakthrough scenario.
(spoke in French)
The past 18 months have been unique in the history
of the United Nations. We have been through the
coronavirus disease pandemic, which continues to cause
great suffering. Millions of families have lost loved
ones. The world has faced one of the greatest threats
since the creation of the United Nations. We have seen
how the pandemic has revealed the fragilities and cracks
in our societies. To give just a few striking examples, it
is estimated that 114 million jobs have been lost, more
than 55 per cent of the world’s population has no form
of social protection and for the first time in 20 years,
poverty is likely to increase, with between 119 million
and 124 million people falling into extreme poverty
in 2020. We know how much women in particular have
been affected, and how fragile, low-income countries

A/75/PV.82

are suffering as a result of the enormous inequalities in
our international system.
The fact that we are only now beginning to unite to
make vaccines the top global priority speaks volumes.
It is crucial to ensure that both our emergence from
the crisis and our socioeconomic recovery are much
more equitable. Then, of course, we have all the other
global challenges — which we all know only too
well — such as climate change, the loss of biodiversity,
environmental
pollution,
growing
inequalities,
including gender inequality, human rights, the lack of
regulation in cyberspace, a growing digital divide, the
changing nature of conflicts, the likelihood of future
pandemics and other global existential risks. And in the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals,
our common road map for a better world, we have seen
setbacks in the progress made, from poverty reduction
to hunger eradication to access to quality education and
gender equality.
Our biggest challenge, which at the same time is our
biggest opportunity, is to use this crisis to turn the tide
and pivot towards a world that learns lessons, promotes
a just, green and sustainable recovery and shows the way
via greater, more effective international cooperation to
address global issues. It is important to recognize that
we have already started to do some things differently
since the start of the pandemic. At the United Nations,
we wasted no time in moving our operations and our
work online, while continuing to support people around
the world. Many others have done the same. We could
not have done that if the pandemic had happened 10
years ago.
So, despite all the negatives, it is also important
to recognize and build on the positives that we have
encountered. Taking this step will require real efforts to
strengthen what works as well as courage to learn from
what does not. That requires us to make prevention and
preparedness, in the broadest sense, a top priority of
the international system. The strategic vision I have
presented shows in detail what I expect to focus on
during my second term.
(spoke in English)
There is no question that the tasks ahead of us
are colossal, but I am confident that we can rise to
the challenges we face, for three reasons. First, I have
witnessed time and again the incredible commitment of
United Nations colleagues serving tirelessly around the
world, ensuring seamless business continuity during

21-160073/11

A/75/PV.82

the challenging circumstances of the pandemic. I know
that has not been easy for most of our colleagues. Let me
start by paying wholehearted tribute to them and their
hard work, often in dangerous or stressful situations
and often away from their families and loved ones.
Their sacrifice for the common cause is remarkable.
Let me also especially remember and honour the United
Nations personnel, women and men, who lost their lives
in the line of duty. My colleagues are indeed the greatest
asset we have, and we need to cherish and recognize
them with deep gratitude and appreciation. We are in
this together, with unity of purpose and solidarity.
Secondly, despite all the differences and divides, we
have shown that we can come together to agree on shared
goals and solve common problems. We have managed
together to embark on an important reform process in
the development, management and peace-and-security
areas of the United Nations. The reform efforts have
left us better equipped to tackle the current crisis. Yet
it is also clear that continuing improvement must be
the norm. If we are to be able to deliver to the world,
we need to consolidate the current reforms, build on
their results and continue to develop new methods of
work. I have talked about a United Nations 2.0, and it
is clear to me that we need to accelerate transformation
through a quintet of changes in the years ahead — better
data, analysis and communications; innovation and
digital transformation; strategic foresight; a stronger
performance and results orientation; and a work culture
that reduces unnecessary bureaucracy and simplifies
and fosters the work of collaboration.
Equally, we need to strive for a much more aligned
and integrated United Nations that works seamlessly
across the various pillars of the Organization, a United
Nations that is transparent and accountable and that
is more effective in making available its remarkable
data set, analytical capacity, policy and normative
developments, as well as its operational engagement, in
a spirit of creativity and openness. I count on the full
support of Member States for this much-needed next
iteration of the United Nations.
Thirdly, in the Declaration on the commemoration
of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations
(resolution 75/1), Member States gave me a mandate to
report back to them on how to advance our common
agenda to respond better to current and future challenges,
in the realization that something fundamental has to
change. And I do indeed sense there is momentum
for some of the most profound transformations to
4/11

18/06/2021

take place. Let us seize it together. In a world that has
changed so much, the promise, principles and values
of the Charter of the United Nations endure, but we
also have to work together in entirely new ways to
keep its promises alive. The United Nations is an
intergovernmental organization, and it harnesses the
unique collective power of States in a world where
they remain the publicly accountable actors with the
responsibility to shape our policy options.
However, in a world where the levers of change lie
in many hands, the United Nations, and the States and
people it serves, can only benefit from bringing others
to the table. Civil society, cities, the private sector and
young people, to name just a few, are critical voices
that must be heard in a context of true gender equality.
They have essential capabilities and insights that we
have to tap into if we are to forge a path towards a more
peaceful and prosperous future. At its heart, this is
about a growing number and diversity of actors working
together to deliver global public goods, with the United
Nations at the centre playing a catalytic and convening
role to initiate more innovation, inclusion, cooperation
and foresight. This is an incremental, organic process,
one that repurposes and innovates the old structures
and institutions while being open to and embracing
new forms of collaboration.
(spoke in Spanish)
Ultimately, that transformation has to do with
solidarity and equality. There must be a renewal of
solidarity, a reinvention of the social contract at the
national level and a more inclusive, interconnected
and effective multilateralism at the global level. And
the latter two must be expanded so that they can
accommodate future generations. My Call to Action
for Human Rights will continue to be an important
guide in this area. Equality is about gaining a better
understanding of global public goods, as well as
improving the management of the growing number of
shared concerns that our well-being as a human race
depends on and that we must address collectively with
improved governance arrangements. I hope that my
forthcoming report on Our Common Agenda will make
a positive contribution in that regard.
(spoke in English)
But equity must start now. Vaccines need to be
available for everyone, everywhere, sooner rather than
later, and we must create the conditions for sustainable
and inclusive recovery in both the developed and
21-16007

18/06/2021

developing worlds. And there is still a long way to
go. All of that will only be possible, however, if we
can manage to overcome the current deficit of trust,
which has a corrosive effect on societies and between
countries. In particular, we need to do everything we
can to overcome the current geostrategic divides and
dysfunctional power relations. There are too many
asymmetries and paradoxes. They need to be addressed
head-on.
We must also be aware of how power plays out
in today’s world when it comes to the distribution
of resources and technology. Sophocles is famously
credited with saying that trust dies but mistrust
blossoms. We have the power to turn that idea around,
resurrecting trust and combating mistrust. What we are
living through today in terms of mistrust is, I hope, an
aberration. It cannot become the norm. The norm is,
and will continue to be, the foundation on which the
Charter of the United Nations was built, an ultimate
belief in multilateralism, and the aspirations of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Norms that
preserve human dignity must prevail, for our survival
and development. They are about human life, not
just about words. Based in the rule of law and rooted
in respect for humanity, they provide a vanguard
against chaos and anarchy and a check on unhealthy
power dynamics.
I will give it my all to ensure the blossoming of trust
between and among nations, large and small, to build
bridges and engage relentlessly in confidence-building.
I will also seek to inspire hope that we can turn things
around, that the impossible may be possible. The
attitude is one of never giving up. That is not idealistic or
utopian but grounded in a knowledge of times in history
when big transformations have occurred. Moreover,
it is guided by the fundamental belief that people are
inherently good and that breakthroughs are possible,
against all odds and when we least expect them. That is
my unwavering commitment.
As regards my own role, throughout my whole life
I have always seen public office, first and foremost, as
a service, and I mean that in its most original form,
of serving people and the planet. Let me repeat what I
have said on previous occasions. I must be at the service
of all Member States equally and with no agenda
other than that which is anchored in the Charter of the
United Nations. We can only meet today’s complex
challenges successfully with a humble approach, one
in which the Secretary-General alone neither has all

A/75/PV.82

the answers nor seeks to impose his views; in which
the Secretary-General supports Member States and
relevant stakeholders in taking the lead on the necessary
changes and makes his good offices available, engaging
tirelessly, making full use of the unique convening role
of the United Nations and working as a mediator, an
honest broker and a builder of bridges and trust to help
find solutions that benefit everyone involved.
The Secretary-General must feel every day the
acute responsibilities of the office, guided by the
Charter and making human dignity and peace with
nature, including for future generations, the core of
our common work and endeavour. It is my intention
to serve with humility, and as I said in my vision
statement, in the spirit of building trust and inspiring
hope. That is our common mission. It is in that spirit
that I look forward to continued close cooperation with
all Member States in the years ahead. The preservation
of human dignity calls on us to draw on our diversity
and richness to imagine larger freedoms that can be
secured only through common action.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
Mr. António Guterres, Secretary-General, was
escorted from the rostrum.
The President: I congratulate the SecretaryGeneral on his reappointment to the pre-eminent
position of the United Nations. The Secretary-General
is the chief administrative officer of the United Nations.
As the world’s top diplomat and advocate, he has
led — and will surely continue to lead — the United
Nations with sincerity and integrity. I would like to
highlight his work in prioritizing gender parity at the
United Nations as a particular example of his efforts
to ensure that this Organization is fit for purpose and
reflective of its ideals. I would be remiss if I did not
thank him for providing support to my Office during
this session. He has led the Organization through a
challenging but interesting period in the history of the
United Nations. To his credit, he has sought to bring it
closer to the peoples it serves and their needs. Last year
he launched a global conversation on building a better
future for all. He gathered the voices and opinions of a
diverse range of people on future priorities and obstacles
and the role of international cooperation. More than
1.5 million people from all countries and all walks of
life were asked about their priorities for the future. And
in September he will present his recommendations on

21-160075/11

A/75/PV.82

18/06/2021

the response of the United Nations to current and future
challenges, which we look forward to.

I now give the floor to the representative of Eritrea,
who will speak on behalf of the Group of African States.

It is clear that his work is shaping this Organization
to make it fit for purpose and able to meet the needs
of the people it serves. Among many other global
challenges, a key test of our generation is surely that of
climate. Without action today, the world as we know it
will cease to exist. The Secretary-General has woven
ambition on the climate issue into the United Nations
system. He has listened to the people of the world
who are demanding urgent action. He has encouraged
Member States to work together using the multilateral
system to take collective action to tackle this communal
threat. I am encouraged by the progress that has been
made so far and urge him to maintain the momentum of
this issue. Our actions on it will determine the success
of the multilateral system.

Ms. Tesfamariam (Eritrea): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Group of African States on this
important occasion of the re-election of Mr. António
Guterres as the United Nations Secretary-General. The
African Group extends its heartfelt congratulations
to Mr. António Guterres on his determination and
commitment to continuing to lead the United Nations in
discharging its mandates to bring peace and development
to the people of the world, most particularly in these
trying times brought about by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.

Fittingly, when he set out his vision for his second
term as Secretary-General, recovery from the pandemic
was first on the list. Member States gave us a clear
message during the Assembly’s high-level week. In the
Declaration on the commemoration of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations (resolution 75/1), they
reaffirmed the necessity of multilateralism as we build
back better for a more equal, resilient and sustainable
world. Those efforts have only just begun. As the world
begins to turn a corner towards recovery, I have no
doubt that the Secretary-General will ensure that the
United Nations is positioned to foster connections and
collaboration for strengthening our weakest links and
leaving no one behind. When the pandemic hit, he
ensured that the United Nations continued to deliver
for those we serve despite the additional challenges,
inspiring staff around the world. While the pandemic
has affected us all, it has hit the most vulnerable the
hardest. His efforts to ensure that human dignity is at
the core of our work are now more crucial than ever.
Dignity must be at the core of our efforts to achieve
sustainable development and peace and security.
As the interconnectivity between people and
countries continues to increase, the need is growing
for a multilateral system that is fit for purpose. I
welcome Member States’ strong universal support for
the reappointment of the Secretary-General and urge
all Member States to continue to empower him to steer
our Organization to meet the needs of those we serve.
Once again, I congratulate the Secretary-General and
look forward to working with him until the end of the
seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly.
6/11

The African Group particularly welcomes the
United Nations, under the leadership of the SecretaryGeneral, for its commitment to working closely with
the African countries on the vaccine rollout through
the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access arrangement.
The uneven and unfair distribution of vaccines globally
is egregious. The fair and equitable distribution of
vaccines, one that prioritizes people over profit, is
the only way out from this pandemic. We applaud the
Secretary-General for his vocal support for patent
suspension and technology transfer on COVID-19
vaccines. We call on the United Nations to invest more
efforts in easing the economic and social fallout of the
pandemic by seeking debt relief for African countries,
more liquidity through a new allocation of special
drawing rights and a reallocation of unused special
drawing rights, as well as an increase in resources from
the international financial institutions in support of
developing countries, particularly in Africa.
In the area of climate change, despite Africa’s
limited contribution to global emissions, the continent
continues to pay a high price for climate change.
Here we welcome the commitment that the SecretaryGeneral has shown in his call to donors to increase the
share allocated to adaptation and resilience to at least
50 per cent of climate finance. However, we urge that
those funds be easily accessible and channelled to
our continent in order to address targeted needs and
projected impacts.
Considering that the Secretary-General has
achieved tremendous strides in enhancing the
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union, we urge him to dedicate his tenure to
working with the African Union in aligning the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development with the African
21-16007

18/06/2021

Union’s Agenda 2063. We call for more cooperation
and collaboration with the African Union, the regional
economic communities and regional mechanisms
to advance peace and sustainable development on
our continent.
Lastly, let me take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his support
to the Office of the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on Africa. In that regard, we note that more
support is needed to enable the Office of the Special
Adviser to play an effective role in advocating for and
coordinating the provision of effective and sustained
support for Africa’s transformative efforts for
inclusive sustainable development. We also welcome
the Secretary-General’s commitment to making
the Secretariat more diverse and representative and
encourage him to continue working to improve the
percentage of Africans in senior and other positions.
We are confident that the Secretary General will
continue to stress the need to redress the past and
ongoing injustices that are hindering Africa’s effective
contribution — international systemic racism and
unfair and exploitive financial and trade practices.
We cannot achieve a strong United Nations capable of
tackling the multifaceted challenges of the twenty-first
century without Africa’s meaningful participation in its
decision-making. I would like to assure the SecretaryGeneral of the support of the African Group as he
assumes the mantle of leadership.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kiribati, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Asia-Pacific States.
Mr. Tito (Kiribati): I am honoured to make this
statement on behalf of the members of the Group of
Asia-Pacific States. At the outset, let me thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this plenary session of
the General Assembly to consider agenda item 184, on
the appointment of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, following the recommendation of the Security
Council that the incumbent Secretary-General of the
United Nations, His Excellency Mr. António Guterres,
be reappointed for another five-year term, with effect
from 1 January 2022.
This is a very important matter not only for the
United Nations as an Organization but even more so
for the 193 member countries and the 7.8 billion people
who call planet Earth home for themselves, their
children and future generations. The task of appointing

A/75/PV.82

one person to take charge of all matters concerning the
world and humankind is indeed a serious and daunting
task. It needs the whole world to come together as one
human family to discuss the global issues facing us
before deciding on the candidate who can best meet or
match the demands of such global issues.
I thank you, Mr. President, for providing this
opportunity for the Governments and the peoples we
represent to renew their sense of belonging to and
ownership of this global body as we discharge our duties
on their behalf by deliberating on the recommendation
of the Security Council before us, as expressed in
resolution 2580 (2021). We are grateful that our task
has been made simple by the fact that the application
of the incumbent Secretary-General for a renewal of
contract, endorsed by his own country, Portugal, is
the only sponsored application that has been submitted
to date. That is a clear indication that the incumbent
Secretary-General has the full trust and confidence of
the whole United Nations membership in carrying on
with his excellent leadership and stewardship of the
Organization, as well as the firm commitment to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations that he has superbly demonstrated during the
past five years.
In the light of this, I have the greatest pleasure
and honour to welcome and join the applause for the
Security Council’s recommendation that the incumbent
Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. António
Guterres, be reappointed for a further five-year term.
The Asia-Pacific Group congratulates the SecretaryGeneral and wishes him the very best as he continues
his leadership of the executive branch of the United
Nations, especially during these unprecedentedly
difficult and challenging times. We assure him of the
full support of all the Member States of our AsiaPacific family.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): I have the honour to
make this statement on behalf of the Group of Eastern
European States.
It is my great pleasure to congratulate the SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, on
his reappointment for a second term. We commend
the President of the General Assembly, as well as the
Presidents of the Security Council for the months of

21-160077/11

A/75/PV.82

February, March, April, May and June, for conducting
a transparent and inclusive selection process of the
Secretary-General, as provided for in resolutions 69/321
and 73/341, on the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly. We remain committed to exploring
ways to further enhance the selection and appointment
process, including by promoting gender equality and
equitable geographical representation.
During the past four and half years, Mr. Guterres
has clearly demonstrated his commitment to the values
and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. He has led the international community with
great dedication in overcoming challenges created
by conflicts and natural disasters as well as climate,
economic, food, social and health crises. We praise
his personal engagement in the prevention of conflicts
and the mitigation of their effects, focusing on
diplomacy for peace. His leadership on climate action
and sustainable development has translated into the
Decade of Action for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Sustainable Development Goals.
We also welcome his valuable role in the promotion and
protection of human rights and have noted his Call to
Action for Human Rights, the strategy on gender parity
throughout the United Nations system and strategies to
counter hate speech and safeguard religious sites. The
inclusion of relevant stakeholders has made the United
Nations more open and inclusive than ever before.
All of that has been underscored by comprehensive
reforms of the United Nations development system,
the peace and security architecture, the management
of the Organization and the call to eliminate sexual
exploitation and abuse.
In the face of the unprecedented challenges caused
by the coronavirus disease pandemic, and through
his calls for a response to its social and economic
effects, the Secretary-General has shown the world that
multilateralism matters, and that we need effective and
inclusive global solutions for serious global challenges.
As a leader serving 7 billion people around the globe,
he has shown courage and wisdom that we continue to
rely on to make an important and lasting contribution
to our common agenda.
On behalf of the Eastern European States, we
welcome and appreciate the Secretary-General’s
pledge to work as a convener, a mediator, a bridge
builder and an honest broker to help find solutions that
benefit everyone involved and overcome challenges.
We look forward to further fruitful cooperation with
8/11

18/06/2021

him in the coming years, and we wish him good health,
strength, success and perseverance in his fulfilment
of the responsibilities of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of Latin
America and the Caribbean States (GRULAC) in order
to congratulate Secretary-General António Guterres
on his re-election to a second term as the head of this
Organization. Given the successes of the past five
years, GRULAC is confident that this second term will
bring us even closer to realizing the ideals enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations.
GRULAC appreciates the strong culture of
partnership present within his first term, and looks
forward to five more years of reform, innovation,
delivery and results. From his steadfast commitment
to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to
his vocal support for the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change; from his call for equitable vaccine distribution
and universal health-care coverage to expanded parity
in terms of female representation in the Secretariat,
the Secretary-General has been indispensable to the
crafting of a United Nations prepared for the twentyfirst century.
His steady hand as a facilitator and mediator brought
clarity and calm through ceasefires. His leadership
during the coronavirus disease pandemic brought
precision and strategy to the navigation of a looming
threat. His careful attention to detail yielded significant
outcomes in the realms of peacekeeping and political
affairs, the United Nations development system and
the management of the Secretariat. GRULAC hails his
dedication to a more inclusive, efficient and transparent
United Nations.
As he knows better than any of us, the duties of
the Secretary-General are challenging ones, combining
the roles of advocate, civil servant, chief executive and
diplomat. Indeed, our present challenges demand such
strong, dexterous leadership. Our ever-evolving climatic,
economic, social, environmental, and technological
dynamics require a unified United Nations, transparent
and bold, harnessing the considerable power of the
General Assembly, a United Nations with vision and
drive that consistently defends the ideals of the Charter
21-16007

18/06/2021

and does not shy away from our most pressing issues,
from climate change to armed conflict.
(spoke in English)
In particular, GRULAC commends the SecretaryGeneral’s intellectual and political leadership in forging
a new social contract. As he articulated in his statement
for Nelson Mandela International Day 2020, we cannot
address the plague of the coronavirus disease without
addressing the plague of inequality in lockstep. We
know that as the leader of the largest and most powerful
multilateral diplomatic apparatus in the world, he will
pursue the challenges of social inequality and economic
disparity with the end goals of human dignity, justice,
peace, tolerance and solidarity.
His vision statement outlines a more peaceful,
gender-equitable, multilateral order in which civilian
security and well-being come first. GRULAC knows
that his leadership will harness the broad and unrivalled
faculties of the United Nations to confront common
challenges, manage shared responsibilities, carry out
collective action and strive for a peaceful, inclusive
and sustainably developed world; a world in which
international law and the dignity of the human being
are fully realized. We look forward to concretizing his
vision of a more transparent, accountable and unified
United Nations 2.0.

A/75/PV.82

humanitarian needs, due to a range of factors, including
conflict, poverty, natural disasters and climate change.
He oversaw a joined-up United Nations response
to COVID-19 that delivered health, economic and
humanitarian support to millions, particularly the most
vulnerable, and he led efforts for a global ceasefire. He
made tackling climate change his clarion call, driving
us to be bolder and more ambitious and to recognize
our responsibilities to those on the front lines.
Those crises reflect a world that is becoming more
complex, and complex international problems require
a coherent international response. A strong, fit-forpurpose United Nations is needed more than ever, and
the United Nations will be best served by a SecretaryGeneral of Mr. Guterres’s calibre at the helm for
another five years. Throughout his tenure, Mr. Guterres
has shown that he is the right person for the job. He
has led important progress on gender equality, conflict
prevention, sustaining peace and United Nations
reform, among other priorities. We pledge to provide
him with our full support. We commit to assisting him
in upholding the principles and values enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations. We have the utmost
confidence in his skills, ability, vision, commitment and
experience. Furthermore, we trust he will promote and
integrate the three pillars of the United Nations — peace
and security, development and human rights.

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
On behalf of the Group of Western European and other
States, it is an honour to welcome the appointment of
Mr. António Guterres for a second term as SecretaryGeneral. We offer him our warmest congratulations.

We encourage Mr. Guterres to deliver on his
vision statement. That means continuing to support
United Nations reform and advance his vision for a
United Nations 2.0 — reducing duplication, increasing
effectiveness, upholding transparency and maximizing
the impact of the United Nations with the full
involvement of civil society. That means ensuring the
centrality of the rule of law and international law, and
of respect for individual human rights, regardless of
race, gender, religion, belief or nationality. That also
means continuing his efforts to deliver a more joinedup United Nations approach to tackling the drivers
of conflict, and doing so earlier, in order to prevent
insecurity and build peace.

The last five years have been framed by
three of the biggest challenges to face the global
community — rising humanitarian needs, the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and climate
change — all against the background of a difficult time
for international cooperation. Mr. Guterres has risen to
the challenge. He has overseen a more seamless United
Nations response to the biggest recorded increase in

We renew our trust in him — and his
Organization — to assist us in building back better from
COVID-19, delivering the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development in the Decade of Action, and resolving
the biggest crises of the day, from brutal conflicts to
global challenges such as preventing future health
emergencies and taking action on climate change. To
that end, we look forward to receiving the Secretary-

I congratulate the Secretary-General on his
re-election to a second term. The Group of Latin
American and Caribbean States looks forward to
continuing to work side by side with him.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Kingdom, who will speak
on behalf of the Group of Western European and
other States.

21-160079/11

A/75/PV.82

18/06/2021

General’s recommendations to advance our common
agenda in September.

Address by Mr. Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa, President
of the Republic of Portugal

In conclusion, we offer our thanks to the President
of the General Assembly for steering a transparent and
effective process, as laid out in resolution 69/321. Once
again, we congratulate Mr. Guterres and look forward
to continuing to work with him.

The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by His Excellency Mr. Marcelo Rebelo de
Sousa, President of the Republic of Portugal. He is
the first President to address the General Assembly
in person since the beginning of the pandemic that we
have faced in the past year.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the host country, the United States.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
On behalf of the host country, I offer our heartfelt
congratulations to Secretary-General António Guterres
on his reappointment. We are pleased that the Security
Council chose to recommend, and the General Assembly
agreed to appoint, Secretary-General Guterres to serve
for an additional five years in this critical post.
The Secretary-General has proved himself to be
a capable leader in a demanding role, and we look
forward to collaborating with him in the coming years.
He has once again been charged with the gravest of
responsibilities, taking on the most important global
challenges of our time. In the past five years those
challenges have included a climate in crisis, human
rights in peril, mass hunger, mass migration, increased
humanitarian needs and an unprecedented global
pandemic, to name a few. His job is as difficult as it is
important. We are counting on him to lead, and we are
counting on him to use his voice when it matters most.
All of us hope that the next five years will be more
peaceful, secure and prosperous than the last. But we
are under no illusions about the difficulty of achieving
that dream. It will require hard work and political will.
It will require forging partnerships, especially with
the private sector and civil society. It will require a
dedication to purpose, accountability and results. And
it will require an impassioned, zealous commitment
to the human rights of every individual everywhere in
the world, especially the most vulnerable. That is the
charge of the United Nations, and it therefore continues
to be the charge of the Secretary-General.
We congratulate him on his election to a second
term and thank the members of the Security Council
and the General Assembly for the collective work
required to finalize this appointment. May he help us
achieve more peace, security and prosperity for all.
10/11

His Excellency Mr. Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa,
President of the Republic of Portugal, was escorted
into the General Assembly Hall.
President Rebelo de Sousa: It is a great honour
to stand here once again before the General Assembly
and to congratulate Mr. António Guterres on his
appointment to serve a second term as SecretaryGeneral. Five years ago, Portugal decided to submit
his name for the position of Secretary-General of the
United Nations for a simple reason, which was the
strong conviction that António Guterres is particularly
suited to the job. He has lived up to expectations. No
one could have foreseen five years ago the exact scale
of the challenges that the world and the United Nations
would face. We all knew it would be challenging, but
we did not know just how much. I dare to say that
António Guterres has proved to be the right person at
the right time. The trust that Member States have once
again placed in him today is solid evidence of that.
Mr. Guterres’s undaunted commitment to an
effective and efficient multilateralism is complemented
by something perhaps rarer and more precious,
the fact that he is a compassionate multilateralist.
Knowing him for 55 years in shared fights and in
opposite positions — as Prime Minister and opposition
leader — and in his years as High Commissioner for
Refugees and his first term as Secretary-General, as
everyone here also does by now, we also know that
for Mr. Guterres, putting people at the very centre of
his actions is not just a choice but an imperative. He is
continuing the tradition of his illustrious predecessors
who have embodied the spirit of the Charter of the
United Nations, which is to lead the United Nations in
the service of “we the peoples”.
We are facing times of even greater uncertainty
today. We all know — we all must know — that we
cannot face them alone and we cannot leave anyone
behind. Much has been done since 2017. Needed
reforms in the areas of sustainable development, peace
and security, and management have been implemented.
21-16007

18/06/2021

The representation of women has been advanced
through a bold gender-parity strategy that has already
yielded results, including at senior levels. Human rights
have been further incorporated into the action of the
Organization, in line with the Secretary-General’s Call
for Action. The voice of youth has been empowered. The
immense challenge of the pandemic has been tackled
head on, and a global ceasefire called for. Mr. Guterres
has consistently made a strong call for the vaccination
of people in all countries and especially the poorest and
most vulnerable. And last but not least, he has been a
leading voice in climate action.
We believe that the vision of António Guterres,
his persistence, his boldness, his fairness and his spirit
of solidarity will also be instrumental in the next five
years. Portugal is grateful to all the nations united

A/75/PV.82

here today for their reaffirmation of their trust in the
candidate we have put forward. It is one of countless
examples of the remarkable work that everyone present
here does. It demonstrates that we can come together,
we can overcome differences and we can agree and
foster consensus. We can unite to serve our peoples.
The President: On behalf of the General Assembly,
I wish to thank the President of the Republic of Portugal
for his statement.
We have heard the last speaker for this meeting.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly
to conclude its consideration of agenda item 184?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.15 a.m.

21-1600711/11
