Resolutions adoph•d on the reports of th" Fifth Commiu,·-:_ ________________

2990 (XXVII). United Nations International
School

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 32
Recognizing the important role of the United Nations
International School in providing international education facilities of a high academic and cultural standard
for children of the United Nations community in New
York and the need to preserve the international
character of the School,
Noting that this international character is being
endangered by the diminishing percentage of the enrolment of children of United Nations staff members,
1. Decides, subject to review by the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session, to increase the_ maximum
of the education grant provided in regulation 3.2 of
the Staff Regulations of the United Nations from $1,000
to $1,500, effective 1 January 1973, and to amend that
regulation accordingly;
2. Urges as increased funds become available in
future year; through the operation of the United
Nations International School Development Fund, that
consideration should be given to increasing bursaries,
to the extent practicable, and using them as a means
of attracting additional children from members o_f the
diplomatic and consular corps who do not receive a
substantial education grant from their Governments;
3. Appeals to Governments to continue to assist the
United Nations International School to the extent possible, especially by providing scholarships and making
available qualified teachers.
2111 th plenary meeting
15 December 1972

3006 (XXVII).

United Nations Juridical
Y earbookH:i

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by its resolution 1814 (XVII) of
18 December 1962, it decided that the United Nations
Juridical Yearbook should contain the documentary
materials listed in the annex to that resolution,
Having considered, at its twenty-sixth session, the
comments concerning the United Nations Juridical
Year book set forth in the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the programme of recurrent publications
of the United NationsH 4 and, at its twenty-seventh session, the views concerning the Year book contained in
the report of the Secretary-General on the programme
of recurrent publications, 35
Decides that the United Nations Juridical Yearbook
shall contain henceforth the documentary materials
listed in the annex to the present resolution.
2113th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
32 A/8856.
3:1 At its 2037th plenary meeting, on 23 September 1972, the

General Assembly decided to refer to the Sixth Committee,
for prior consideration, the part of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on recurrent publications which dealt with publications in the legal field. The present resolution was adopted on
the recommendation of the Sixth Committee, a~ set forth in
the report of the Fifth Committee (A/8978).
a4 See A/8362, paras. 59-70.
3~ See A/8851, para. 9.

101

ANI\EX
OutlinP of the United Nations Juridical Yearbook

Part One. Le!,lal statlls of the United Nations and related
intcrgoi·crnmental organi::.oti,ms
Chapter I. Legislative texts concerning the legal status of
the United Nations and related intergovernmental organi7ations
Chapter II. Treatv provisions concerning the legal status of
the United Nations and related intergovernmental organizations

Part Two. Legal activities of the United Nations and related
i11tcrgo,·,·mme11tal organi::.ations
Chapter III. General review of the legal activities of the
Unikd Nations and related intergovernmental organizations
Chapter IV. Treaties concerning international law concluded under the auspices of the United Nations and
related intergovernmental organizations
Chapter V. Decisions of administrative tribunals of the
United Nations and related intergovernmental organizations
Chapter VI. Selected legal opinions of the secretariats of
the United Nations and related intergovernmental organi,ations

Part Three. Judicial dcci,1io11s on questions relating to the
United Nations and related intcrgovcmmental organizations
Chapter VH. Decisions of international tribunals
Chapter VIII. Decisions of national tribunals

/'art Four. Lrga/ bibliography of the United Nations and
related i11tcrgm·rrn111ental organi;:ations

3007 ( XXVII). (:omposition of the Secretariat
T/ip General Asscmblr,
Having considered the compos1tlon of the Secretariat:rn and the long-term recruitment plan, 37
/ksirous of ensuring that, in accordance with Article 8 of the Charter of the United Nations, no restriction, arc placed on the eligibility of men and women
to participate in any capacity and under conditions of
equality in the work of the Secretariat,
Desirous f 11rther of avoiding any discrimination between staff members on grounds of sex,
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at it-; twenty-eighth session a study
on those provisions of the Staff Rules and Staff Regulations of the United Nations whose application might,
in certain cases, give rise to discrimination between
staff members on grounds of sex.
2113th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

:{008 (XXVII). Anwmhnent8 to the Staff Regulation,; and Staff Rul<-8 of the l1nited Nation8

The General Assembly,
I laving cunsiderecl the note by the SccretaryGencrai::x on a proposed :11nendment to the Staff Regulatiuns of the United Nations,
,: Sec/\ 1 8831 and Corr. I and Add. I.
, Sec A/8836.

'' AiC5lt439.

102

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

1. Decides that, wilh cfkct from 1 January 1973,
regulation I. 10 of the Staff Regulations of the United
Nations shall be amended to read as follows:
"The oath or declaration shall be made orally by
the Secretary-General at a public meeting of the
General Assembly. All other members of the Secretariat shall make the oath or declaration before the
Sccretary-Gcncrnl or his authorized representative."
2. Takes note of the changes made by the Secretary-General in the Staff Rules of the United Nations
in the year ending on 31 .~ ugtht I 972, as set forth in
his report. :rn
2 I 13th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

3042 (XXVII). United Nations salary system

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2743 (XXV) of 17 December 1970, by which it establi,hed the Special Committee for the Review of the United Nations Salary
System,
Recalling further its resolution 13 ( l) of 13 February 1946, on the basis of which the International Civil
Service Advisory Board was established in 1948, and
recalling that the terms of reference of the Board were
subsequently extended by resolution 1981 ( XVIII) of
17 December 1963,
Noting the report of the Special Committee for the
Review of the United Nations Salary System,40 the
comments thereon by the [ntcrnational Civil Service
Advisory Board, 11 the Sccretary-Gencral 42 and the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,-1:i and the statement of the Federation of
International Civil Servants' Associations, 44
Noting that, in its report, the Special Committee
for the Review of the United Nations Salary System
recommended the establishment of a new organ for the
regulation and co-ordination of the conditions of service
of the United Nations common system,
Noting that the International Civil Service Advisory
Board and the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions recommend the establishment
of an international civil service commission composed
of experts who should be independent of executive
heads, staff associations and Governments, but accountable as a body to the General Assembly,
Noting further that the executive heads of the specialized agencies, as well as representatives of the staff,
believe that such a commission is necessary,
I . Decides to establish in principle, as of 1 January
1974, an International Civil Snvicc Commission consisting of not more than thirteen independent experts
having the requisite qualifications and experience who
would be appointed in their individual capacities by,
and answerable as a body to, the General Assembly;
2. Invites the governing organs of the specialized
agencies in the United Nations common system to offer
39 A/C.5/1435.
40 Official Records of the General Assembl_,.,

Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 2R ( A/8728 and Corr. I).
41 lbid., Supplement No. 2RA (A/8728/ Add. I).
4 ~ A/8839 and Corr. I :md Add. I.
43 A/8914.
44 See A/C.5/1466.

such observations as they may have on the proposed
International Civil Service Commission;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, together with
his colleagues in the Administrative Committee on Coordination and after such consultations as he or they
may deem necessary, to submit, through the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth
session detailed proposals for an International Civil
Service Commission. together with a draft statute covering its terms of reference and procedures, including
conditions and periods of service for the commissioners, methods of selection of the supporting staff of
the Commission, methods of consultation with representatives of the administrations and staff, and other
necessary administrative, budgetary and financial provisions;
4. Requests the Secretary-General and his colleagues in the Administrative Committee on Coordination to initiate appropriate consultations with a
view to the compilation of a roster of candidates for
appointment to the International Civil Service Commi,sion, selected on the basis of their personal qualifications and experience and of broad geographical
representation, and to consult with the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions in
time for consideration and decision by the General
Assembly at its twenty-eighth session;
5. Decides to transmit to the International Civil
Service Commission, after it has been constituted, the
report of the Special Committee for the Review of
the United Nations Salary System, the comments of
the International Civil Service Advisory Board and
other related documentation for its consideration and
the submission of recommendations for action at the
earliest possible date;
6. Decides to continue to keep the International
Civil Service Advisory Board in being until such time
as the International Civil Service Commission is constituted and becomes operational.
21 I 6th plenary meeting
19 December 1972

3043 (XXVII). Form of presentation of the
United Nations budget and duration of the
budget eycle

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the form of presentation of the United
Nations budget and the duration of the budget cycle 40
and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 46
Taking into account the view expressed by the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination at its twelfth
se,sion 47 and by the Economic and Social Council at
it~ fifty-third scssion1R that the new form of presentation constitutes a useful basis for proceeding towards
the introduction of a system of programme budgeting
in the United Nations,
4;; A/C.5/1429 and Corr.I

and 2.

JG A/87390

17 See

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-third Session. Supplement Noo JO (E/5 I 86/Revo 1).
1 ~ See O[ficial Records of the General Assembly, Twentyseventh Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/8703).
