S/PRST/2001/12

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 April 2001
English
Original: English and French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4314th meeting of the Security Council, held on 24 April 2001, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Georgia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the briefing provided by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, on 24 April 2001, in accordance with
paragraph 16 of its resolution 1339 (2001) of 31 January 2001. It welcomes
also the presence of the Minister for Special Affairs of Georgia at its meeting.
“The Security Council stresses that the continued lack of progress on key
issues of a comprehensive settlement of the conflict in Abkhazia, Georgia, is
unacceptable. It underlines the decisive importance of early negotiations on the
core political questions of the conflict. It strongly supports, in this context, the
efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to promote the
achievement of a comprehensive political settlement based on the resolutions
of the Security Council, which must include a settlement of the political status
of Abkhazia within the State of Georgia.
“The Security Council strongly supports, in particular, the intention of
the Special Representative to submit, in the near future, his draft paper
containing specific proposals to the parties on the question of the distribution
of constitutional competences between Tbilisi and Sukhumi. It calls on all
those concerned to use their influence with a view to facilitating this process.
“The Security Council welcomes the intention of the Special
Representative to submit the draft paper to the parties soon, as a starting point
for negotiation, and not as an attempt to impose or dictate any possible
solution. It calls upon the parties constructively to accept the paper in this light
and work towards a mutually acceptable settlement.
“The Security Council will remain actively seized of the matter and
reaffirms its commitment to advancing the peace process.”

01-34629 (E) 240401

*0134629*
