S/PV.9089

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9089th meeting

Tuesday, 12 July 2022, 9 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Costa Filho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Bongo
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-42021 (E)
*2242021*

S/PV.9089

The situation in the Middle East

General on the humanitarian needs in Syria will inform
that decision.

The meeting was called to order at 9.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2022/546, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Ireland and Norway.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I deliver this statement
on behalf of Norway and Ireland.
Today we are meeting to vote on draft resolution
S/2022/546, put forward by Ireland and Norway,
which would authorize the cross-border humanitarian
aid operation in Syria. It is no secret that this was a
difficult negotiation. As co-penholders, Ireland and
Norway engaged diligently and constructively with
all Security Council members. After draft resolution
S/2022/538, which we put on the table last week, was
vetoed, we redoubled our efforts to find a path through
so that the Council could adopt a resolution that would
allow humanitarians to continue to reach those in dire
need in Syria. The result of our efforts is now before the
Council in the form of a new draft resolution.
Throughout this process, like so many around this
table, Ireland and Norway have been guided solely
by the humanitarian needs of the Syrian people. The
authorization for the cross-border operation expired at
midnight on Sunday night. For the Syrian people and
for all those humanitarians who work diligently to
assist them, this has been a long and uncertain couple
of days. The fear that vital supplies of aid would be cut
generated significant uncertainty and fear.
The draft resolution before us now will renew
the border crossing at Bab Al-Hawa for six months.
It anticipates the further extension of an additional
six months, which will require a separate resolution.
Importantly, a special report from the Secretary2/8

12/07/2022

We recognize that a six-month renewal is shorter
than we, as co-penholders, aimed for when we started
this negotiation. We also recognize that the vast majority
of the members of the Council shared that view and that
of humanitarian actors on the ground that a 12-month
mandate was needed.
What is most important today is that, with this
draft resolution, the Council keeps the cross-border of
mechanism open and operating and that humanitarian
assistance continues to reach those in need. This
draft resolution will facilitate further early-recovery
efforts and encourage regular follow-up meetings
on implementation.
This draft resolution represents a delicate balance
between the different positions of Council members
at this time. We are grateful to all Council members
for their engagement to that end. Now it is time for the
Council to assume its responsibilities. We command
this draft resolution to the Council, and we ask all
members to support it.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I make this explanation
of vote before the voting on behalf of the 10 elected
members of the Security Council (E-10), in Kenya’s
capacity as coordinator for the month of July.
The E-10 appreciates the manner in which
delegations rallied to put foremost the humanitarian
needs of the Syrian people. It is in that regard that the E-10
commends the extensive efforts by the co-penholders
to achieve a compromise draft text that ensures the
continuity of the critical humanitarian assistance
provided through the cross-border mechanism, which
is key to addressing the dire and urgent needs of the
Syrian people.
Last week, the E-10 supported a 12-month renewal,
as that would have given humanitarian organizations
more certainty in their operations. Ultimately, however,
the E-10’s fundamental interest is for the Security
Council to meet the grave needs of the Syrian people.
The E-10 therefore stands behind the co-penholders’
draft text, as it allows for critical humanitarian
assistance to be delivered.
We look forward to the continuing effective
implementation of the cross-border mechanism, as
agreed, so that the conditions are in place for its
continuation after the coming six months. To that end,
22-42021

12/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East

the E-10 will continue to play a constructive role that
aims to bridge divides and identify useful compromises
that advance the humanitarian well-being of the Syrian
people. I reiterate that the E-10’s pressing interest
remains the uniting of the Security Council on that
issue and on behalf of the Syrian people.
The President: I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, China, Gabon, Ghana, India,
Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, Norway, Russian
Federation, United Arab Emirates
Against:
None
Abstaining:
France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
The President: The draft resolution received 12 votes
in favour, none against and 3 abstentions. The draft
resolution has been adopted as resolution 2642 (2022).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I am delivering this statement
on behalf of Ireland and Norway.
As co-penholders, Norway and Ireland welcome
the Council’s adoption of resolution 2642 (2022),
renewing the authorization for the cross-border
humanitarian aid operation into Syria. Throughout this
negotiation, Norway and Ireland engaged carefully and
constructively with all Council members. Our objective
has always been clear — humanitarian aid must reach
all people in need in Syria. We have listened carefully
to the United Nations and to humanitarian agencies
on the ground. They were clear that given the level
of humanitarian need in north-west Syria, the crossborder mechanism must be renewed.
They were also clear that, for effective
implementation of the humanitarian response serving
the long-suffering people in north-western Syria, a
minimum extension of 12 months was needed. As
co-penholders, we worked for that outcome, and we
regret the use of the veto by one member of the Council,
which prevented the extension.

S/PV.9089

Resolution 2642 (2022), which we adopted today,
keeps the critical cross-border mechanism open. It
allows this life-saving humanitarian operation to
continue. For those in humanitarian need in northwestern Syria who have been in an uncertain situation,
with the negotiations running into overtime, we can
now reassure them. That is what matters. The crossborder operation is their lifeline, and today the crossborder operation remains.
The Council has a responsibility to put the needs
of Syrians first and to ensure that humanitarian relief
can reach those who rely on it. As we move forward, it
is incumbent upon every one of us to come together for
the sake of the people of Syria, to support humanitarian
deliveries by any modality and to support continued
and enhanced early-recovery efforts. It is our sincere
hope that the Council can build on this adoption to
engage in further constructive dialogue on Syria and,
above all, to put the needs of the people of Syria at the
heart of all that we do.
Now over 11 years into this terrible conflict, the
people of Syria have suffered too much and for too
long. Ireland and Norway call for redoubled efforts to
work towards a political solution in Syria. We urge all
parties to engage urgently and constructively with the
Special Envoy.
Finally, Ireland and Norway wish to thank
all Council members for their engagement on this
important file. We would like to warmly acknowledge
the critical role played by the 10 elected members of the
Council throughout this process. With this resolution,
the Council is ensuring that life-saving humanitarian
assistance will continue to be delivered to the many
millions in need in north-western Syria.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): India welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2642 (2022), extending the
authorization of humanitarian assistance to Syria
through the Bab Al-Hawa crossing. Today’s adoption
will reassure nearly 4 million people in the north-west
of Syria — 2.7 million of whom are internally displaced
persons, many of them women and children. At the same
time, we should not lose sight of the fact that more than
14.5 million people across Syria need humanitarian
assistance in one form or another, with essential food
items and fuel in short supply. Food insecurity has
reached historic highs, and an estimated 60 per cent
of the population is food insecure, according to the
United Nations.

22-420213/8

S/PV.9089

The situation in the Middle East

It is therefore clear that decisive forward movement
on the political track in Syria remains an urgent
imperative if we are to alleviate the suffering of its
people. To realize that, all parties, particularly the
external players, need to display their commitment,
in tangible terms, to a Syrian-led and -owned United
Nations-facilitated political process in line with
resolution 2254 (2015).
We reiterate our call for enhanced and effective
humanitarian assistance to all Syrians throughout
the country, without discrimination, politicization
or preconditions. While cross-border operations are
predictable and important, they cannot continue to
exist in perpetuity. Concrete steps need to be taken in
order to address the hurdles that are obstructing the
functioning of cross-line operations.
Humanitarian assistance cannot be a matter
of political expediency. Linking humanitarian and
development assistance with progress in the political
process will only exacerbate humanitarian suffering
and should be avoided. The international community
also needs to constructively look at promoting projects
that will bring much-needed jobs and economic
opportunities for the Syrian people. Similarly, early
recovery projects that help Syrian people to become
self-sustaining, need a realistic basis to move forward.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that India is
committed to supporting the people of Syria in their
endeavour to achieve lasting peace and stability.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French):
The renewal of the cross-border humanitarian aid
mechanism is a relief because this remains a vital tool
for millions of Syrians.
I commend the efforts of Ireland and Norway to
reach a compromise. But France is not satisfied with
this precarious renewal for just six months, which
will expire in the depths of winter at the very moment
when aid is the most indispensable, without any firm
guarantee of renewal. The call by the SecretaryGeneral and the whole of the humanitarian community
to renew this mechanism for 12 months was clear, but
nevertheless ignored.
The Council is therefore not up to its responsibilities,
which is why France abstained in the voting.
Our mobilization, however, remains intact.
France will continue to fully assume its humanitarian
responsibilities in the spirit of the principles and
4/8

12/07/2022

parameters of the Secretary-General on United Nations
assistance in Syria. We shall be extremely vigilant in
six months at the time of the renewal of the cross-border
mechanism so as to ensure that the Security Council
gives the humanitarian community the possibility to
meet the immense needs of the people.
France remains mobilized to bring an end to the
war. However, our position and that of our European
partners remains unchanged — we will not finance
reconstruction or lift sanctions until a credible and
inclusive political process is firmly under way, pursuant
to resolution 2254 (2015), adopted unanimously by
the Council.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
join others in thanking Norway and Ireland for their
work as co-penholders.
The United Kingdom approached this renewal as
it has every year since the mandate was first agreed
in 2014 (resolution 2165 (2022)): on the basis of
humanitarian need and humanitarian need alone.
Humanitarian need in Syria is the highest it has ever
been: 4.1 million people in need of aid across the northwest, of which 2.4 million are reliant solely on the
United Nations cross-border mechanism for life-saving
assistance every single month.
We have heard repeatedly from the United
Nations and from non-governmental organizations
that a renewal for 12 months was necessary to provide
operational certainty so they could prepare to meet
that humanitarian need, especially during the harsh
months of winter. Last Friday, Russia stopped this from
happening (see S/PV.9087).
With today’s vote, innocent Syrians can breathe no
sigh of relief. The suffering and the uncertainty go on.
Without the confidence of at least 12 months, United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations
risk being caught in a perpetual cycle of pre-positioning
and contingency planning. It is therefore important that
we are clear: while this renewal is only for an initial six
months, the intent of the Security Council is to renew
it for a further six months subject to another resolution.
The Secretary-General’s report requested by
resolution 2642 (2022) will be able to set out the
implications, were this mandate to come to an end in
January, as winter is setting in. The humanitarian case
for a further renewal will be self-evident, and to oppose
it would be to ignore the suffering of 4.1 million people.
22-42021

12/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East

The United Kingdom will continue to support
the United Nations efforts to deliver its humanitarian
response plan. But we will not consider providing
any reconstruction assistance without a credible,
substantive and genuine political process firmly under
way. A genuine political process is the only sustainable
means of ending the suffering in Syria.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes the Security Council’s adoption of
resolution 2642 (2022) renewing the authorization for
humanitarian assistance in Syria. We thank Ireland and
Norway, as well as Russia and other Council members,
for their active efforts over the past few days to promote
the final outcome through intensive communication.
The facts have shown that it is normal for members of
the Council to have differences on relevant issues. It is
only natural that while sometimes divergences may be
sharp, as long as we have full political will, persevere
in patient consultations and accommodate each other’s
concerns, we can still find effective solutions to
these problems. Ramming a vote through when major
differences still exist will only intensify contradictions
and differences and will do a disservice to maintaining
the unity of the Council and its effective discharge of
its responsibilities.
China’s position on the humanitarian issue in
Syria is as consistent as it is clear. We always maintain
that humanitarian assistance to Syria should respect
Syria’s sovereignty and the ownership by the Syrian
Government. Crossline delivery should become the
main channel for humanitarian assistance to Syria.
Cross-border delivery is a temporary arrangement
made under specific circumstances. It is necessary to
speed up the transition to crossline relief and establish
a clear timetable for the eventual termination of crossborder relief.
The resolution just adopted provides for the
necessary flexibility to allow the Council to assess and
adjust its mandate in a timely manner. The resolution
sets out clear demands for early-recovery programmes
and greater transparency in relief efforts. The bimonthly
informal interactive dialogues of the Security Council
are also conducive to concrete follow-ups on the
resolution. We expect all parties to strictly abide by the
basic principles governing international humanitarian
assistance, strictly comply with the requirements of
Security Council resolutions, ensure the neutrality and
transparency of assistance and make it more targeted
and effective.

S/PV.9089

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that unilateral
sanctions severely restrict the operations of international
humanitarian agencies in Syria and run counter to the
efforts of the Security Council and the international
community aimed at improving humanitarian access
and increasing humanitarian resources in Syria.
China urges the relevant countries to immediately and
comprehensively lift unilateral sanctions against Syria.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would like first to express
my delegation’s appreciation for the outstanding work
done by the co-penholders, Ireland and Norway, as well
as the active engagement of Kenya as the coordinator of
the 10 elected members of the Security Council (E-10),
in order to streamline this process.
Albania voted in favour of resolution 2642 (2022)
today. We did so with a sense of deep responsibility,
but also with a heavy heart. Last Friday was one of
those regrettable and dark moments when the Security
Council was not able to live up to its responsibilities,
when what it produced was contrary to its raison d’être.
Our position for a better result has been outlined
clearly and strongly many times in this Chamber,
including during the explanation of vote delivered on
behalf of the E-10 by the representative of Kenya just
a few minutes ago. We wanted the 4 million Syrians
to rely with confidence on this exceptional lifeline and
allow humanitarian actors to plan more adequately
and mobilize resources in time. We wanted children,
girls, mothers, entire families, as well as the brave
humanitarian workers, to believe and see that the
Security Council is on their side.
Last week we failed, while, ironically, being right.
We were stopped by a power we do not possess and
by a privilege that was misused: the veto by Russia
(see S/PV.9087).
We agreed today on this imperfect and difficult
compromise because saving human lives is above
diplomatic pride or geopolitical scores. The needs of
those millions of Syrians in desperate need come — and
should come — first. We have said it many times, and
we maintain it: those who need help must get help by
all possible means.
By voting in favour of resolution 2642 (2022),
we are doing our part with an open heart, not with
cynicism — with solidarity, not with calculations.
We continue to believe that continuing effective
implementation of the cross-border mechanism

22-420215/8

S/PV.9089

The situation in the Middle East

remains crucial and that, upon the recommendations of
the Secretary-General, we will be able to extend it for
another six months next January.
Until the new Syria emerges out of the ruins of
a war that has entered its twelfth year, cross-border
assistance will continue to be vital to meeting the
immense humanitarian needs in north-western Syria.
We must inspire hope and trust in the Syrian people
and help them find the path to their future in a dignified
way, through free choice, with their rights respected
through a democratic process with effective justice and
accountability as fundamental parts of it.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, the United Arab Emirates aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of Kenya on behalf of the 10 elected members of the
Security Council.
My country welcomes today’s adoption of resolution
2642 (2022) to extend the cross-border aid mechanism
in Syria, and we are pleased that a compromise has
been reached that reflects the Council’s commitment
to responding to the massive humanitarian needs. It
also represents a critical step in ensuring the delivery
of humanitarian aid to those in need across Syria, by
all means.
Accordingly, we would like to extend our sincere
thanks to Norway and Ireland, the co-penholders on the
Syrian humanitarian dossier, for their tireless efforts in
facilitating the negotiations that led to the adoption of
the resolution. We also appreciate the cooperation of all
Council members in that regard.
We stress that the international community must
continue its efforts to alleviate the suffering of the
Syrian people and to ensure them access to all basic
services. That includes stepping up early-recovery
projects to respond to the urgent needs on the ground,
especially considering the exacerbation of the global
food and health crises. We also welcome the inclusion
of important language in the resolution about providing
Syrians with electricity. Electricity is a fundamental
humanitarian necessity, without which essential
services such as in hospitals and schools cannot function
and millions of Syrians are unable to receive water.
In conclusion, we hope to build on that momentum,
especially in January of next year. It is critical to
continue prioritizing the Syrian dossier in all its aspects
in the long term to achieve stability, prosperity and
6/8

12/07/2022

peace for the brotherly people of Syria in particular and
the Arab world in general.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): My delegation supported the adoption of
resolution 2642 (2022), which was put forward by the
informal penholders of the Syrian humanitarian dossier
in the Security Council, namely, the delegations of
Norway and Ireland. It allows the Syrian cross-border
mechanism to continue working until January 2023.
We note that some dissatisfaction has been
expressed by some of our colleagues concerning the
fact that their vision of the extension of the mechanism
did not pass. Well, the world is not limited by the
Western countries or the so-called first Golden Billion,
as was imagined in Washington, London and Paris. It is
time for them to get used to respecting the interests of
other States, first and foremost States that are impacted
directly by Security Council decisions.
By finding the optimal way of extending the
cross-border mechanism, we gave a second chance
to the good-faith implementation of all aspects of the
resolution for the upcoming six months.
Through the opportunities offered by the informal
interactive dialogues within the Security Council, we
will continue to monitor progress in implementing the
resolution that we adopted today so as to decide on the
ultimate fate of the cross-border mechanism.
We are convinced that only through candid and
substantive dialogue on the issues in the Syrian
humanitarian track while involving all interested
parties will we be able, in six months’ time, to come
up with a well-considered decision. The special reports
of the Secretary-General, unfortunately, as shown by
experience, are not sufficient for that purpose. We all
now need to work on many important areas, including
increasing cross-line deliveries in all regions of Syria.
We call also upon the Secretary-General to pay
special attention to the need to lift unilateral sanctions
in the context of the consequences of the coronavirus
disease pandemic, which has not yet been overcome.
We must work actively to ensure that that issue is
resolved in Syria, which will increase opportunities
for donors to fund early-recovery projects in that Arab
country. We will closely monitor the achievement of all
those goals as well and expect that by January 2023 the
Secretary-General will have provided the Council with
exhaustive information on the work done.
22-42021

12/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Mills (United States of America): I, too, want
to thank the penholders for leading a process with
integrity and an unquestionable commitment to meeting
the needs of the most vulnerable Syrian people.
The vote we took this morning is what happens
when one Council member takes the entire Security
Council hostage, with the lives of Syrian men, women
and children hanging in the balance.
Right now the humanitarian needs in Syria
are greater than they have ever been. As other
colleagues have noted, the Secretary-General asked
for more. United Nations agencies asked for more.
Non-governmental organizations asked for more.
Syrians asked for more. All those voices told us that
a straightforward, 12-month mandate for cross-border
was the bare minimum and that now was the moment
to step up.
But one country, one member, has chosen not to
put humanitarian needs first. Rather than scaling
up, we have been, sadly, pushed to cut down. That
is such a heartless play. It will serve only to hurt the
Syrian people.
Last year the Council showed that there was
a different way. The entire Council came together
to adopt resolution 2585 (2021) unanimously that
ensured that the bare minimum was met. This year,
14 members of the Council were prepared to go that
route again, but one member stood against it. And now,
the last remaining United Nations-authorized border
crossing has been whittled back. This mandate will
make the work of humanitarian organizations more
costly and more challenging for procurement, staffing
and planning.

S/PV.9089

Some of the recent dire needs in Syria are a direct
result of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and the shocks
that that brutal invasion has caused to food systems in
Syria and around the world. The simple truth is, Russia
does not care. Russia is so brazen in its disregard for
Syrian lives that it has not even bothered trying to
justify its stance on a humanitarian basis. That is an
immoral and cynical approach to humanitarian needs.
Let us be clear: the first of the two six-month
extensions that the Security Council decided on today
will bring us only to January, which will be the very
moment when humanitarian needs peak.
The weakness of resolution 2642 (2022) is that it
requires further action from the Council to confirm
what should be automatic. But to fail to do so would
be unconscionable. It would leave Syrians without
blankets or fuel for heat in the dead of winter. It would
deprive children of their education, since their schools
will not have funding to plan for the second half of the
year. We cannot lose sight of the gravity of this decision
and what will be at stake.
When we talked to the United Nations and
non-governmental organizations over the weekend,
they told us that a temporary extension was better than
nothing. And since our approach to humanitarian aid
has always been driven by needs, we are listening to the
experts on the ground. That is why we did not stand in
the way of the resolution.
In the coming months we will work with our
humanitarian partners to stave off the worst-case
scenarios that we have all been warned about, and we
will take a hard look at our aid posture in Syria and do
everything in our power to help those in need.

Let us remember that this mandate exists because
the Al-Assad regime has a well-documented history
of corruption and of stealing aid and denying it to
communities in need. With its brutal behaviour and
continued attacks on civilians, the cross-border
mechanism remains essential to ensuring that aid is
able to reach those in need.

As I conclude, I would urge that we not forget that
the Russian Federation was the only Council member to
oppose a straightforward 12-month resolution. Despite
my Russian colleague’s comments, the entire Council
voted last Friday. Russia stood alone, in complete
isolation, and used its veto to punish the Syrian people.
It bullied Council members and continued its merciless
approach towards the most vulnerable.

Russia continues to defend that brutal regime and
treat the Syrian people as disposable. They were already
hanging on by a thread, and now that thread could snap.
The rest of us will do whatever it takes to get the most
vulnerable Syrian people the humanitarian aid that they
need, and Russia knows that.

We now move forward knowing that the Council
voted in solidarity today with the Syrian people and
with the principles of humanitarian assistance. The
commitment of the United States to the Syrian people
will not end with this resolution. We will not turn our
backs on those who have been suffering for more than

22-420217/8

S/PV.9089

The situation in the Middle East

a decade, and we hope that the other members of the
Council will not do so either.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): The Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic has stressed time and again that it has
primary responsibility for all matters concerning
the Syrian people. In the past few years we have
repeatedly expressed our commitment to ensuring
that humanitarian assistance reaches all Syrians all
over the country without discrimination or exclusion.
In extremely challenging times, my Government has
succeeded in facilitating many of the convoys from
the United Nations and the International Committee
of the Red Cross, as well as the humanitarian work
of partners in various parts of Syria. That refutes all
the allegations spread by certain hostile countries and
their proxies in order to justify the extension of the socalled cross-border mechanism, despite the fact that it
was intended to be a temporary exceptional measure to
address circumstances that are no longer relevant.
In a statement before the Security Council two days
ago (see S/PV.9087), the delegation of the Syrian Arab
Republic laid out in detail all of Syria’s concerns about
the implementation of humanitarian operations in Syria
and expressed our readiness to undertake serious work
in collaboration with all parties to ensure that every
concern is addressed. What was achieved today could
have been achieved days ago. However, the political
selfishness of the three Western permanent members
of the Security Council compelled them to exploit the
Council yet again, using it to garner the support of public
opinion through a media disinformation campaign
designed to offend the Governments of Syria and Russia.

8/8

12/07/2022

They are trying to create a false impression that they
are concerned about humanitarian issues while at the
same time they have been responsible for an unethical,
inhumane and illegitimate siege imposed on the Syrian
people that has made them suffer and obstructed the
implementation of humanitarian operations.
What my delegation requested, in coordination
with friendly delegations in the Security Council, was
the introduction of improvements in the text of the draft
resolution that would ensure an adequate response to
humanitarian needs in a balanced, transparent and
quantifiable way in order to improve the humanitarian
situation of the Syrian people and their livelihoods and
alleviate their suffering, including through promoting
early-recovery projects, especially in the critical
electricity sector, which has now been included in
resolution 2642 (2022), just adopted by the Security
Council. My delegation urges the Secretariat to include
in the report of the Secretary-General that the resolution
requests a meticulous quantitative, qualitative and
geographically based assessment of the humanitarian
needs in Syria and the impact of the unilateral coercive
measures imposed by the United States of America and
the European Union on responding to such needs.
In conclusion, my delegation appreciates the
flexibility of the delegation of the Russian Federation in
facilitating the adoption of resolution 2642 (2022). We
also call for the strict implementation of its provisions
without selectivity, discrimination or politicization. We
look forward to the convening of the informal interactive
dialogue meetings referred to in the resolution, which
would represent a platform for reviewing and following
up on its implementation.
The meeting rose at 9.45 a.m.

22-42021
