UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1872””MEETING:l4JANU@q\gfj&k$~y
NEW YORK

JUN 29 1984

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1872) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The Middle East problem including the Palestinian question. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1872

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the Officicrl Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in, yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security
Council.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1872nd MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 14 January 1976, at 3 p.m.
Pwsidmt:
Mr. Salim A. SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania).

discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. I
propose, if I hear no objection, to invite the representative of Mauritania to participate in the discussion, in
conformity with the usual practice and with the relevant
provisions of the Charter.and the provisional rules of
procedure. Since there are no objections, I invite that
representative
to take the place reserved for him at
the side of the Council chamber, on the usual understanding that he will be invited to take a place at the
Council table whenever he wishes to address the
Council.

Prcwnt: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics., United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

The Middle
question
The meeting

agenda (S/Agenda/1872)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. El Hasscn
(Muurituniu)
took the place reserved for him ut the
side of the Council chumher.

of the agenda
East problem

including

the Palestinian

The Security Council will now
3. The PRESIDENT:
continue its examination of the question on the agenda.
The first speaker is the representative
of Qatar. In
accordance with the procedure followed yesterday
[/87/st meeting],
I would ask the representative
of
Jordan to withdraw temporarily
from his seat at the
Council table in order that his place may be taken by
the representative of Qatar. I invite that representative to take a place at the Council tabie and to make
his statement.

wus culled to order at 3.50 p.m.
Adoption

of’ the agenda

The ugendu wus adopted.
The Middle

East problem including
Palestinian question

the

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken earlier by the Council [/870th and 187/st
meetings],
I invite the representatives
of Egypt,
Jordan, Qatar, the Syrian Arab Republic, the United
Arab Emirates and Yugoslavia, in conformity with the
usual practice and the relevant provisions of the
Charter and the provisional
rules of procedure, to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote.
In accordance with the decision also taken by the
Council [1870th meeting], I invite the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization to participate in
the discussion.

4. Mr. JAMAL (Qatar): Sir, allow me to congratulate you upon your assumption of the post of President
of the Security Council for the month of January.
Your exceptional qualities and skills are well known to
us here within the United Nations, as well as beyond.
We are confident that they will be a great asset to
our deliberations.
I also should like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the members of the Security Council
for giving my delegation the opportunity to participate
in this very important debate, which my Government
considers with great concern. Equally, I should like to
extend, on behalf of my delegation, a warm and heartfelt welcome to the delegation of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), which is participating in the
Security Council’s debate on an item involving the
Palestinian people.

At the invitation c$ the President, Mr. Ahdel Meguid
(Egypt), Mr. Shuruf (Jordan), Mr. Allaf (Syriun Arab
Republic) ,und Mr. Khaddoumi
(Pukestine Liberation
Organizution)
took places at the Security Council
table; Mr. Jumul (Qutur), Mr. Gbobush (United Arub
Emirutes) and Mr. Petri; ( Yugosluviu) took the places
.rewrved for them ut the side of the Council chamber.

5. The delegation of Qatar welcomed Security Council resolution 381 (1975) of 30 November 1975, which
invited the PLO to participate in the general debate
on the Middle East and the Palestine question. Indeed,
it was a historic decision of the Council and should
be viewed in the context of the resolutions at the
twenty-ninth
and thirtieth sessions of the General

2. The PRESIDENT:
I have also received a letter
from the representative
of Mauritania
containing a
request to be invited in accordance with rule 37 of the
provisional
rules of procedure, to participate in the
1

Assembly relating to Palestine, notably resolution 3375
(XXX) of 10 November 1975, whereby the Assembly
called for

Arab people of Palestine or with other Arab States
which have been suffering from racist Zionist aggression since 1947. The position of Zionism in the Middle
East is founded on the precarious grounds of aggression
and domination. As an alien element, Zionism can
survive only by maintaining the tension and turmoil
which have constituted its history since 1947.

“the invitation of the Palestine Liberation Omanization, the representative of the Palestinian people,
to participate in all efforts, deliberations and conferences on the Middle East which are held under
the auspices of the United Nations, on an equal
footing with other parties.”

10. My Governrnent fully bebeves that in order to
solve the question of the Middle East and its core,
namely, the Palestine question, and to generate
momentum towards a lasting and just solution, we
must consider this question as one of flagrant Israeli
aggression against the Palestinian and Arab peoples
and put an end to this aggression by forcing the
aggressor- to withdraw from all the, occupied Arab
territories and prevent the aggress-or from reaping
the fruits of his aggression by giving full recognition
to the already recognized inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, as stated in ‘General Assembly
resolution 3236 (XXIX).

6. From this standpoint, it is important to reassert
my Government’s conviction that no final and lasting
peace with justice in the Middle East can take place
without the effective participation of the PLO, which
has been widely recognized by the Members of the
United Nations as the genuine representative of the
Palestinian people, and the implementation of resolutions adopted by the Security Council and the General
Assembly.
7. The Security Council has been considering the
Middle East question for nearly three decades in order
to resolve the problems of the constant tension caused
by the Zionist occupation of Arab land and the denial
to the Palestinian Arab people of the exercise of their
rights, the control of their destiny and their selfdetermination. What are the results of those endeavours? What have we accompIished in all these
deliberations? The results are well known: increased
Zionist expansion, disregard of world public opinion,
and atrocities of aggression committed by the Israeli
authorities against the Arab and Palestinian peoples.

11. Unless these two conditions are fulfilled and,
above all, the recognition of the national rights of the
Palestinian people, it is our belief that a final and.
lasting peace with justice will not prevail in the Middle
East. On that basis, we believe that Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) failed to recognize
the inalienabre rights of the Palestinian people, represented by the PLO; the resolutions referred only
to the Palestinian refugees and not to the root cause
of why they became refugees and from where they
came.
12. The absence of the representative of Israel and
Israel’s boycott of the Security Council debate is a
clear sign of Israel’s attitude to the resolutions adopted
by the General Assembly. The precarious sit&Ion
in the Middle East remains in perpetual movement,
full of hazards. The tragedy of Palestine goes beyond
its geographic borders and more than ever requires
from the Council that it take the matter seriously and
provide a reasonable basis for a just and lasting solution to the Middle East problem including the Palestine
question, namely, the restoration of the land of
Palestine and other Arab lands to their peopies and
the return of the people of Palestine and other Arabs
to their homelands.

8. My delegation shares the grave concern expressed
by previous speakers at the measures being taken by
Israel to consolidate its hold over the occupied Arab
territories. The change in the legal and demographic
character of the occupied territories, the establishment of Israeli settlements in the area, the economic
subservience of the occupied territories, the economic
and political objectives of the occupying Power, the
utilization of the people of the occupied territories
as cheap labour: all those actions contradict the express
provisions of international law and the resolutions of
the United Nations. In particular, the sensibilities of
millions al1 over the world to whom Jerusalem is
sacred cannot tolerate the Holy City being treated as
the spoils of war. The action taken by Israel to annex
that city are in defiance of the numerous resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council
on Jerusalem and other cities in the occupied Arab
lands. Those acts also contradict the principle of the
non-acquisition of territory by the use of force.

13. It is in the Iight of these considerations that we
hope that the Security Council wiIl be able meaningfully and with all sincerity to discharge its obliga:
tions and to use the means provided by the Charter
of the United Nations to force Israel to comply with
the resolutionsofthe Organization which it has ignored
for a very long time.

9. The United Nations has adopted more resolutions
concerning the Middle East problem and the Palestine
question than any other matter of international interest.
But Israel has failed to implement even one of those
resolutions. On the contrary, since its birth Israel has
violated the Charter and refused to implement any
resolution connected in any way with the rights of the

14. Mr. JACKSON (Guyana): Mr. President, at the
very outset of my participation in this debate, I wish
to associate myseif and my delegarion with the sentiments you expressed two days ago when paying, a
tribute to the memory of Premier Chou En+Iai of the
2

People’s Republic of China, My ownPrime Minister+&
Comrade Forbes Burnham, mad@the: following state.?
merit on being apprised of the sad news of Chou
En&i’s death:

amred of leadetilp-&the
oionth.

highest quality during this

17. May I take this opportunity also-to do..two.things:
first, to thank Mr. Ivor Richard of the United Kingdom,
who so skilfully and patiently presided over our work
during the month of December 1975: secondly, to join
with you, Sir, and with other delegations in welcoming
most cordially the delegations of Benin; the Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama and Romania to the
Council. Each one comes to the Council with a fine
record of constructive contribution. We look forward
to working closely and co-operatively with ail of them.

“I am deeply shocked by.the news of the death of
Comrade Chou En-lai, a truly great revolutionary
leader who for over a quarter of a century was
a central figure in the transformation of China into
a-truly socialist State; a man who was in the vanguard
of China’s struggle for the creation of a just society
for ail her people.
“He had been Premier of China since the birth of
the Republic. His intellect, capacity for hard work,
skilful diplomacy and commitment to his country’s
development made him one of the most outstanding
statesmen of the twentieth century.

18. The earlier part of our consideration of the item
on the agenda, “The Middle East problem including
the Palestinian question’*, was consumed by discussions-rather
lengthy discussions-on
important
aspects of procedural questions. And during those
discussions there were verbal essays on several
matters. My delegation did not participate in those
discussions, but would nevertheless at this stage iike
to offer its comments ownone aspect of them.

“He was a tireless champion of socialism and an
indefatigable- opponent-of imperialism, and his death
is a loss not only to China but to all progressive
forces of mankind.
“Guyana and China have over the yearsdeveloped
close and fraternal relations and it was just under a
year ago that I and members of my delegation were
privileged to meet with-Chou En-lai at Peking, where
we shared thoughts and a common understanding
. ofmany.of the serious international issuesof the day.

19. Over the last few months there has been a virtual
bombast against organs of the United Nations-first the
General Assembly and now the Security Council.
While we enter contestation neither on the purity of
intention nor on, the genuineness of motivations, we
insist on our entitlement to pronounce on the accuracy
of the interpretation and to challenge the authenticity
of the judgement. Portentous words conveying prophetic sentiments have been flung at us with ail the
trappings of an, organized campaign. And in the interstices of those expressions have been concealed
indications of intimidation and pressure.

“I take this opportunity to say to the Government and the people of China that we in Guyana
share with them today the sorrow which they all
must feel on this sad occasion and to convey to
them our deepest sympathy.”
15. Mr. President, it is a fortunate accident that at
the beginning of this year 1976you, Mr. Salim Ahmed
Salim, an eminent son of Africa, a most worthy
representative of your great country, the United
Republic of Tanzania, a true friend and a real brother,
should be presiding over the Council’s deliberations..
Your distinction as an intrepid fighter unwaveringly
upholding principles that are lofty, your vast skills as
a diplomat, your varied talents, your erudition and,
above all, your keen sensitivity towards what is
ennobling, what is just and what is right are matters
of public record widely acciaimed.‘For me personally
and for my entire delegation, this is an occasion that
gives rise to immense satisfaction.,

20. The phenomenon of modern professional sport
has given,legitimacy to two concepts-that of intimidation and that of the superstar. If I assume for a brief
while a posture which I, have only just criticized, it
is only to enable me to say: let us confine those
concepts to that area of human activity and let us
not by a process of osmosis allow them to intrude
into our work in the Organization.
21. Quite seriously, in several countries that are
States Members of the United Nations, peoples’ faith
in institutions had been profoundly shaken. In some
of those countries, domestic institutions are afso being
subjected to rigorous inquiry and intense scrutiny.
It is a fact that in those countries. the operations
of several domestic institutions are under attack and
there is a real and genuine crisis of confidence in
them. And so it is that as a consequence, as understandable as it. is logical, spokesmen in and for those
countries have criticized the operations of infernational institutions, including this one, the United
Nations. Those of us who have faith not only in the
role but also in the efficacy of the United Nations
should be tolerant, for we believe that ultimately such
criticisms will be judged as counter-productive. Let

16. In pledging my own and my’,delegation’s total
support of and co-operation with you as President, I
should like to say that this unequivocal pledge flows
logically and irreversibly from our own dose
personal relationship and shared perceptions, from the
deep friendship which the leaders of our countries
enjoy, and from the bonds that link our peoples in
common struggle, symbolized by the Treaty of Mutual
Solidarity: and Co-operation which our two countries
concluded. For its part, Mr. President, Guyana is
3

us, therefore, be vigilant in resisting pressure and
intimidation,
and patient while those peoples use time
to recommit their hopes and aspirations to the institutions they helped to create.
22. Turning to the substantive aspects of the issue
before the Council, my delegation wishes to acknowledge the participation
of representatives of the PLO
in the debates and to welcome them most warmly.
Guyana voted in favour of their participation
and we
are proud to be one of the members which made this
possible. I venture to suggest that whatever decisions
we take at the end of our deliberations,
the fact that
the legitimate representatives of the dispossessed and
dispersed Palestinian people are with us and have
contributed
to our deliberations
is a matter of the
utmost significance. For it accurately reflects the will
of the vast majority of the international
community
that no longer shall the rights of the Palestinian people
remain peripheral to the search for peace in the Middle
East. The Palestinian question is not tangential to the
problems of the Middle East. Few doubt-indeed
many
assert-that
the restoration of the rights of the Palestinian people is central to the solution of those
problems.
23. My ownForeign
Minister, Comrade Frederick
Wills, speaking in the general debate at the thirtieth
session of the General Assembly, said:
“The prospects for lasting peace in the Middle
East begin and end with the rights of the Palestinian
people. For their struggle is an integral part of the
liberation struggle throughout the world. This area,
the ancient cradle of so many cultures and religions,
is today the arena in which is played out the competition and conflict of the interests of major Powers,
Powers which are intent on supporting the expansionist aims of Zionism, or securing the control of
communications
or of energy resources.
“In the welter of such turbulence we must continue to insist that the foremost responsibility
of
the international
community
in this area is the
restoration of the rights of the Palestinian people.“’
24. I believe that it is universally accepted that once
the negotiating process for the settlement of disputes
is embraced, all the parties involved in any dispute
should participate in that process. Thus it is a sine yrrtr
lro~r that in the search for peace in the Middle East
all the parties concerned, and most certainly the
Palestinian people through their authentic representative, the PLO, should be involved in all those processes. That attests to the relevance of General Assembly resolution 3375 (XXX). It is in that wise that
my delegation
regrets the decision of the Israeli
Government not to participate in these debates.
25. The problems and the issues we face today in
regard to the Middle East are nearly as old as the
history of the United Nations itself. The vicissitudes

of international
consideration
of, and action on, the
situation in the ‘Middle East including the Palestinian
question are well documented and clearly expressed.
Extensive recitation by the delegation of Guyana is
therefore not required. Yet it is clearly necessary for
me to sketch the background against which Guyana
approaches the current debates and to give our perception of the way forward.
26. As a country which ardently pursues a policy of
non-alignment,
Guyana stands by the ~collective
affirmations of conferences of non-aligned countries
on this question. At Dar es Salaam in April 1970,
at Lusaka in Septe~mber 1970, in the capital of my own
country, Georgetown, in August 1972, at Algiers in
September 1973, and more recently at Lima in August
1975, the non-aligned have stood steadfast by the
only principles which can ensure just and lasting peace
in the Middle East. And before 1970 non-aligned
countries ,had, at Belgrade in September l961, at
Cairo in October 1964 and again at Belgrade in July
1969, affirmed and reaffirmed their commitment
to
those essential principles.
Enumerated
skeletally,
those principles are: respect for the rights of the
Palestinian people and their entitlement
to a home;
the non-acquisition
of territory by force and the right
‘of all the States in the .Middle East to exist within
secure and internationally
recognized boundaries.
27. But for Guyana the Palestinian tragedy-and
it
can be called by no other name-has a special and farreaching significance. For earlier in this century there
was a serious proposal, based on the recommendations
of a joint Anglo-American
Committee of Inquiry on
Palestine appointed by the then President of the United
States of America, President Roosevelt, for the settlement in my country of Jewish refugees’ escaping
persecution in Europe. The proposal was to dispose
of our land without consulting us. Such was the
ordering then of international
relations. However,
the interposition
of bureaucratic
delays, combined
with the outbreak of the second European civil war,
put paid to those plans. Yet, in the light of that nonepisode in Guyana, and against the background of the
perplexities over time concerning the land which was
Palestine, there is a present danger that in my part of
the world, in the north-eastern
sector of South
America, there can still in this era be contemplations
of similar induced migrations.
,
28. The war of. aggression of 1967 and the war of
liberation of 1973, represent neither the beginning of
the Middle East crisis nor the creation of the Palestinian question. But both wars in retrospect are important milestones regarding both those issues, so
inextricably linked. For in their aftermath, these wars
have had three essential consequences. First, they
have assisted in quickening
the conscience of the
international
community
to the gross injustice of the
suppression and the denial of the legitimate, rights of
the Palestinian people. Secondly, they have reinforced
the need for action-collective
action by the, intema-

tional community-to
restore those rights tu th-e
Palestinians and to deal adequately with States which
still believe that the territory of other States can be
acquired by force, that the international community
will acquiesce 3s s.uch action, and that an investment
can be made in the application of such an unworthy
tenet. And thirdly, they have brought a realization
-one hopes, a permanent fealization-to Israel that
it must face up to the realities of the situation.
29. Fundamental psychological and, attitudinal
changes have occurred. They are not what they used
to be. ,The effects of wars, actions taken in other
fields, and plain and simple elementary justice have
led effectively to the erosion of stereotypes based on
inverted concepts of innate superiority and divine
right, stereotypes which hadacquired a status almost
equivalent to that of folklore. And the General
Assembly, by its several resolutions at its twentyninth and thirtieth sessions, has made a great contribution to the evolution of international thinking in this
regard.
30. My delegation believes that these discussions on
the Middle East problem, including the Palestinian
question, are taking place with a clearer perception
of the realities. The involvement of the Palestinian
peopte is in sharper and bolder relief. The full meaning
of the Palestinian diaspora is more c!earIy perceived.
The true nature of Israeli calculations in the “creation
of facts” in occupied Arab territories is now more
widely acknowledged. The need for a regime of peace
in the Middle East not basedon the pursuit of selective
interests is almost universally recognized.
31. In the light of what I have said before, I believe
that this debate provides the international community
in general, and the Security Council in particular,
with a most timely opportunlty to appraise rationally
and objectively the flow of history in the Middle East
since the creation of Israel. It provides an opportunity
for us to arrive at wise, mature and judicious dispositions which, operating within the limits of what is
practicable, will restore legitimate national rights to
the dispossessed and dispersed Palestinian people
-now a nation with.ouf a State. For this is the essential
prerequisite to a peace in the area that would be as
lasting as it is just. Guyana, for its part; urges that this
opportunity not be used for vituperative recrimination.
32. I turn now in more specific form to my delegation’s ideas and thoughts on what those. dispositions
should be. Perhaps I should first of all point out w-hat
Guyana believes to be signals- of danger. We in. the
Council should be on guard lest a desire to atone for
past misdeeds on the part of some-and I do not
intend to be ungenerous-should so compromise us in
the Council as to lead to the continued repudiation
of the legitimate rights of others by’ seeming to
inrtitutionalize a current diaspora. I refer to the dispersal of the Palestinian Arabs. In the second place,
we should not take decisions which will encourage

the. belief, that the ‘@&e-keeping forces which the
Council has authorized to be stationed in the Sinai
and the Golan Heights, and to the upkeep of which
so many of us contribute, are there ,to serve the
interests of a single State. They are there, rather,
to serve the interests of the international community
as a whole. The forces are to be commended on their
performance. We pay tribute to- them and to their
Governments. But while we express thanks to them,
it is imperative that we contemplate the limited nature
of their role. So let no one subvert, or attempt to subvert, their true role.
33. The times today are different from when resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) were adopted by the
Security Council. Nevertheless, the essential prescriptions of those resolutions remain as valid as when
they were adopted. But they need updating to take
account of current perceptions and the requirements
which the circumstances of today dictate. By that
statement, Guyana implies neither a legal nor constitutional objection to either document. We accept
those realities as we accept today’s.
34. My delegation has-been, on occasion, impressed
by argument advanced inthe Security Council urging
us to be even-handed: to take what has been called
a balanced position, especiahy in a .de’licatesituation.
Adherence to that view would lead one to stick to
principles based on equity and justice. In that context
it is really difficult to see how the Council can continue to recognize,the rights of the Israelis and ignore
those of the Palestinians. But this is not all that is
required for that regime- 6f peace in the Middle East
which we all desire. ‘For peace to come to the Middle
East, Guyana believes that three essential principles’
must be operative: the- legitimate rights of the Palestinian people to afiomelandmust be adequately satisfied;
Israel must withdraw from all Arab territories occupied
since 5 June. 1967, and do so quickly; and all States
in the area, including the State of Israel, must have
the right to exist and to do so within boundaries
that are universally recognized and scrupulously
respected.
35. But the conditions for peace are of paramount
importance. No secure peace is attainable unless the
Palestinians, through their legitimate representative,
the PLO, are fully involved in the processes which
are employed in the search for peace. They are
central to that search for peace. Israel must shed, not
by a wilting, process, the cloak of intransigence and
the mantle of obstinacy which it has assumed for so
long. The United Nations, and the Security Council
in particular, while remaining flexible enough to
employ all possible mechanisms like the Geneva Peace
Conference on the Middle East, which might appear
to hold out ‘prospects for advancing peace, should
nevertheless no longer allow itself to be shunted into
the “sidings”. In this connexion my delegation is of
the view that the Geneva Conference, which operates
under the auspices of the United Nations, should be

required periodically to submit reports to the Council.
Finally, Member States to which have beeri ascribed,
or which have assumed especial responsibilities in
this matter should allow neither the interests of the
international community nor those of peace for the
parties in the Middle East to be subordinate to their
own perceived national interests.

constructive discussion on the achievement of peacein
the Middle East, and we shouldnot try tomadopt, a
resolution taking: the side of only one of the parties.
Instead-we should try to seek a solution by consensus
which will be acceptable to allthe parties concerned.
In order to attain. this goal it is desirable- that all ‘the.
parties concerned fully participate.. My delegation
appeals to the Israeli Government to join in our
current discussions on the problem; of the Middle
East including the Palestinian question.

36. Those, then, are the views of my delegation. We
are prepared to participate in any constructive consultations designed to permit the Council to reach
decisions which will advance the prospects for peace
in that troubled area of the world.

41. On this occasion I should like to. state the basic,
position of the Japanese Government on. the Middle
East conflict. The comprehensive position of the
Japanese Government on the solution of the Middle
East conflict was set forth in our statement on 22 November 1973, which, in essence, is as follows.

37. Mr. SAITO (Japan): Mr. President, since this is
the first occasion on which my delegation ,has taken
the floor this year, I should like to begin by expressing
my congratulations on the fact that you are presiding
over our deliberations this month. Your dynamic
leadership and outstanding ability as Chairman of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
your contribution to the achievements of other United
Nations bodies, notably the Security Cquncil, are well.
known to all of us. I feel certain that your dis&guished
qualities as a diplomat will provide excellent guidance
to the Council during our consideration of the
extremely important issues.that confront us. I wish
also to express my congratulations and thanks to
Mr. Richard of the United ..Kingdom for his most
successful term as Presidentof the Council last month.

42. The Government of Japan is of the view that the
following principlesshould be adhered,to in achieving
a peace settlement: the inadmissibility. of the acquisition and occupation of any territories ,by use of forcer
the withdrawal of Israeli forces from all the territo-ries
occupied. in the 1967war; respect for the integrity and
security of the territoriesof. all countries in the area
and..theneed ofguarantees to that end; and the recognition of and respect for the. legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people in accordance with. the Charter of
the United Nations in bringing about a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.
43. The Government of Japan has consistently
hoped that a just and lasting peace in the. Middle East
will be achieved through the prompt and complete
implementation of Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and. 338 (1973) and has sought to encourage
efforts- by the parties and. countries concerned to
achieve a solution through peaceful negotiations.
Since: 1971 my Government- has recognized the legitimate: rights of the Palestinian people in accordance
with the Charter of the United.Nations.

38. At the same time I wish to welcome. the tepresentatives of the five newly electedmembers of the
Council-the People’s Republic of Benin, the Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, and the. Socialist
Republic of Romania. We 1oo.Rforward.to working,
with them closely and we feel certain that we shall
establish the same relationship ,of co-operation and
understanding as we maintained with their predecessors, the representatives of the Byelorussian
Soviet S.ocia!istRepublic, Costa Rica, Iraq, the-Islamic
Republic of Mauritania and the United Republic of
Cameroon.

44. My delegation recognizes that the Palestinian
problem is.no longer solely the problem of the refugees.
and that there can be no just solution of this problem
without a political settlement in conformity with the
principles of self-determination, based upon the
Charter of the United Nations. It is the view of my
delegation that‘our discussions here on the Middle
East problem should take into account the following
considerations:‘.

39. I have the further and painful duty of expressing
to the representative of the People’s Republic of China
the most sincere condolences of my delegation on the
death of Premier Chau En-lai. His. superb achievements as one of the architects of mo.dem China were
recognized throughout the ‘world. The .Government,
and people of Japan appreciated particularly his
constructive role in the negotiations that made it
possible to normalize relations between the People’s
Republic of China and Japan.

*First, the,Palestinian question is the central issue ,
of the Middle .East probiem. Without a solution of this.
question, therefore, there can be no.true, solution of
the Middle East problem.
,
-Secondly.; a solution of this problem should be
based on- Security Council resolutions, 242 (1967) and
338 (1973). ,However, concerning the Palestinian
people, since those resolutions deal with the problem
solely in terms-of refugees, it is equally necessary.for

40. The United Nations has been concerned with the
. problem of the Middle East ,for over a quarter of a
century, and we must seek a comprehensive solution
of this problem. There re it is the earnest hope of
my delegation that on tht
\ occasion we shall have a.
6

-the Council, while reaffirming those resolutions, to
acknowiedge the legitimate rights of fhe Palestinian
people in accordance with the Charter.

tion-has not notice%b?@mrrowed. We should then -first
work to give fresh- impetus to the- dynamics of peace
and, secondly, to encompass a!! aspects of the problem,
namely, those which stem from the 1967 conliict and
are we!! known, and those which relate to the recent
growing awareness of the legitimate yearning of the
Paiestinian people to possess a homeland as do all
other peoples. We should see to it that a just settlement of the Palestinian problem,is brought about at
the same time as recognition of secure and guaranteed
.’
frontiers for a!l.the States of the area.

tThirdIy, parties to the- negotiations should utilize
the forum of the Geneva Conference, which should be
reconvened ,’at the earliest possible date.
-Fourthly and lastly, Israel and the PLO should
conduct a dialogue, in whatever form it may be, with
a view to facilitating a peaceful solution of the question.

48. Nevertheless, when one is convinced, as France
is, that there can be no peace in the Middle East
except within the framework of an over-a!! settlement
-and partial agreements can only be a step towards
an over-all settlement-we believe that the components
of that settlement are now rather obvious.

45. it is the hope of my delegation that the Security
Council will find a harmonious and balanced formula
which will reflect these points I have listed. We
understand-that all the parties concerned are sincerely
seeking the early achievement of a just and durable
settlement of the Middle East prob1e.m. The present
situation, in our view, offers a grezt opportunity to
achieve peace in the area, which for so many years
has been sought in the United Nations and outside. In
concluding, my ~delegation urges the parties directly
concerned to examine the realities of the situation and
renew their efforts for a solution.

49. First and foremost, the Arab territories occupied
as a result of the war of 1967 must be evacuated.
First, that occupation in fact is contrary to the principles of the Charter, and secondly, no global settlement acceptable to the Arab countries is conceivable
without the return of those territories.

46. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD (France) (interpretation
from Fmnch): When in November last it invited us to
agree to meet this month to consider “The Middle
East problem incIuding the Palestinian question”,
Syria, together with the.Group of Arab States, took a
justified decision which reflected its legitimate impatience at the fact that the dynamic movement
towards peace which we hoped would have got under
way two years ago had been bogged down. It is,only
natural that the Council, which under the Charter is
the organ primarily charged with the maintenance of
peace and intemationar~ security, should be seized
of the entire problem, inasmuch as recently only
specific aspects of the problem or individual’incidents
had been considered and- the prolonged absence of a
settlement would pose a serious threat to peace and
security. It is a matter of regret that, considering the
experience that it has had in this matter, the Council
has never dealt specifically with the Palestinian
aspects of the prob1e.m.Today every .member knows,
or at least senses, that unless the Palestinian problem
is taken into account there can be no settlement
which is truly just and.!asting. We regret the absence
of Israel in this- debate, to which we, for our part,
have taken a constructive approach, in the sole
interest of helping to bring about a settlement.

50. Secondly, the rights of the Paletinian people to
an independent homeland must be recognized. Unless
and until those rights are satisfied, it is illusory to
hope for a genuine peace in the Middle East. It goes
without saying that it is not for us to determine for the’
interested parties themselves the nature and the status
of that Palestinian homeland, which they should
determine in the light of the opportunities offered by
life in the area. In our view, it is important that at the
present time it be recognized that a settlement of the
Palestinian problem is an integral part of a global
settlement. We should like to stress that we take as
a very positive sign the progress in thinking on this
point that has taken place practically everywhere
over the past few months.
51. Thirdly, the right of all the States of the area
to exist within frontiers which are recognized, guaranteed and consequently secure should be affirmed.
While we call upon theentire international community,
and first and foremost Israel, to admit the major
political fact that the Palestinian people have a right
to a homeland, we also call upon the same intemati.onal
community to confirm and recognize the rights which
Israe! enjoys as a State, on an equal footing with a!!
other Members of the Grganization. It is our responsibility to reconcile those rights, taking‘into consideration the human and historic legitimacy of a Palestinian
homeland, while acting in such a way as to ensure that
the State of Israel may coexist peeacefully with all
its neighbours, respecting the rights and obligations
set forth in the Charter.

47. It may therefore be said that the*full file on the
case is before us today. We find there. an important
measure of achievement, one which should be preserved, in the form ofChefundamenta1 text-s of tesolutions 242 (1967) and: 338 (1973), which:establish. the
principles of a settIement and indicate the path to
that settlement. But we alsosin-daspirations, proposals
and reflections which deserve careful consideration.
We also note that even when principles are recognized,
the gap between the principles and their imprementa-

52. Turning now more specifically to guarantees, we
befieve that they are a fundamental question in the
formulation of a settlement. The French Government
7

has been giving active consideration
to that matter.
Prepared as we are to participate
in international
guarantees aimed at ensuring. peace in the area, we
shall, together with our European partners, put
forward proposals in this regard at an appropriate time
in the future.

you warmly on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council. I am confident-yes
I know-that
your skill, amply evidenced in other organs of the
United Nations where we have had the privilege to
work under your chairmanship, your patience and your
great experience will make an invaluable contribution
to the work of the Council during this month, a month
which promises to be one of the most intensive in the
recent history of this body.

53. Those are the fundamental
principles
which
France believes should guide our quest for an overall settlement, which alone can reconcile the concerns
of all the parties because they do not separate the
various elements of the problem. Similarly, we do not
believe that it is possible to take action on one of the
elements of the problem without also taking the others
into account.

57’. Permit me also to pay an equally warm tribute
to your predecessor, Mr. Richard of the United Kingdom. With his eloquence, wit and most helpful sense
of humour, he guided the Council with great skill
through considerable
difficulties
during its equally
heavily schedule in the month of December.

54. As regards the procedure which should be
followed in seeking a settlement, it was established
by Security Council resolution
338 (1973), which
remains entirely valid. A settlement can emerge only
from genuine negotiations among the parties. In this
connexion, we are in favour of a Palestinian expression of views in the course of those negotiations.
Inasmuch as a global settlement of the conflict presupposes recognition of the right of the Palestinians
to enjoy a homeland, it is only natural that they should
be allowed to put forward their views concerning
precisely the exercise of that right. It is fitting then
that they should be given the means to express their
views in the normal course of events on the nature
and the scope of the settlement of the Palestinian
problem. We express the hope that the prerequisites
will be met for a resumption
of those negotiations
which should make it possible for essential problems
to be discussed. Of course, it is for the Security
Council to follow very closely the developments .in
the negotiating
process, to endorse results and to
determine international
guarantees which will make
it possible to ensure the implementation
of and
respect for the agreements.

58. ‘My delegation bids a warm welcome to the new
members of the CouncilBenin, the Libyan Arab
Republic, Pakistan, Panama and Romania-and
we
look forward to close and friendly co-operation with
them as we had the privilege to enjoy with their
predecessors, the delegations of the Byelorussian
SSR, Costa Rica, Iraq, Mauritania
and the United
Republic of Cameroon.
s
59. Now that the Security Council is debating the
situation in the Middle East including the Palestinian
question, in the opinion of the Swedish Government
attention should, from the very outset be focused on
the question of what should be the task of the Council
in this matter. What can and what should the Council
do to facilitate and speed up the process towards a
peaceful solution of this tragic conflict? Is there anything that the Council should avoid or forgo in order
not to make it more difficult for the parties to find the
most effective ways of reaching such a solution?
60. There is no doubt that the Security Council has
an important responsibility
for the peaceful solution
of this problem which constitutes a continuous threat
to the peace in the area, with possible consequences
for peace in the entire world. This responsibility
derives from the Charter. The Council has therefore,
for more than a quarter of a century now, consistently
tried to prevent war and contribute
to a just and
lasting solution of the conflict. We must recognize
that the Council has repeatedly been unsuccessful in
its task. This makes it all the more important that we
should approach our task this time both in a spirit of
clear realism and with deep sympathy for the peoples
in the area who so often have had to endure the
sufferings of war and who have for so long lived in
insecurity, anxiety and desperation.

55. The Security
Council
has undertaken
this
exceedingly important debate at a time when people
are wondering about the likelihood of a return to peace
in the Middle East. In June and July 1973, following
an initiative by Egypt, another debate on the question
of the Middle East took place. That provided another
opportunity for a peaceful settlement, within the framework of the United Nations, based on the implementation of resolution 242 (1967). Today, as before, the
situation will remain explosive until the substance of
the problem is dealt with. On the basis of texts and
principles already recognized and by giving the new
reality some meaning which guarantees consideration
of the entire problem, it is up to us to make it possible
for all the parties to seek together in a. responsible
manner the path to a settlement which redresses
injustices and establishes finally ti just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.

61. It is a matter of great importance that the Council should arrive at a decision that can receive broad
support. Resolutions which are highly eontroversial
cannot in the present situation be of benefit to any
party in the Middle East.

56. Mr. RYDBECK
(Sweden): Mr. President, before
I turn to the matter on the agenda, let me congratulate
8

62. The basis for our deliberations must be, first and
foremost, the two Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973). The principles embodied in those
documents are still fully valid. We must not do anything
that might change or weaken those principles. The
Swedish delegation hopes that there is a common
view on this score among the members of the Security
Council. We must, however, also be aware of the
fact that resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) do not
contain certain basic elements which are essential
for a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.

67. This demand is based on the realization
that
peace in the area can only be permanent if it is based
on mutual political confidence just as much as on
considerations
of military security. Without this dual
aim the peace would be a mere truce under which the
peoples would live in constant fear and which might
change into open war at any moment.
68. It is evident that the question of the methods
to be used for reaching a solution to the Middle East
problem is of particular-perhaps
decisive-importance in the present situation. Experience shows that
results can be reached by various methods. Bilateral
or mutilateral talks may give the best result, depending
on the circumstances.
Partial agreements must be
welcomed, provided that they form part of a continuous development
towards a total and final
agreement.

63. It is now hardly disputed by anyone that during
the previous attempts to reach a lasting solution the
interests and rights of the Palestinian Arabs have not
sufftciently been taken into account. It is now evident
to all that the Palestinian
Arabs have legitimate
national interests and rights and that these must be
fully. taken into account in the search for a solution.
At the same time, it must be strongly emphasized
that the legitimate interests and rights of other peoples must not be sacrificed. The Swedish delegation
considers it to be of decisive importance
that the
existence and independence of Israel, as well as of
every other State in the area, be safeguarded within
secure and recognized borders.

69. We consider it of utmost importance
that the
parties refrain throughout from any use of violence.
The permanent members of the Security Council, and
in particular the two leading nuclear weapons States,
have a special responsibility for accelerating a peaceful development.
The United States and the Soviet
Union have a greater responsibility
and also greater
possibilities than other Powers for creating conditions
for a final agreement. The arms with which the States
in the area are equipped come essentially from these
two Powers. New military conflicts in the area could
endanger detente and lead to disputes between the two
major Powers which might in the end threaten world
peace.

64. A recognition of the right to self-determination
of the Palestinian Arabs also implies a recognition of
their right to present their views in international
debates where their interests are clearly involved.
This is the reason why the Swedish Government,
in the General Assembly and in the Security Council,
has supported the proposal that the representatives
of the PLO-which
in our view is the most authoritative spokesman for the Palestinian Arabs-be
invited
to participate in the debates. We believe that such
participation
should be based on the recognition of
the principles embodied in the Charter of the United
Nations, among which is the right of all Members to
self-determination
and territorial integrity.

70. It is therefore an inescapable fact that the rest
of the world expects the United States and the Soviet
Union to intensify their efforts and speedily to make
use of all possibilities to co-operate towards finding a
solution which will create a lasting peace. To state
this does not, of course, amount to an acceptance of
the right of a Power or Powers to dictate the conditions of the peace, to force the parties in the area to
accept a solution which violates their fundamental
interests. Such a solution would not only be unfair.
It would have no prospects in the long-term perspective
of creating a real peace. Sweden would furthermore
strongly urge that the dangerous arms race in the
area be put to a stop. What I have said here indicates
the principles which will guide the work of the Swedish
delegation
during the ‘present deliberations
in the
Security Council on the Middle East.

65. It is also important that States non-members of
the Security Council whose interests are directly
concerned by the debates in the Council should not
hesitate to avail themselves of the right to present
their views before the Council in the customary
manner. Holding this view, my delegation would like
to address an appeal to Israel to reconsider its present
attitude of not utilizing this right.
66. As already stated, the Swedish Government
considers that the principles contained in resolutions
242 (1967) and 337 (1973) remain valid and should
guide the efforts to reach a final solution. In regard
to the important
question of the borders of Israel
this means that the situation that existed before the
June war of 1967 must be the point of departure. The
Swedish Government
has consistently
maintained
the principle laid down in resolution 242 (1967) that
acquisition
of territories
by force is unacceptable.
Likewise,
it is imperative
that the final borders
eventually to be defined be secure and recognized.

71. The Security
Council should, in our opinion,
clearly indicate that it continues to take an active
interest in the matter and that it expects result to
follow from the various forms of efforts which will
now have to be undertaken in order that a final solution may be approached. The result of these efforts
should be reported to the Council and given the
necessary international
authority by the Council.
9

72. However, whatever decisions the Council may
arrive at, they can never replace the will of the parties
themselves finally to put an end to the state of war
through negotiations and agreements, to start an epoch
of peace and, to this end, realistically
review their
respective positions. It is sometimes said that time
works for one party or the other, and that for this
reason an agreement is not urgent. To the Swedish
Government,
such an attitude means a dangerous
playing with fire. Status quo does not give peace.
Time does .not work for peace. The people-the

Governments-must
want, and then work for, such
changes as will lead to agreements, understanding
and a lasting peace.
The meeting

Notes
I See Officid Records qf the Generol Assm~hly, Thirtieth
sion, Plenmy Meetings, 2370th meeting.

10
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

rose ut 5.10 p.m.

00300

/
83-60801-May

1984-2.200

SW
