S/2019/741

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 September 2019
Original: English

Future planning for the protection of civilians sites in
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2459
(2019), in which the Council decided to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) until 15 March 2020 and requested a written
report, within 180 days, on future planning for the protection of civilians sites.
Accordingly, the report contains an assessment of each site, the security and
assistance provided thereto and recommendations on the role s and responsibilities of
UNMISS and other stakeholders and on the steps necessary to foster a secure
environment for the safe, informed, voluntary and dignified return or relocation o f
internally displaced persons.
2.
The complexity of the issues surrounding the protection of civilians sites evoke
strong sentiments and, consequently, often diverging views on the way forward.
While the country has come a long way from the violence that resulted in the need
for the creation of the sites, the legacy of that violence prevails. Delays in
implementing key benchmarks of the peace deal may fuel uncertainty among the
South Sudanese. The continued prevalence of intercommunal violence, sexual and
gender-based violence and criminality, as well as the weak rule of law, remain the
reality. Years of conflict and underdevelopment have left almost two thirds of the
population in need of some form of humanitarian assistance and protection. Those
factors both act as a deterrent for internally displaced persons and refu gees to return
home and, in some places, provoke further displacement.
3.
Notwithstanding those conditions, the prospect of hope provided by the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, signed in September 2018, has encouraged spontaneous return movements of
both internally displaced persons and refugees. With the revitalized peace process
progressing, albeit slowly, opposition leaders continue to travel across the country
without restrictions, while numerous rapprochement initiatives at the subnational
level have cemented collaboration between Government and oppositio n forces and
local authorities.
4.
As the security environment has improved, the priorities for physical protection
afforded by UNMISS have evolved. Improvements in access and a reduction in
political violence have also enabled both UNMISS and humanitarian partners to

19-14912 (E)

160919

*1914912*

S/2019/741

broaden actions related to the protection of civilians and to ensure that assistance and
basic services reach further afield, thus enabling internally displaced persons to
receive assistance and protection in areas of return.
5.
Among all stakeholders there is consensus on the need to enhance efforts to
avoid protracted displacement. Despite the best efforts of humanitarian partners and
UNMISS, the situation within the protection of civilians sites is untenable, and their
entrenchment generates increasing protection and security risks. The present report
presents a picture of the current situation, challenges and considerations. Importan tly,
the process of its formulation has brought all stakeholders together for the first time
to consider how to chart a way forward that optimizes the collective efforts and
capacities of all partners to ensure the protection of the most vulnerable civilia ns of
South Sudan and to make concrete progress in the creation of conducive conditions
for durable returns.
6.
In preparing the report and the observations and recommendations contained
herein, comprehensive consultations were conducted with a broad range of
stakeholders, including discussions with humanitarian actors facilitated by the joint
humanitarian task team of UNMISS and the humanitarian country team; extensive
dialogue with civil society organizations; engagement with the Government of South
Sudan; engagement with local communities; in-depth assessments in the form of
61 focus group discussions with residents of the protection of civilians sites led by
the South Sudan Protection Cluster; and internal deliberations involving the military,
police and civilian components of UNMISS.

II. History of the protection of civilians sites
7.
As detailed in previous reports to the Security Council, the UNMISS protection
of civilians sites were established as a measure of last resort, when civilians were
forced to flee their homes as a result of widespread and systematic violence, often
committed along ethnic lines, when conflict broke out in South Sudan at the end of
December 2013. The scale of the atrocities perpetrated against civilians at the
outbreak of the conflict compelled the Mission to take urgent measures to protect
civilians on an unprecedented scale. By opening its gates and allowing civilians of all
ethnic backgrounds under imminent threat of physical violence to take refuge at
UNMISS bases, thousands of lives were undoubtedly saved. Following further waves
of violence associated with the breakdown of the Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities between the Government of the Republic of South Sudan (GRSS) and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army (in Opposition) (SPLM/A in Opposition)
of 23 January 2014 and the breakdown of the peace process in July 2016, additional
displacement occurred. By 2016, a total of 224,000 people had sought sanctuary at
UNMISS bases in Bentiu, Bor, Juba, Malakal, Melut and Wau. At present, more than
4 million people, or one third of the total population, are displaced, including
1.83 million within the country and 2.3 million outside the country.
8.
In September 2015, when national authorities granted prima facie refug ee status
to all its residents and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees supported the residents in relocating to various towns and refugee camps,
UNMISS was able to close one of the protection of civilians sites in Juba that was
hosting foreign nationals. In December 2017, the Melut site was closed following the
relocation and return of internally displaced persons with support from UNMISS and
partners. Finally, in Wau, one of the two sites was closed in March 2019 following
the provision of support for the return and relocation of its residents.
9.
More than five years after the outbreak of the conflict, the legacy of that noble
decision to establish such sites remains, with approximately 180,000 internally
2/18

19-14912

S/2019/741

displaced persons (88,736 female and 91,630 male) still residing at the sites in Bentiu,
Bor, Juba, Malakal and Wau.

III. Legal status of the protection of civilians sites
10. The UNMISS protection of civilians sites are located within or adjacent to
UNMISS bases, which, under paragraph 15 of the 2011 Status of Forces Agreement
between the United Nations and the Government of the Republic of South Sudan
concerning the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, enjoy the status, privileges
and immunities of the United Nations in accordance with the 1946 Convention on the
Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations. Whether located within UNMISS
premises or adjacent to them and deemed extensions of such premises, they are,
therefore, inviolable and subject to the exclusive co ntrol and authority of the United
Nations. Furthermore, the sites operate under the purview of the Security Council
mandate given to UNMISS to protect civilians under imminent threat of physical
violence.

IV. Mandate and challenges with respect to the protection of
civilians sites
11. Although the UNMISS protection of civilians mandate is often interpreted only
in terms of the provision of physical protection from imminent harm, it is, in fact,
composed of eight related protection tasks: (a) to protect civilians under threat of
physical violence; (b) to deter violence through proactive deployment; (c) to
implement a mission-wide early warning strategy; (d) to maintain public safety within
the protection of civilians sites; (e) to deter and prevent sexual and gender-based
violence; (f) to exercise good offices in support of protection, including as a means
to facilitate the prevention, mitigation and resolution of intercommunal conflict;
(g) to foster a secure environment for the safe, informed, vo luntary and dignified
return or relocation of internally displaced persons and refugees; and (h) to support
the facilitation of the return or relocation of internally displaced persons from
UNMISS protection of civilians sites.
12. A broad range of actions related to the protection of civilians mandate, such as
those involving conflict resolution, good offices and local peace initiatives, therefore
include substantial non-military forms of protection and are undertaken by civilian
components of the Mission. Regarding the UNMISS police and military components,
the provision of perimeter security to the protection of civilians sites and the
enforcement of law and order within the sites disproportionately consume the
available capacity for protection of civilians tasks, leaving fewer resources for
patrolling in conflict hotspots or areas of return.
13. Of the total 11,200 personnel belonging to Mission infantry units, 14 per cent
(1,545 personnel), or 6 out of 46 infantry companies, are currently performing dut ies
directly associated with the protection of civilians sites. A total of 61 per cent
(6,881 personnel) are available to undertake patrolling activities outside the sites in
support of broader protection of civilians mandated tasks. The remaining 25 per c ent
of the infantry units are dedicated to other relatively permanent tasks, such as securing
UNMISS bases and installations and providing protection for logistics operations and
humanitarian convoys of the Mission, upon request. The remainder of the Missi on
personnel perform command, engineering, logistics or administrative functions or
those related to the operation of the UNMISS headquarters.

19-14912

3/18

S/2019/741

14. In terms of policing, of the 2,101 personnel that comprise the authorized
UNMISS police strength, 1,320 personnel within six formed police units are
exclusively tasked with performing duties at the protection of civilians sites,
including the primary responsibility for enforcing law and order with support from
the local community. Another 703 are assigned as individual police officers, of whom
491 are deployed to the sites to screen incoming internally displaced persons in order
to prevent the entry of prohibited items and to provide a protective presence through
patrolling and the apprehension of those who violate rules and regulations or commit
other serious crimes. In addition, 78 corrections officers manage and operate three
UNMISS holding facilities used for the secure and humane detention of individuals
suspected of having committed serious violations within the sites, until such cases
can be handed over to national counterparts for investigation and prosecution. In total,
90 per cent of United Nations police personnel are directly committed to performing
tasks related to the protection of civilians sites.
15. Although the protection of civilians sites were explicitly established to isolate
and safeguard civilians from imminent external threats to their safety, the Mission
increasingly dedicates time and resources to address protection risks emanating from
within the sites. As in many other camp settings, the high population density, tensions
among different communities, limited economic opportunities and unoccupied young
people create numerous social problems, among which is crime. Residents of the sites
experience gang-related intimidation and, at times, outbreaks of violence fuelled by
alcohol and drug use and the presence of weapons. Despite the best efforts of the
Mission to provide security, the residents continue to report incidents of sexual and
gender-based violence, theft, assault and disorderly conduct. From January to July
2019, there were 505 incidents at the five site locations, including 378 instances of
assault, fighting and domestic violence; 86 incidents of theft and burglary; 21 reports
of sexual assault or harassment; and 20 assaults specifically on UNMISS uniformed
personnel.
16. Over time, changing power structures and conflicting and competing claims
over authority within the protection of civilians sites have also created tensions.
Alternative leadership structures have taken root, dominating camp governance and
interfering with the equitable delivery of services. Former members of opposition
military forces, including officers and former combatants, reside within the sites, as
they are entitled to protected status under international humanitarian law principles
having ceased to actively participate in hostilities. While not armed or in uniform,
their camp arrangements, along with those of political figures, often aligned with the
Sudan People’s Liberation Army in Opposition, to varying degrees and across
different sites, are organized according to a military command structure. The Mission
has undertaken efforts to maintain the civilian character of the sites and enforces a set
of ground rules. Persons who engage in activities that are inconsistent with the
civilian status are expelled from the site.
17. Mission and humanitarian personnel providing services and support have also
been exposed to threats and targeted violence, including incidents of stone throwing
and vandalism of property. National staff are not immune from such violence and
have, on occasion, been targeted because of their ethnicity. At the Malakal site, threats
to the safety of national humanitarian workers emanating from withi n the site have
had an impact on the access of the entire population of the site to health and other
services for more than a year.
18. Controlling access into and out of the protection of civilians sites also remains
a challenge. Perimeter fences span several kilometres and can be breached, in
particular at night. Some individuals who are expelled from the sites for criminal acts
have managed to re-enter despite the security measures in place. The Mission is
working to strengthen accountability measures and reduce the recurrence of expelled
4/18

19-14912

S/2019/741

persons re-entering the sites. Those measures include establishing mechanisms for
people suspected of having committed serious offences within the sites to be referred
to national authorities for investigation and prosecution under South Sudanese law,
including for investigation and prosecution on criminal trespass charges of expelled
persons who had attempted re-entry. At the time of reporting, 119 criminal cases had
been referred to national justice institutions.
19. UNMISS has acted to progressively improve the processes under which
individuals are detained in holding facilities, assessed and released or handed over,
as well as to improve the security, structural and material conditions at the facilities.
20. The detention of individuals at the holding facilities is undertaken in line with
the interim standard operating procedures on detention in United Nations peace
operations, as well as Mission-specific guidance and policies developed by the United
Nations. The continued improvement of the process under which persons are detained,
released and handed over to national counterparts or expelled has decreased the
number of persons in the facilities from an average of 50 detainees per day in 2016
to 20 currently in all holding facilities and has, in turn, improved detention conditions.
21. Since 2016, the security in towns and cities where the protection of civilians
sites are situated has evolved favourably. With the exception of a considerable setback
and derailment of the peace process, the immediate risk of any politically or ethnically
motivated targeting of residents of the sites has decreased. However, despite evident
improvements to the threat environment, the UNMISS security posture has remained
largely unchanged.
22. With more than 1.83 million people displaced within the country, at -risk
populations spread across an expansive terrain and refugees and internally displaced
persons looking to UNMISS to establish security and stability in areas of return, the
continued dedication of UNMISS resources to the protection of civilians sites at
current levels is disproportionate when considered alongside broader protection
requirements. The situation constrains the Mission’s capability to meet its broader
mandated responsibilities for the protection of civilians, which require a proactive
and preventive deployment of its military forces beyond the sites. In the 2019 report
on the humanitarian needs overview for South Sudan, the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs identified 5.7 million South Sudanese women, men and
children facing protection risks. The Mission’s uniformed capacity to provide
protection to those people equates to 1 uniformed peacekeeper for every 832 civilians.
For the protection of civilians sites, the ratio is 1 uniformed peacekeeper for every
53 civilians.

V. Protection of civilians sites and a changing political context
23. In 2017, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development launched mediation
efforts to revitalize the 2015 Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan. Those efforts concluded with the signing of the Revitalized
Agreement on 12 September 2018. The Revitalized Agreement stipulates a permanent
ceasefire between parties and a pre-transition period leading to the formation of a
transitional government of national unity, to govern during a three -year period,
culminating in elections.
24. The Revitalized Agreement has had some notable positive outcomes. The
permanent ceasefire continues to hold, with a significant drop in political violence
across the country, except for pockets of Central Equatoria where the National
Salvation Front has been in armed conflict against the South Sudan People ’s Defence

19-14912

5/18

S/2019/741

Forces and the Sudan People’s Liberation Army in Opposition, resulting in violations
and displacement.
25. Senior opposition figures reside in Juba without threat and move freely to atte nd
peace talks. At the subnational level, at least 128 rapprochement initiatives between
the Government and opposition forces, including military forces, have been
undertaken since the signing of the Revitalized Agreement, including 24 in greater
Bahr el-Ghazal, 60 in greater Upper Nile and 44 in greater Equatoria. At least
14 events included the participation of internally displaced persons from the
protection of civilians sites in Bentiu, Malakal and Wau. The resulting enhanced trust
and confidence among the parties to the conflict have led to improved freedom of
movement in contested areas and contributed to increased humanitarian access in
regions previously inaccessible owing to insecurity. Data from humanitarian
displacement tracking and monitoring also indicate increases in same day, local
movements in and around the sites for purposes such as employment, livelihood
activities, visiting markets and visiting friends and family.
26. The changing situation has encouraged some displaced persons to explore
options for returning home. The International Organization for Migration reports that,
since the signing of the Revitalized Agreement, 534,082 people have returned to their
places of habitual residence. The number of returnees per month increased from an
average of 17,900 prior to the signing of the Agreement to 76,000 after its signing. In
May 2019, in a survey of intentions and perceptions conducted at the Malakal site, it
was found that, of the 44 per cent of households expressing an intention to leave the
site, 60 per cent cited improvements in security as influencing their decision -making,
although nearly half of those intending to leave were uncertain about the timing of
their planned departure. Data from a longer-term trend analysis for the Wau site also
indicated that, for 70 per cent of internally displaced persons who had chosen to leave
the site, the perception of life now being better at the return or relocation destination
was the main motivation.
27. In consultations regarding intentions to return, many internally displaced
persons expressed continuing anxiety about the peace process. Since the signing of
the Revitalized Agreement, the parties have made slow progress in implementing the
Agreement and several benchmarks that would enable the time ly formation of a
transitional government have been missed. People living in the protection of civilians
sites display a level of caution, primarily related to the outcome of past peace
initiatives. In discussions, men and women alike stated that they need ed to have
further assurances that peace was real before leaving.
28. Since the signing of the Revitalized Agreement, the total population of the
protection of civilians sites has fluctuated, with an overall net population decrease
between November 2018 (195,747) and August 2019 (178,923) of approximately
17,000. Overall trends show that, while South Sudanese people are exploring
solutions to displacement, population flows remain fluid, characterized by the
simultaneous movement of displaced persons into and out of the sites. While some
internally displaced persons have decided to permanently leave, others leave for
temporary, prolonged periods to assess the situation and then return. In some
instances, for example at the Bentiu site, internally displaced persons have divided
their families, with some family members remaining at the site to observe progress in
the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement and retain access to services and
others leaving for areas of origin or other destinations. In interviews with
130 individuals leaving the Bentiu site in April 2019, the respondents indicated their
intention to permanently leave, while, at the same time, 88 per cent reported that they
were leaving family members behind.

6/18

19-14912

S/2019/741

29. At the same time, new arrivals continue to appear at the sites. The Juba, Bentiu
and Malakal sites are recording an increase in arrivals from neighbouring countries.
The trend is a cause for concern considering the existing internal protection
challenges, the overcrowding and the capped provision of food assistance at the sites.
In Juba, the population has grown on average by 500 to 600 individuals a month in
2019. UNMISS interviews conducted with new arrivals to the Juba site in 2019
indicated that about half of all individuals were returning from Ethiopia, Kenya, the
Sudan and Uganda. Similarly, in data from displacement tracking and monitoring of
new entries at the Bentiu and Malakal sites, most arrivals were identified as coming
from the Sudan.
30. In June 2019, 17,288 individuals reportedly returned from the Sudan to Unity,
the majority of whom were women and children. The increase in spontaneous arrivals
from the Sudan was motivated by two factors: the political situation, which affected
many South Sudanese refugees, and the signing of the Revitalized Agreement. While
some returnees have returned to their location of habitual residence, often in Rubkona
County, others have entered the Bentiu protection of civilians site, both for family
reunification purposes and to assess and wait for favourable conditions to pursue
onward travel to their counties of origin, in particular Koch, Leer and Mayendit.
31. While insecurity outside the protection of civilians sites remains the impetus for
some arrivals, reunification with family and access to services are increasingly given
by new arrivals as reasons for entry. In interviews with new arrivals at the Bentiu,
Malakal and Juba sites conducted by humanitarian entities and the United Nations
police between December 2018 and May 2019, the primary reason for entry was
reunification with family. The increase in movements associated with family
reunification has come at the same time as increased mobility across parts of the
country and likely explains the increased movements of internall y displaced persons
who have been observed exiting one protection of civilians site to enter another.
32. The exception has been in Wau. Between March and June 2019, the Wau site
experienced a 35 per cent increase in arrivals (about 4,500 new arrivals) dur ing
clashes between pastoralists and farmers in Kuarjena and Rocrocdong, in the
Jur River area. Of all new arrivals during that period, 97 per cent cited conflict - or
protection-related reasons as the primary motivation for arrival, while access to
services was most commonly cited as the secondary reason.
33. Although political violence has decreased since the signing of the Revitalized
Agreement, violence associated with intercommunal clashes and cattle raiding has
worsened. Acts perpetrated by community-based militias and armed elements have
increasingly involved actors such as State defence and security forces. This trend has
had a significant impact on the security environment, which has resulted in an
increase in civilian deaths since the signing of the Agreement and has both prompted
new displacement and deterred returns.

VI. Provision of humanitarian assistance
34. The delivery of humanitarian assistance inside the protection of civilians sites
is managed by humanitarian entities on the basis of Inter-Agency Standing Committee
guidelines. At present, residents of the sites are eligible for humanitarian assistance
based on their status as individuals who face direct physical threats and lack freedom
of movement. As a result, a range of services is available inside the sites, including
food, shelter, water, sanitation, schools, hospitals and communal facilities operated
by humanitarian entities. The distribution of assistance is routine and access to
services is uninterrupted. In contrast, assistance to those displaced outside the sites,
and often to communities immediately adjacent to the sites, is provided on the basis
19-14912

7/18

S/2019/741

of need. This imbalance has contributed to animosity related to issues of equity among
vulnerable communities.
35. There are comparative advantages for identifying and serving vulnerable
communities in protection of civilians sites. In contrast, there are significant obstacles
to the provision of humanitarian assistance to displaced populations dispersed across
South Sudan, ranging from geographical and seasonal operational constraints to
issues of insecurity and bureaucratic impediments, leaving civilians, aid workers and
assets exposed to harm.
36. Despite those challenges, over the past year, humanitarian partners have
significantly scaled up services across the country to serve remote populations. Food
assistance distributions are organized at over 200 locations, and, in the first six
months of 2019, humanitarian actors reached 3.4 million people in counties without
protection of civilians sites.
37. The increasing stability and better access to many parts of the country provide
opportunities to work with partners in local areas to restore services and build
resilience. The non-humanitarian activities of the United Nations country team,
including the launch of large-scale basic service programmes, increased steadily in
2017 and 2018. Despite those efforts, coverage of basic services remains extremely
limited. More than 4.4 million people have insufficient access to health services and
approximately 2.8 million children do not have access to education.
38. Consequently, the access, availability and quality of services are important
factors in the decision-making of internally displaced persons, both those arriving at
the protection of civilians sites and those evaluating conditions before deciding to
return home. Access to assistance and basic services, in particular health and
education that may not be available elsewhere, is cited among the reasons given
by new arrivals entering the sites. New arrivals interviewed at the Bentiu site in
April 2019 cited access to services as the main reason for entry, secondary to
rejoining family. Data collected between July 2017 and March 2018 also indicated
that 5 per cent of new arrivals to the Bentiu site were seeking education opportunities.
39. Similarly, the prospect of return to areas where there is limited or no access to
services influences the decisions of internally displaced persons and can pose a risk
of prolonging displacement and deepening dependence on humanitarian assistance.
In profiling exercises of approximately 98,000 internally displaced persons conducted
countrywide between April 2018 and January 2019, the lack of access to basic
services and employment or livelihood opportunities was identified as the second
most significant impediment to voluntary return or relocation for internally displaced
persons from both the protection of civilians sites and displaced communities within
urban settlements. Focus group discussions undertaken for a survey of intentions and
perceptions among internally displaced persons at the Malakal site in May 2019 also
revealed that a major challenge to returning to places of origin or other villages where
security is improved is that people would not be able to sustain themselves owing to
the lack of shelter, food, clean water, employment and basic infrastructure, including
health and education facilities.
40. Humanitarian partners have sought to scale up support in response to
spontaneous returns and enable others to act on their intentions to pursue alternative
solutions to their displacement. An allocation of $11 million from the Central
Emergency Response Fund is bolstering health, education, water and sanitation
activities, as well as protection services in areas of return. The Mission, the United
Nations country team and partners are working directly at the local level to promote
localized priority setting and area-based joint programming to support the long-term
needs of returnees as they arrive in host communities.

8/18

19-14912

S/2019/741

41. Multi-agency solutions working groups for each protection of civilians site have
been formed to facilitate more durable solutions for internally displaced persons.
Transport by road, barge and air is also being provided by the United Na tions
Humanitarian Air Service and UNMISS. In all situations, humanitarian actors are
guided by international humanitarian principles, Inter-Agency Standing Committee
guidelines, and processes established by the humanitarian country team, including the
principles on the search for durable solutions as outlined in the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee Framework on Durable Solutions for Internally Displaced Persons of
2010; the African Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of Internally
Displaced Persons in Africa (Kampala Convention) of 2009 and, in particular,
article 11 thereof; articles 2 and 12 of the African Charter on Human and Peoples ’
Rights; and the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement.
42. Under the Revitalized Agreement, all parties committed to creating an enabling
political, administrative, operational and legal environment for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and protection to ensure the right of refugees and internally
displaced persons to return in safety and dignity. The Ministry of Humanitarian
Affairs and Disaster Management and the Relief and Rehabilitation Commission have
been engaged in developing policies and planning for the return of displaced
populations to their homes. A national framework for the safe and di gnified return of
all people displaced by conflict has been developed for approval by the Cabinet and
the allocation of resources.

VII. Site-by-site assessment of the protection of civilians sites
43. While all protection of civilians sites share common attributes, each site has a
distinct character. On average, the sites comprise approximately 50 per cent women
and girls and 50 per cent men and boys, including a significant number of young
people.
Bentiu (greater Upper Nile)
Evolution of the site
44. The Bentiu site is the largest in South Sudan. Over the years, its size and
composition have changed considerably. On 18 December 2013, Government and
opposition forces clashed over the control of Bentiu, displacing thousands of Dinka
who sought refuge at the UNMISS base. In January 2014, Government forces
retook Bentiu, resulting in the Dinka exiting the base, only to be replaced by then displaced Nuer. As fighting intensified, the number of internally displaced persons
seeking physical protection increased to 91,540 in July 2015, reaching 120,278 in
February 2016.
45. At present, 103,424 internally displaced persons (49,424 female and 54,000 male),
primarily Nuer and some Shilluk, reside at the site. The majority of the displaced
come from opposition-controlled areas. Tracking and monitoring of the flow of
internally displaced persons entering the site between December 2018 and May 2019
revealed that a majority came from the Sudan. The new arrivals cited their primary
reason for entry as family reunification, as well as stopping temporarily at the site
while waiting to move on to their counties of origin once they could determine that it
was safe and viable to do so.
Current status
46. A total of 43 humanitarian entities are providing 41 different services at the site.
Internally displaced persons continue to move freely into and out of the site, ranging

19-14912

9/18

S/2019/741

from short excursions to collect firewood or check and repair their properties, to trips
lasting several months. In addition, members of local communities outside the site
enter the site for medical care at the UNMISS level II hospital.
47. Since the signing of the Revitalized Agreement, improved security and freedom
of movement in Unity has contributed to a more stable environment. Nev ertheless,
residents of the site noted perceptions of insecurity external to the site, due to cattle
raiding, criminality, military presence in civilian areas and physical and sexual and
gender-based assault, as well as concerns related to risks associated with a collapse
of the Agreement. Within the site, internally displaced persons report threats such as
armed robberies, communal clashes and arson. Former combatants expressed fear of
forced recruitment and targeting by the Government and its supporters.
48. Despite such circumstances, between October 2018 and March 2019, there was
a decrease of 15,084 internally displaced persons at the site. In a survey of intentions
conducted in January 2019, it was found that 63 per cent of respondents had discussed
leaving the site, with 55 per cent considering returning to their places of origin.
Moreover, since its inception, the solutions working group has helped 3,000 internally
displaced persons identify land and shelter in Bentiu town and Rubkona to enable
their relocation out of the site. In a survey undertaken in September 2018 exploring
possible tensions between the host community residing in the towns and returnees
and internally displaced persons, it was also found that host communities actively
support returnees and internally displaced persons, specifically through the sharing
of food. UNMISS and humanitarian partners continue to engage with internally
displaced persons to provide information about areas of return so as to enable them
to make informed decisions. However, several impediments to return remain.
Internally displaced persons at the Bentiu site note, in particular, perceptions of
insecurity, the scarcity of food in return areas and limited education opportunities.
Bor (greater Upper Nile)
Evolution of the site
49. When conflict erupted in December 2013 and spread to Bor, 18,000 civilians
from various ethnic groups sought physical protection at the UNMISS base. The
control of Bor town changed hands several times, and Government forces even tually
consolidated their position in January 2014. As a result, many Dinka who had initially
sought sanctuary exited the site and returned to town. Ethnic tensions endured and, in
April 2014, a suspected Dinka militia attacked the site, resulting in the d eath of
47 internally displaced persons and 98 injuries. Currently, 2,000 internally displaced
persons (1,034 female and 966 male), predominantly Nuer, remain at the site.
Current status
50. A total of 13 humanitarian entities are providing 14 services at the site,
compared with 20 humanitarian organizations in Bor town that provide a similar level
of services. Most internally displaced persons do not intend to relocate to the town
and remain concerned about the availability of services in their areas of origin.
51. Following the signing of the Revitalized Agreement, security in Bor has
improved considerably. Efforts by the local governor, church leaders and UNMISS to
facilitate peacebuilding activities have contributed to fostering a sense of se curity. As
a result, UNMISS transitioned from a static presence around the site to a more mobile
posture in April 2019, expanding its protective presence to adjacent communities. In
an assessment, UNMISS identified three primary threats to internally displ aced
persons living inside the site – political uncertainty, criminality, and tensions around
housing, land and property – the same issues as those identified by communities
outside. Within the site, internally displaced persons identified sexual harassmen t and
10/18

19-14912

S/2019/741

forced marriages as threats. External threats perceived by internally displaced persons
relate to the proximity of military barracks and police training camps, as well as the
risk of illegal detentions, abductions and sexual and gender-based violence.
52. Over the past six months, some 192 individuals (82 female and 110 male)
entered the Bor site to visit family for short periods. The visitors, who mainly came
from northern Jonglei, also noted the use of the site as a stopping point while heading
to Juba or onwards to Kenya or Uganda and vice versa. UNMISS data confirm that
internally displaced persons leave the site to engage in livelihood activities on a daily
basis, the majority of whom return in the evening when they feel less secure.
Participants in focus group discussions acknowledged that the site is not conducive
to a prolonged stay. While many intend to return or relocate, they are closely
following national political developments before deciding. Other barriers include a
lack of services in return locations and the destruction or occupation of their homes.
From early 2016 onwards, the solutions working group has supported the voluntary
and dignified return of 902 internally displaced persons (481 female and 421 male)
from the site to several locations across the country.
Juba (greater Equatoria)
Evolution of the sites
53. When conflict broke out in Juba on 15 December 2013, tens of thousands of
civilians escaping violence gathered at UNMISS bases in Jebel Kujur (United Nations
House) and Tomping seeking physical protection. Two protection sites were
established at the United Nations House and one at Tomping. A year later, the
internally displaced persons at the Tomping site were relocated to the United Nations
House sites. When conflict erupted again in July 2016, nearly 7,000 newly displaced
civilians sought refuge at the United Nations House sites, while an additional
4,000 entered the Tomping site and were later transported to the United Nations
House sites. In August 2018, clashes between Bul Nuer and Leek Nuer clans at the
site known as United Nations House POC 3 resulted in 3,379 Bul Nuer moving out
of the site, under duress. They were supported by UNMISS and humanitarian partners
to relocate to the Mangateen collective site in Jub a city. Currently, two protection of
civilians sites exist in Juba, with a combined population of 29,327 (14,772 male and
14,555 female), primarily of Nuer ethnicity.
Current status
54. A total of 34 humanitarian organizations provide services inside the sites. In a
humanitarian assessment of services in adjacent areas conducted in February 2019,
no humanitarian actors assisting the communities in the immediate vicinity of the
Juba sites were identified.
55. Security in Juba has improved considerably. UNMISS reports that thousands of
residents of the sites are commuting daily to town for employment, the pursuit of
livelihood activities and higher education. The presence and unrestricted movement
of senior opposition leaders in Juba attest to the impro ved security environment.
While some individuals inside the sites have specific security concerns, much of the
population of the sites face comparable risks to those borne by civilians living outside.
The participants in the focus group discussions noted that inside the sites, the threats
they face include the presence of gangs, the politicization of communities and
tensions at water points. Specific perceptions of external threats reported include
military presence at checkpoints outside the sites, along with a lack of trust in public
security forces. Former combatants who deserted the Sudan People ’s Liberation

19-14912

11/18

S/2019/741

Army 1 and former politicians affiliated with the opposition expressed fear of
retribution. At the same time, the presence of senior political and mi litary opposition
figures could constitute a significant risk if fighting was to resume.
56. From September 2018 to June 2019, UNMISS recorded 6,265 internally
displaced persons arriving at the sites, with the majority citing family reunification
as their main reason for entry. Interviews conducted with new arrivals in 2019
indicated that about half were returning from Ethiopia, Kenya, the Sudan and Uganda.
57. In a profiling exercise conducted in September and October 2018, it was found
that 38 per cent of internally displaced persons in the site known as United Nations
House POC 1 and 43 per cent in United Nations House POC 3 were considering
leaving the sites to return to places such as Leer, Mayendit, Panyinjar, Rubkona, Ayod,
Fangak, Koch, Akobo, Uror and Juba. In considering whether to return, concerns
about security and a lack of services in return areas were the impediments most
commonly cited. By June 2019, 577 households, or 1,589 internally displaced
persons, from the sites had registered with protection desks for assistance with
voluntarily return. In 2019, the Mission and humanitarian actors supported the return
of 14 internally displaced persons to Uror, 84 to Yuai and 36 to Akobo.
Malakal (greater Upper Nile)
Evolution of the site
58. On 21 December 2013, conflict spread to Upper Nile, with Government and
opposition forces clashing over control of Malakal town. As the fighting intensified,
20,000 internally displaced persons entered the UNMISS base seeking ph ysical
protection. Control of the town changed hands several times, with the Sudan People ’s
Liberation Army subsequently consolidating its position. In July 2015, displaced
Dinka, Nuer and Shilluk were relocated to a protection of civilians site adjacent t o
the UNMISS base. Renewed fighting created additional displacement, boosting
numbers at the site to over 40,000. In February 2016, following an attack on the site
by a suspected Dinka militia that resulted in the killing of at least 40 Shilluk and Nuer
internally displaced persons, the Dinka internally displaced persons left the site for
Government-controlled Malakal town, while the Nuer and Shilluk remained.
Currently, 32,608 internally displaced persons (16,784 female and 15,824 male)
inhabit the site, a majority being Shilluk.
Current status
59. A total of 15 humanitarian entities are providing 30 different humanitarian
services inside the site. The same number of entities are operating in Malakal town.
60. The security situation in Malakal has improved to the extent that, on average,
up to 5,000 internally displaced persons visit the town daily to engage in a range of
activities. However, most return to the site at night owing to the presence of military
and perceptions of vulnerability. Despite an overall improvement in security, in two
separate incidents, in March and April 2019, members of the Shilluk community were
allegedly killed or attacked by suspected Dinka assailants outside the site.
61. During focus group discussions, participants identified sexual and gender-based
violence and criminality as perceived threats inside the site. Women further indicated
not feeling safe at night. Concerns about external threats centred around risks of
physical and sexual violence, the presence of soldiers and fear of revenge killings and
harassment. Former combatants expressed fear about venturing outside the sites.
__________________
1

12/18

In October 2018, the Sudan People’s Liberation Army was renamed the South Sudan People’s
Defence Forces.
19-14912

S/2019/741

62. Between October 2018 and June 2019, the number of individuals at the site
increased by 3,418. In addition, during interviews conducted with n ew arrivals
between December 2018 and May 2019, hunger due to conflict and natural disaster
and family reunification were cited as the primary reasons for entry. Since early 2018,
however, there has been a significant upward trend in intentions of internal ly
displaced persons to leave. A survey of intentions conducted in May 2019 established
that 44 per cent of those interviewed intended to leave the site. Of those, one third
intended to leave within three months. UNMISS and humanitarian partners have
facilitated visits to areas of return by internally displaced persons and encouraged
them to share their experiences to provide the community with information on
conditions in areas of return. As a result, families have expressed interest in returning
to their places of origin and requested humanitarian support to help them to rebuild
their lives.
63. While the Central Upper Nile Government has taken numerous steps to create a
safer environment, scepticism and mistrust of the parties’ will to implement the
Revitalized Agreement persists. A lack of services and livelihood opportunities, as
well indiscriminate arrests of young people, including children, are also compounding
concerns about returns. Most of the Shilluk internally displaced persons are reluctant
to return home owing to unresolved land disputes with the Dinka. The significant
presence of Government and opposition military forces in the Wau Shilluk area is also
exacerbating concerns about returning to the area.
Wau (greater Bahr el-Ghazal)
Evolution of the site
64. The Wau protection of civilians adjacent area was established, adjoining the
UNMISS base, in 2016, following the outbreak of violence in Juba that spread to
Western Bahr el-Ghazal. In May 2017, fighting in Wau resulted in a major influx of
internally displaced persons to the site, with UNMISS subsequently providing
physical protection to 39,165 internally displaced persons. As a result of the efforts
of the Government, UNMISS and United Nations entities, 25,535 left, and only
13,630 remained as at February 2019. However, an increase in intercommunal
violence caused new displacements between March and June 2019, with 4,928 new
internally displaced persons entering the site. As at July 2019, the site hosted
13,007 internally displaced persons (6,939 female and 6,068 male).
Current status
65. A total of 24 humanitarian organizations provide 41 different services at the site.
There are 21 humanitarian organizations operating in areas beyond the site, and, while
services available in town are comparable, those available further afield are extremely
limited.
66. Following the signing of the Revitalized Agreement, UNMISS supported
rapprochement efforts between the Government, the South Sudan People ’s Defence
Forces and the Sudan People’s Liberation Army in Opposition to build trust and
confidence among communities. Those efforts resulted in an improved security
environment, enabling the return of internally displaced persons to Wau town.
Significant developments have included the withdrawal of the South Sudan People’s
Defence Forces, the removal of all checkpoints and the institution of night patrols by
the National Security Service and the South Sudan National Police Service. However,
ongoing intercommunal violence in the Jur River area, coupled with ethnic tensions
between Luo and Dinka tribes, continues to create an atmosphere of mistrust among
various ethnic communities.

19-14912

13/18

S/2019/741

67. Improved security has enabled internally displaced persons to gain access to
markets outside the site and participate in livelihood activities, while some visit their
areas of origin to check on or repair their houses. Between December 2018 and May
2019, the International Organization for Migration interviewed 1,404 internally
displaced persons returning from or embarking on journeys outside the site. A total of
67 per cent of the travellers were women. Almost half were planning to be out for less
than a week, while 19 per cent intended to spend more than four months away. Family
visits were the most common reason for travel.
68. Within the site, internally displaced persons identified criminality, the
prevalence of gangs and sexual and gender-based violence as threats. Some
participants expressed fear of revenge attacks and killings, while the elderly felt
vulnerable to violence because of their unaccompanied status. Perceived external
threats recorded include the presence of armed groups outside, tensions among ethnic
groups and alleged arrests of young people by Government forces. The participants
perceived the lack of humanitarian organizations in town as an indication of
insecurity.
69. Since the signing of the Revitalized Agreement, an estimated 4,324 i nternally
displaced persons have left the site. A survey of intentions conducted in December
2018 indicated that 40 per cent of respondents intended to leave the site. Between
April 2016 and August 2019, 282 individuals (214 female and 68 male) have been
helped to return, and efforts are under way to support additional relocations to Raja.
70. The politicization of the site continues to be a concern, as prominent Fertit and
Luo leaders have claimed that the site is the only viable means for survival. Other
communities accuse the Mission of harbouring criminals and opposition supporters
within the site. Such rhetoric compromises the Mission’s impartiality and creates
mistrust and discontent among the communities. General scepticism among internally
displaced persons about the commitment of parties to the Revitalized Agreement
further impairs returns. Other barriers include the destruction of homes or land and
the lack of access to livelihood opportunities in areas of return.
Leer temporary protection area (greater Upper Nile)
Evolution of the site
71. In November 2015, UNMISS established a temporary operating base in Leer to
protect civilians amid increased hostilities between Government and opposition
forces. In 2016, violent clashes resulted in displaced civilians seeking protection at
the base for periods ranging from a few hours to a day. When conflict in Leer
intensified in 2018, a new temporary protection area was established to accommodate
civilians seeking refuge. As at May 2018, the area hosted 1,995 individuals. At the
time of reporting, there were 589 individuals.
Current status
72. The humanitarian footprint in greater Leer remains minimal, although efforts
are under way to increase presence. UNMISS and partners continue to explore all
possible measures to support internally displaced persons and facilitate their return,
as requested.
73. Inside the area, participants in focus group discussions reported criminality as
the primary concern. The participants reported generally reduced protection risks
outside the area following the signing of the Revitalized Agreement. Concerns cited
related to the presence of armed young people in areas of return, criminality, military
presence in Leer town and sexual and gender-based violence.

14/18

19-14912

S/2019/741

VIII. Observations and recommendations
74. Each protection of civilians site and each area of return presents unique conflict,
ethnic and social dynamics. Individuals within the sites and their motivations for
staying or leaving are similarly diverse. Planning regarding the future of the sites
must take such diversity into consideration, guaranteeing close consultation and
communication with affected communities and ensuring that increasing protection
responsibilities are assumed by the State. The continued role of the multi-agency
solutions working groups will be essential in that regard.
75. The signing of the Revitalized Agreement in September 2018 has generated
cautious optimism in South Sudan. The ceasefire has continued to hold in most parts
of the country, ushering in a changed protection environment and prompting a number
of spontaneous returns. Many internally displaced persons at the protection of
civilians sites, as revealed in surveys of intentions, express an increasing willingness
and desire to return home. However, several impediments exist, including uncertainty
about the peace process, insecurity in home areas and the absence of basic services in
places of return.
76. That said, facilitating returns when conditions are conducive is an integral part
of humanitarian action and the UNMISS mandate. While the current situation may
not be conducive to large-scale organized returns, displaced people are opting to move
spontaneously from the protection of civilians sites and other displacement centres or
neighbouring countries. Although people with resources are acting independently,
many others lack the means to do so as a result of years of protracted displacement.
It is incumbent upon the entire international community to resp ect the fundamental
rights of displaced persons who seek solutions to their displacement and enable them
to act on their expressed intentions, by addressing the challenges outlined in the
present report.
77. In that regard, I reiterate that the Government of South Sudan must uphold its
primary responsibility to establish conditions enabling internally displaced persons
to return voluntarily in an informed manner, in safety and in dignity, to their homes
or to other parts of the country. Once adopted, the na tional framework will offer a
pathway for safe and dignified return.
78. A commitment to address major protection risks, as well as to extend and
strengthen the rule of law to prevent and respond to serious crimes in areas outlying
the protection of civilians sites and areas of return, must be demonstrated by the State.
The Government must take the measures necessary to ensure the security and
protection of internally displaced persons and returning refugees, including by
facilitating humanitarian access. It must promote respect for universally accepted
protection principles throughout its institutions and assume accountability for serious
human rights violations and abuses that fuel conflict and trigger displacement.
Holding to account perpetrators of violations, including State security forces, is
essential to instil confidence among displaced populations to return home. In that
regard, I welcome the ratification by the Government of the Kampala Convention and
call for the Convention to be adopted into national legislation.
79. I also acknowledge the early steps taken by the signatories to the Revitalized
Agreement to establish a humanitarian coordination unit under the National
Pre-Transitional Committee. When fully established, this joint mechanism of the
Government and opposition will be essential to secure access across the entire country
to civilian populations in need of humanitarian assistance and protection and to
uphold the rights of refugee returnees and internally displaced persons who have
chosen to return. Recent improvements in access must be sustained and all
obstructions to humanitarian assistance eliminated. The United Nations will support
19-14912

15/18

S/2019/741

the humanitarian coordination unit during the pre-transitional period and the eventual
humanitarian coordination arm of the transitional government.
80. UNMISS, for its part, should continue to reprioritize the work of its uniformed
personnel to better align with civilian protection requirements. While the Mission
will, in coordination with humanitarian actors, continue its commitment to physically
protect and support the provision of life-saving assistance at the protection of
civilians sites, the imperative remains to provide protection to the most vulnerable,
wherever they are located. In determining its continued approach to protecting
civilians, the Mission will take into account the report of the Secretary -General on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2019/373).
81. In that regard, I welcome the approach of UNMISS to strengthen its early
warning and surveillance capabilities and its shift to a more mobile and robust posture
to match the prevailing threat environment while retaining flexibility to adapt to
changing circumstances. I encourage the Mission to pursue options for more remote
and sustained long-duration patrols, which will contribute to a secure environment
and build confidence in areas of return. The Mission’s intention to ensure that its
projected presence is reinforced by non-military forms of protection to maximize
community engagement, human rights monitoring and confidence -building is also
encouraging. In addition to the reprioritization of resources, I encourage broader
engagement in integrated peacebuilding initiatives, in coord ination with humanitarian
and development partners, and broader support for subnational reconciliation, conflict
resolution, security sector reform, and the strengthening of rule of law institutions.
82. The protection of civilians sites should remain a place of last resort for the
protection for civilians under imminent threat, including the most vulnerable. I
encourage the continued efforts of all partners and stakeholders to address protection
concerns emanating from within the sites. In that regard, UN MISS uniformed
personnel will maximize efforts to respond to and remove from the sites any
combatants, including persons organizing military activities and persons inciting
violence that might jeopardize the safety of residents. UNMISS civilian components
will continue to work closely with uniformed personnel and national authorities to
prevent and respond to criminality and violent acts through the national justice
system. Residents of the sites must also meet their civic responsibilities and uphold
the civilian nature of the sites.
83. The provision of humanitarian assistance outside the protection of civilians sites
has been and must remain a priority. With 7.2 million people estimated to be in need
of some type of assistance or protection, the humanitar ian community must continue
to routinely assess how services are provided, where they are provided and what level
of services is available. Five years after the establishment of the sites, maintaining a
status-based determination for the provision of assistance to internally displaced
persons solely on the basis of people’s residential status within a site raises questions
of equity. I urge all stakeholders to consider whether the current model of support to
populations inside the sites aligns with the principle to do no harm. Steps need to be
taken to avoid reliance on assistance offered within the sites and to mitigate
perceptions within host communities of inequity in the provision of assistance.
Initiatives should be pursued to ensure local area development, trust-building and
reconciliation between communities inside and outside the sites.
84. In assessing whether an environment is conducive to returns, internally
displaced persons have stated that they consider livelihood opportunities and the
availability of education and health services alongside security guarantees. To create
conditions for durable solutions, the Government and all partners must invest in
physical, material and legal safety in places of return or resettlement. Humanitarian
actors must continue to engage both host communities and returnees in open dialogue
16/18

19-14912

S/2019/741

to understand and monitor the situation carefully and to allow them to express their
own needs and challenges. I call upon international partners to do their part and
provide resources in an effective manner for the comprehensive humanitarian,
protection and development actions necessary to enable voluntary returns, including
activities to build resilience and sustainable development.
85. All efforts to support durable solutions must be undertaken in accordance with
the operational guidance note for humanitarian support to returns, relocations and the
local integration of internally displaced persons in South Sudan updated in 2019 and
the Framework on Durable Solutions for Internally Displaced Persons. Returns must
be safe, dignified, voluntary and informed, and appropriate to considerations relating
to age, gender and specific needs. I call upon the parties to the Revitalized Agreement
to respect the rights of displaced persons to freedom of movement and to choose their
own residence, and refrain from pressuring or forcing displaced persons to settle in
specific areas for reasons including those associated with political and/or ethnic
preferences.
86. As we approach the deadline for the formation of the Transitional Government
of National Unity, I urge the South Sudanese parties to remain committed to the full
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement. As detailed in the present report, the
benefits of peace are evident. While challenges remain in the implementation of the
Agreement, the spontaneous return of refugees and internally displaced persons,
including from the protection of civilians sites, is reflective of the population ’s
overwhelming desire for peace. I therefore urge the parties to remain steadfast and
for the leaders of South Sudan to come together to form a transitional government by
12 November. The presence of party leaders, including Riek Machar, working
alongside the President, Salva Kiir, as part of that government , will have the most
profound impact on the confidence of internally displaced persons and refugees to
return home.
87. Finally, I would like to convey my sincere appreciation to my Special
Representative for South Sudan, David Shearer, the UNMISS militar y, police and
civilian components, the United Nations humanitarian and country teams and
non-governmental organizations for their continued dedication to assist the
considerable displaced population of South Sudan. Going forward, I urge all
stakeholders to continue to work together, to consult and coordinate, respecting
distinct roles and responsibilities, while collectively pursuing the common objectives
to protect civilians and enable people to safely return home and resume their lives.

19-14912

17/18

S/2019/741

18/18

19-14912
