S/PRST/2007/1

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 January 2007
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5615th meeting of the Security Council, held on 8 January 2007, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Threats to
international peace and security”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, H. E. Mr. Ban Ki-moon. The Council commits itself to work closely
and in a focused and action-oriented manner with him in order to better
address the multifaceted and interconnected challenges and threats confronting
our world within its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, as provided for by the Charter of the United Nations.
“The Security Council pledges to uphold the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, and reaffirms its commitment to the
principles of sovereign equality, national sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of all States, underlines further the need for respect for
human rights and the rule of law, including protection of civilians in armed
conflict, and the importance of adhering to the principles of refraining, in
international relations, from the threat or use of force in any manner
inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations, and of peaceful
settlement of international disputes.
“The Security Council, recalling that the 2005 World Summit Outcome 1
recognized that development, peace and security and human rights are
interlinked and mutually reinforcing, emphasizes that the challenges and
threats confronting the international community demand a resolute and
coherent response, based on the collective security system of the Charter of the
United Nations. The Council reaffirms its commitment to address the whole
range of threats to international peace and security, including armed conflict,
terrorism and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
“The Security Council recognizes the essential role of the United Nations
in the global effort to combat terrorism, which in all its forms and
manifestations constitutes one of the most serious threats to peace and security.
The Council therefore welcomes the adoption by the General Assembly of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. It stands ready to play its
part in its implementation. The Council, in keeping with its responsibility in
__________________
1 Resolution 60/1.

07-20415 (E) 080107

*0720415*

S/PRST/2007/1

the international community’s efforts to combat the scourge of terrorism, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, underlines its
determination to intensify its efforts, including in translating the commitments
made at the Security Council Summit meeting in the course of the 2005 World
Summit meeting into practical results. It reiterates further that States must
ensure that any measures taken to combat terrorism comply with all their
obligations under international law, in particular international human rights
law, refugee law, and humanitarian law.
“The Security Council reaffirms its resolve to take appropriate and
effective actions against any threat to international peace and security caused
by the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their
means of delivery, in conformity with its primary responsibilities, as provided
for in the United Nations Charter.
“The Security Council recognizes the importance of more effective
international efforts to prevent conflict, including intra-State conflicts, and
encourages the Secretary-General, as already requested in Security Council
resolution 1625 (2005), to provide the Council with more regular, analytical
reporting on regions of potential armed conflict and stresses the importance of
establishing comprehensive strategies on conflict prevention in order to avoid
the high human and material costs of armed conflict.
“The Security Council underlines the need for improved United Nations
capacity to assess conflict situations and for the effective planning and
management of United Nations peacekeeping operations and for quick and
effective responses to any Security Council mandate. The Council also
recognizes the importance of a more strategic approach to the oversight and
direction of peacekeeping, to maximize the prospects for successful transition
in the countries concerned, and so as to make possible the most effective use
of scarce peacekeeping resources. To this end, the Council requests the
Secretary-General to focus in managing of and reporting on peacekeeping
missions on the steps needed to achieve the objectives of the mission, both by
the host Government and by the international community, and to propose to
the Council, as appropriate, initiatives to accelerate the transition process.
“The Security Council emphasizes the importance of post-conflict
peacebuilding to assist countries emerging from conflict in laying the
foundation for sustainable peace and development and, in this context,
welcomes the establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission that should play
an important role to achieve the objective of improving United Nations
capacity to coordinate with regional organizations, countries in the relevant
regions, donors, troop contributors and recipient countries and to perform
peacebuilding activities, in particular from the start of peacekeeping
operations through stabilization, reconstruction and development. It
appreciates the progress made thus far in the initial work of the Commission
on Burundi and Sierra Leone. The Council underlines the importance of close
interaction between the two bodies and will regularly address the work of the
Commission in its own discussions and will take into account the advice of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to working in
partnership, with the Secretary-General and the Secretariat, other United

2

07-20415

S/PRST/2007/1

Nations organs, regional, subregional and other intergovernmental
organizations, with non-Council members, including those Member States that
are parties to a conflict and with troop-contributing countries, financial and
other stakeholders in pursuit of the common objective of maintenance of
international peace and security.”

07-20415

3
