S/2002/199*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 May 2002
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
Annual report of the Security Council to the General Assembly
1.
The members of the Security Council, having taken into account the views
expressed during the debate on agenda item 11, entitled “Report of the Security
Council”, at the fifty-sixth session of the General Assembly, have reviewed the
format of the annual report of the Council to the General Assembly, which is
submitted by the Council in accordance with Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter
of the United Nations. Further to the notes by the President of the Security Council
dated 20 December 1974 (S/11586), 29 January 1985 (S/16913), 30 June 1993
(S/26015), 29 March 1995 (S/1995/234), 12 June 1997 (S/1997/451) and 30 October
1998 (S/1998/1016) concerning the Council’s documentation and other procedural
questions, the President of the Council wishes to state that all members of the
Council have indicated their agreement with the following.
2.
The Security Council will take the necessary action to ensure the timely
submission of its report to the General Assembly. For that purpose:
(a) The Security Council will continue with the existing practice whereby the
annual report is submitted to the General Assembly in a single volume. However,
the report to be presented to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session will
cover the period from 16 June 2001 to 31 July 2002. Thereafter, the period of
coverage for all future reports shall be from 1 August of one year to 31 July of the
next;
(b) The Secretariat should continue to submit the draft report to the members
of the Council no later than 31 August, immediately following the period covered by
the report, so that it may be discussed and thereafter adopted by the Council in time
for consideration by the General Assembly during the main part of the General
Assembly’s regular session.
3.

The report shall contain the following parts, as described below:
(a)

An introduction;

* Reissued for technical reasons.

02-26394* (E)

220502

*0226394*

S/2002/199

(b) Part I shall contain a brief statistical description of the key activities of
the Security Council in relation to all subjects dealt with by the Council during the
period covered by the report, including a list of each of the following with symbol
numbers, as appropriate:
(i) All decisions, resolutions, presidential statements and assessment reports
issued by the individual monthly Presidencies of the Council on its work,
annual reports of all sanctions committees and other documents issued by the
Council;
(ii) Meetings of the Security Council, including key committees such as the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, sanctions committees, working groups and
meetings with troop-contributing countries;
(iii) Panels and monitoring mechanisms and their relevant reports;
(iv) Security Council missions undertaken and their reports;
(v)

Peacekeeping operations functioning, established or terminated;

(vi) Reports of the Secretary-General prepared for the Security Council;
(vii) All communications received;
(viii) Citations to relevant United Nations documents relating to financial
expenditures in connection with Security Council activities during the period
covered by the report, if available;
(ix) References to the summary statements by the Secretary-General on
matters of which the Security Council was seized for the period covered by the
report;
(x) Notes by the President of the Security Council and other documents
issued by the Security Council for the further improvement of the Council’s
work;
(c) Pursuant to paragraph 3 (b) (i) above, the Secretariat will take the
necessary steps to ensure the timely issuance by the month of September each year,
of the publication Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council under the
symbol S/INF/ [year of the General Assembly], containing the full text of all
decisions, resolutions and presidential statements of the Council for the period
covered by the report;
(d) Part II shall contain, in relation to each subject dealt with by the Security
Council during the period covered by the report:
(i)

Factual data of the number of meetings and informal consultations;

(ii) A list of the decisions, resolutions, presidential statements and all
documents issued by the Council;
(iii) A list of the relevant panels, monitoring mechanisms and their reports, as
appropriate;
(iv) A list of the Security Council missions undertaken and their reports, as
appropriate;
(v) A list of the peacekeeping operations functioning, established or
terminated, as appropriate;

2

S/2002/199

(vi) A list of the reports of the Secretary-General prepared for the Security
Council.
4.
The report shall continue to include an account of the other matters considered
by the Council, the work of the Military Staff Committee and of the subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council. The report shall also continue to include matters that
were brought to the attention of the Council but not discussed during the period
covered by the report.
5.
In addition, the Secretariat should post the current annual report of the Security
Council on the United Nations web site. The relevant web page should be updated to
provide the information as necessitated under future notes issued by the President of
the Security Council with respect to the annual report.
6.
In accordance with the decision taken in June 1993 (S/26015), the report will
continue to be adopted at a public meeting of the Security Council where members
of the Council who wish to do so could comment on the work of the Council for the
period covered by the report. The President of the Council for the month in which
the report is presented to the General Assembly will also make reference to the
verbatim record of the Council’s discussion prior to its adoption of the annual report.
7.
The members of the Security Council will continue their consideration of other
suggestions concerning the Council’s documentation and related matters.

3
