S/2005/668

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 October 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 24 October 2005 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
As members of the Security Council are aware, the situation with regard to the
United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) has seriously
deteriorated. I believe that the present state of affairs represents more than just an
alarming situation; it constitutes a crisis that requires the full attention of, and
urgent and specific action by, the international community. I am concerned, that in
the absence of concrete action, the situation could escalate and, by intent or as a
result of a miscalculation, lead to another round of devastating hostilities.
The Council has been thoroughly briefed on the latest turn of events affecting
this important peacekeeping operation, most recently on 19 October, both in
informal consultations and at a special meeting with the troop-contributing
countries. As was underlined in those briefings, Eritrea’s decision to restrict all
types of helicopter flights by UNMEE within Eritrean air space severely inhibits the
Mission’s capacity to implement its monitoring mandate, as requested by the parties
in the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities of 18 June 2000, and authorized by the
Security Council in its resolutions 1312 (2000) and 1320 (2000). As such, the
decision also seriously affects the prospects for the implementation of the Peace
Agreement between Eritrea and Ethiopia, signed in Algiers on 12 December 2000
by the leaders of the two countries and witnessed by representatives of Algeria, the
European Union, the Organization of African Unity (now the African Union), the
United Nations, and the United States of America.
In addition, the Eritrean restriction dramatically affects the security of United
Nations peacekeepers and their operations, to the extent that the continuing
occupation of small posts in isolated places — which constitute 18 out of 40
locations — has become unsustainable and is no longer operationally viable. At the
above-mentioned meeting with troop-contributing countries, the Permanent
Representative of India, Ambassador Nirupam Sen, and the Permanent
Representative of Jordan, His Royal Highness Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein,
expressed their alarm at the implications of the helicopter ban and other restrictions
imposed by the Eritrean authorities, and described them as unacceptable to their
Governments. They appealed to the Council to send an unequivocal and strong
message, in order to reverse an increasingly untenable situation. At the same time,
the Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Meles Zenawi, has stated to the press that members
of the Eritrean Defence Force have infiltrated the Temporary Security Zone, and
urged the United Nations to “take measures to restore the status quo”.

05-56950 (E) 251005

*0556950*

S/2005/668

As you have been informed in the briefings mentioned above, I have conveyed
my serious concern regarding these issues in a letter to the President of Eritrea,
Isaias Afwerki, and appealed to his Government to reconsider the damaging
restrictions without delay. On 20 October, I received a reply in which the President
states that the Security Council and I have forfeited our “relevance” on matters
relating to the peace process.
In view of the above, I once again call on the Security Council to exert its
maximum influence to avert a further deterioration of the situation and to ensure
that the restrictions imposed on UNMEE are lifted. At the same time, after years of
frustrating stalemate, it would be imperative for the Security Council — as the
principal organ entrusted with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security — to address the underlying causes of the stalemate
in the peace process, including those relating to the Ethiopian position on the
decision of the Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission. The concerted and resolute
action of the Council will be essential in bringing about the full implementation of
the Algiers Agreements and restoring peace between the two countries.
Finally, I would like to express my growing concern about the restrictions
placed on humanitarian operations in Eritrea, including the significant delay in relief
food distributions, the impoundment of the United Nations project vehicles and the
lack of access to some of the Organization’s warehouses and containers. Those
decisions have had an adverse impact on humanitarian activities and have
exacerbated the situation of vulnerable Eritrean communities. In addition, food
insecurity remains of paramount concern, and malnutrition rates exceed the
emergency threshold in many parts of the country. Irrespective of political issues
and considerations, it is critical that restrictions on humanitarian operations are
lifted. At the same time, I wish to stress that efforts to address the root causes of
food insecurity cannot be effectively tackled until there is significant progress in the
peace process.
I stand ready to work closely with the Security Council, collectively, and with
key stakeholders, individually, to bring this dangerous crisis to an end, to conclude
the peace process expeditiously, and to re-establish vital humanitarian activities in
Eritrea.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2
