142

General Assembly-Forty-first Session

grasshoppers, especially the Global lnformation and
Early Warning System on Food and Agriculture of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and its role in identifying this potential disaster,
I. Expresses its appreciation to donor countries, organizati<:ms _of t_he ~nited. Nations system ~nd ot~er competent mst1tutions m the1r efforts to contam the mfestation;
2: Urges !he Food and Agriculture Organization ofthe
U~1ted Nahons to strengthen its co-ordinating mechamsms and its technical and field operational support for
locust and grasshopper control;
3. Endorses and encourages the continued cooperation of local, regional and global organizations and
donors in the campaign to control the current threat to
agriculture caused by locusts and grasshoppers, including
the exchange and dissemination of information on pests
and insects;
4. Encourages the donor community to continue to
marshal its resources in support of the affected countries
to bring locusts and grasshoppers under control;
5. Encourages also the affected countries to continue to
ensure that adequate resources are made available to combat_ these_ recurrent crises, in particular by strengthening
the1r nat1onal plant protection services;
6. Urges ali parties concerned to establish and
strengthen early warning systems in respect of the affected
countries and to co-ordinate their efforts in this regard;
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with t~e ~irector-Gen~ral of t~e Food and Agriculture
(?rg~mza~•~m of the Um~ed Nat1ons, to take catalytic act10n m_ ra1sm~ the co~sc1ous_ness of the world community
regardmg thts potenttally d1sastrous situation;
8. Invites the Director-General of the Food and
Agriculture Organization ofthe United Nations to submit
an _up-to-date report on the locust and grasshopper infestatton to the Economic and Social Council at its second
regular session of 1987.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/186.

lnclusion of Kiribati, Mauritania and Tuvalu in
the list of the least developed countries

The General Assembly,
N oting Economic and Social Council decision 1986/ 15 3
of 11 July 1986, in which the Council endorsed the conclusion and rec~mmendati~n of the C:ommittee for Development Planmng regardmg the mclusion of Kiribati
Mauri~ania and Tuvalu in the list of the least develope<l
countnes,
Decides to include Kiribati, Mauritania and Tuvalu in
the list of the least developed countries.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/187.

Proclamation ofthe World Decade for Cultural
Development

The General Assembly,
Considering recommendation No. 27 40 adopted by the
World Conference on Cultural Policies convened by the
40 Sec

United Nations Educational, Scientitic ,111d Cultural Organization, World Co11jere11ce 011 Cu/1ural Policies, Mexico Ciry, 26
July-6 A ugu,r 1982. Final Reporr (CLT /MD/ 1, Pari,, Novernher 1982),
part V

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at Mexico City in 1982, in which it recommended that the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
propose to the General Assembly of the United Nations
the proclamation of a world decade for cultural development,
Considering also resolutions 11.20 of 25 November
198341 and 11.10 of 8 November 198542 adopted by the
General Conference of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization at its twenty-second
and twenty-third sessions, respectively,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1986/69 of 23 July 1986, in which the Council recommended that the General Assembly take a decision at its
forty-first session on the question of the proclamation of a
world decade for cultural development,
Taking into account the interest that the intemational
community, including the organizations ofthe United Nations system, have shown in the proposed decade,
Recognizing that voluntary efforts at the national leve)
by interested individuals and non-governmental and govemmental organizations are principal vehicles for advancing the objectives of the decade,
Taking note of the draft plan of action for the world
decade for cultural development, submitted by the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, 43
1. Proclaims the period 1988-1997 the World Decade
for Cultural Development, to be observed under the auspices ofthe United Nations and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
2. Approves the four main objectives of the Decade: acknowledging the cultural dimension of development; af~n:nin~ an_d enriching cultural identities; broadening part1c1pat1on m culture; promoting international cultural cooperation;
. 3. Invites all States, intergovernmental and internatlonal non-governmental organizations, and interested individuals to take an active part in the fulfilment of the object~ves of the Decade and, for that purpose, to make
ava1lable, on a voluntary basis and taking into consideration their particular situation, priorities and means, the
necessary intellectual, human and financia! resources;
4. Encourages the organs, organizations and bodies of
the United Nations system participating in the fulfilment
of the objectives of the Decade to do so in a manner that is
in accordance with established programme priorities and
does not entail additional financia! impltcations for nonvoluntarily funded programmes;
5. Re9u_ests t_he Secret~ry-General to ensure, through
the Admm1strat1ve Comm1ttee on Co-ordination, that activities undertaken by the United Nations system in support ofthe Decade are co-ordinated in such a manner as to
avoid duplication and overlap;
6. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to report biennially to the General Assembly, through the Economic and Social Council at its second regular session, on

41 Scc Unitcd Na11011, Educational, Scicntitic and Cultural Organization, Record., o} the Ge11crul Co11jere11ce, Twe111y-wcond Sessio11,
vol. 1, Re.10/a1io11s, sect. 11.
42 /bid., Twenry-rhird Ses,ion, vol. 1, Resolurio11s, scct. 111.
4 •1 E/llJKó/l..10. anne,

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

the progress of the World Decade for Cultural Development.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/188. Sessions of tbe Economic and Social Council
and of tbe Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme in 1987
The General Assembly,
Having decided to convene the seventh session of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at
Geneva from 9 to 31 July 1987,
Recognizing the resulting need for appropriate adjustments in the dates and programmes of work of other principal and/or subsidiary bodies of the United Nations,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council, at its organizational session for 1987, to suspend, on an exceptional basis, rule 2 of its rules of procedure to enable its
second regular session of 1987 to be held from 23 June to
9 July at Geneva, and to convene a resumed second regular session, not exceeding three days, in September in
New York;
2. Requests the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme, at its organizational session, to reschedule its annual session for 1987, which
should be held from 26 May to 19 June in New York, and
the session of the High-level Committee on the Review of
Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries,
which should be held between 18 and 22 May 1987.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/189.

Tenth session of the Commission on Human
Settlements

The General Assembly,
Recallingits resolution 32/162 of 19 December 1977, by
which it made institutional arrangements for international
co-operation in the field of human settlements, including
the establishment of the Commission on Human Settlements and the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat), to provide institutional focus to the activities of the United Nations system in that field, as
recommended by Habitat: United Nations Conference on
Human Settlements, held at Vancouver, Canada, from
31 May to 11 June 1976, 44
Noting with utmost concern that, although sorne progress has been achieved in that field in the past decade, the
living conditions of the majority of people in urban and rural slums and squatter settlements, especially in developing countries, continue nevertheless to deteriorate in both
relative and absolute terms,
Recalling the important initiative taken by Member
States to reverse that negative trend through the proclamation by the Assembly, in its resolution 37/221 of
20 December 1982, of the year 1987 as the lnternational
Year ofShelter for the Homeless, with the aim ofsecuring
renewed political commitment by the international community to the improvement of the shelter and neighbourhoods of the poor and disadvantaged,
44 See Repon of Habita/: Uniled Nations Conference on Human
Se11/emen1s, Vancouver, 31 May-1 J June 1976 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.7 and corrigendum), chaps. 11 and 111.

143

Taking note with appreciation of the fact that over one
hundred and thirty countries have responded positively to
the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless by establishing national focal points for the Year and that over
three hundred and sixty projects for improving the shelter
and neighbourhoods of the poor and disadvantaged have
been officially designated around the world in the context
of the Year,
Recalling that, in its resolution 37/221, it designated the
Commission on Human Settlements, in the framework of
its regular sessions, to actas the United Nations intergovernmental body responsible for organizing the lnternational Year of Shelter for the Homeless, and noting that
1987 will mark not only the observance of the Year but
also the tenth anniversary of the establishment of the
Commission,
Convinced that the tenth session of the Commission,
commemorating its tenth anniversary and coinciding with
the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless, provides therefore a timely and unique opportunity for the international community to assess the results ofthe eff'orts of
the past decade, including the results of the many programmes and projects around the world identified as demonstration projects for the Year and, on the basis of such
assessment, decide on new directions and approaches for
national policies and strategies that will bring closer the
objective of shelter for ali by the year 2000,
Recognizing that universal participation by States in the
commemorative session of the Commission will greatly
enhance the significance and usefulness of the delibera-.
tions and conclusions of that session,
1. Appeals to ali Member States of the United Nations
or members of the specialized agencies, including the International Atomic Energy Agency, to participate at the
highest possible level in the tenth session of the Commission on Human Settlements, commemorating its tenth anniversary, in order to highlight the significance of that session and the critical importance of the programme of the
International Year of Shelter for the Homeless;
2. Decides that for the duration of the tenth session no
distinction shall be drawn in the application ofthe rules of
procedure between States members of the Commission
and other participating States and for that purpose suspends for the duration of the session the operation of rule
56 of the Commission's rules of procedure.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/190.

International Year of Sbelter for the Homeless

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 37/221 of 20 December 1982, in
which it proclaimed the year 1987 International Year of
Shelter for the Homeless,
Noting with satisfaction that more than one hundred and
thirty countries and many key United Nations agencies
and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations are taking part in the programme for the Year and
have designated more than three hundred and sixty projects for it,
Noting a/so that a large number of States have participated in the regional and subregional meetings for the
Year, man y at the ministerial level, which have resulted in
constructive recommendations and commitments for
renewed national action,
