Resolution 401 (l 976)

Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus for a further period
of six months,
Noting that the Government of Cyprus has agreed that. in
view of the prevailing conditions in the island, it is
necessary to keep the Force in Cyprus beyond I 5 December 1976,
1. Reaffirms the provisions of resolution I 86 ( 1964} of
4 March 1964, as well as subsequent resolutions and
decisions on the establishment and maintenance of the
Unit•~d Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus and other
aspects of the situation in Cyprus;
2. Reaffirms once again its resolution 365 (I 974) of 13
December 1974, by which it endorsed General Assembly
resolution 3212 (XXIX) adopted unanimously on I November l 97 4, and calls once again for the urgent and effective
implementation of those resolutions as well as of its
resolution 367 (l 975) of 12 March 1975;
3. Urges the parties concerned to act with the utmost
restraint to refrain from any unilateral or other action
likely to affect adversely the prospects of negotiations for a
just and peaceful solution and to continue and accelerate
determined co-operative efforts to achieve the objectives of
the Security Council;
4. Extends once more the stationing in Cyprus of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force, established under
Security Council resolution 186 (1964 ), for a further
period ending IS June 1977, in the expectation that by
then sufficient progress towards a final solution will make
possible a withdrawal or substantial reduction of the Force;
5. Appeals again to all parties concerned to extend their
fullest co-operation so as to enable the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force to perform its duties effectively;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the mission of good offices entrusted to him by paragraph 6 of
resolution 367 ( 1975), to keep the Security Council informed of the progress made and to submit a report on the
implementation of this resolution by 30 April 1977.

of 14 December 1976

771e Security Council,
Noting from the report of the Secretary-General of
9 December 19765 1 that in existing circumstances the
presence of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus is essential not only to help maintain quiet in the
island but also to facilitate the continued search for a
peaceful settlement,
Noting from the report the conditions prevailing in the
island,
Noti11g also from the report that the freedom of
movement of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus and its civil police is still restricted in the north of
the island and that further progress is being made in
discussiJns regarding the stationing. deployment and functioning of the Force, and expressing the hope that ways will
be found to surmount the remaining obstacles,
Noting further that the Secretary-General has expressed
the view that the best hope of achieving a just and lasting
settlement of the Cyprus problem lies in negotiations
between the representatives of the two communities and
that the usefulness of those negotiations depends upon the
willingness of all parties concerned to show the necessary
flexibility, taking into acconnt not only their own interests
but also the legitimate aspirations and requirements of the
opposing side,
Expressing its concern at actions which increase tension
between the two communities and tend to affect adversely
the efforts towards a just and lasting peace in Cyprus,
Emphasizi11g the need for the parties concerned to adhere
to the agreements reached at all previous rounds of the
talks held under the auspices of the Secretary-General and
expressing the hope that future talks will be meaningful and
productive,
Noting also the concurrence of the parties concerned with
the recommendation by the Secretary-General that the
Security Council extend the stationing of the United

Adopted at the I 979th meeting by I 3 votes tu none. s 2
52 Two members (Benin and China) did not participate in the
voting.

51 Ibid., document S/12253.

D. COMPLAINT BY GREECE AGAINST TURKEY
Decision

Resolution 395 (l 976)

At its 1949th meeting, on 12 August l 976, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Greece and Turkey
to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item
entitled "Complaint by Greece against Turkey: letter dated
l O August 1976 from the Permanent Representative of
Greece to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council ( S/ I 216 7)". s 3

of 25 August 1976

The Security Council,
Taking note of the letter of the Permanent Representative
of Greece dated 10 August 1976,S 4
Having heard and noted the various points made in the
statements by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Greeces s
and Turkey,s6
54 /hid., document S/12167.
55 Ibid., Thirty-first Year, 1949th meeting.
56 /bid., 1950th meeting.

5 3 See Official Records of' the Security Council, Thirty-first Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1976.

15

'1
Urges the Governments of Greece and Turkey to do
everything in their power to reduce the present tensions in
the area so that the negotiating process may be faciliated;
3. Calls upon the Governments of Greece and Turkey to
resume direct negotiations over their differences and
appeals to them to do everything within their power to
ensure that these negotiations will result in mutually
acceptable solutions;
4. Invites the Governments of Greece and Turkey in this
respect to continue to take into account the contribution
that appropriate judicial means, in particular the International Court of Justice, are qualified to make to the
settlement of any remaining legal differences which they
may identify in connexion with their present dispute.

Expressing its concern over the present tensions between
Greece and Turkey in relation to the Aegean Sea,
Bearing in mind the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations concerning the peaceful settlement of
disputes, as well as the various provisions of Chapter VI of
the Charter concerning procedures and methods for the
peaceful settlement of disputes,
Noting the importance of the resumption and continuance of direct negotiations between Greece and Turkey
to resolve their differences,
Conscious of the need for the parties both to respect each
other's international rights and obligations and to avoid any
incident which might lead to the aggravation of the
situation and which, consequently, might compromise their
efforts towards a peaceful solution,
I. Appeals to the Governments of Greece and Turkey to
exercise the utmost restraint in the present situation;

Adopted at the 1953rd meeting by co11se11sus.

E. THE SITUATION IN THE COMOROS
Decisions
At its 1886th meeting, on 4 February 1976, the Council decided to invite the

representative of the Comoros to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item
entitled:
"The situation in the Comoros:
"(a) Telegram dated 28 January 1976 from the Head of State of the Comoros to the
President of the Security Council (S/11953);s 7
"(b) Letter dated 3 February I 976 from the Permanent Representative of GuineaBissau to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11959)."5,

At the same meeting, the Council also decided to invite the representatives of Algeria,
Equatorial Guinea, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Madagascar and Somalia to participate,
without vote. in the discussion of the question.

At its 1888th meeting, on 6 February I 976, the Council decided to invite the
representatives of Nigeria and Saudi Arabia to participate, without vote, in the discussion
of the question.
57 Ibid., Thirty-first Year, Supplement for January, February and March I 976.

16
