Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

area early enough to permit effective preventive
action;
(iii) The propagation, consciously or otherwise, of racial
prejudice by the press, cinema and television, in
particular in publications and programmes for children and youth;
(iv) The role of education and science, especially social
science, in combating racism and racial discrimination and in solving racial problems;
( v) The preparation and implementation of economic,
social and political measures that would ensure the
real equality of all peoples and individuals, without
distinction of any kind on grounds of race, colour,
descent or national or ethnic origin;
(vi) Problems of discrimination arising in connexion with
immigration of men, women-married and unmarried-and their children and foreign workers of both
sexes;
(vii) The crime of apartheid under international penal
law, with particular reference to the responsibility
of individuals;
(viii) Problems of racial discrimination arising in connexion
with housing, sporting activities, and so forth:
(ix) The role of private group action in combating racism
and racial discrimination, consistent with the objectives of this Programme.
( e) Seminars on special aspects of combating racism and
racial discrimination and promoting racial harmony should
be organized at both the international and regional levels.
(/) The United Nations should address an appeal to various
scientific international organizations ( for example, associations of jurists, sociologists, anthropologists, historians, economists) to devote special efforts during the Decade to the
analysis and study of aspects of racial discrimination within
their competence.
Education, training and information
I 6. (a) The need for inter agency co-ordination and cooperation in the field of education and training on problems
and activities concerning the elimination of racial discrimination undertaken in the implementation of this Programme
should be identified.
( b) The procedures and types of action used by various
agencies in the field of education and training related to
racial discrimination with a view to any necessary harmonization should be examined in the light of the experience acquired.
(c) New educational and information materials should be
prepared to dispel racial prejudice and to combat racism
and racial discrimination, such as teaching materials for use
in every type of institution of learning, at the elementary, secondary and higher levels of education.
( d) Popular publications, films and radio and television
programmes should be produced for distribution or broadcasting to the general public.
International funds
17. The General Assembly should establish an international fund on a voluntary basis to help the peoples struggling against racial discrimination and apartheid.
Co-ordination, review and appraisal, and reporting
18. (a) The General Assembly shall entrust the Economic
and Social Council, in co-operation with the SecretaryGeneral, with the responsibility for co-ordinating the programmes and evaluating the activities undertaken in connexion
with the Decade.
(b) The Economic and Social Council ah::ll, du1ing the
period of the Decade, submit an annual report to the General
Assembly containing, inter a/ia:
(i) An enumeration of the activities undertaken or contemplated to achirve th~ objectives of the Decade,
including the activities of Governments. Unit-:d Na-

73

tions organs, the specialized agencies and other international organizations;
(ii) A review and appraisal of those activities;
(iii) Its suggestions and recommendations.
(c) The Economic and Social Council shall also act as the
preparatory committee for the world conference to be convened as a major fe;iture of the Decade.
(d) The Secretary-General shall provide the Economic and
Social Council with such assist;incc as may be necessary for
the performance of its functions relating to the Decade.
( e) Governments should forward a report every two years
on the action taken under the Programme for the Decade, on
the basis of a questionnaire circulated by the SecretaryGeneral; these reports shall be transmitted to the Economic
and Social Council for its comid~ration.
(/) The Secretary-General shall submit to the Economic
and Social Council an annual report containing:
(i) A summary of the actions, suggestions. trends, etc.,
emerging from the deliberations of United Nations
organs and bodies and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, as well as from the
deliberations of the specialized agencies concerned
with the question of racial discrimination and apartheid;
(ii) A summary of information relating to the elimination
of racism and racial discrimination as may be received
by the United Nations under the system of periodic
reports on human rights;
(iii) Information concerning the activities undertaken or
contemplated during the Decade under the programme
of advisory services in the field of human rights in
regard to the elimination of racial discrimination;
(iv) Information submitted by non-governmental organizaticns in consultative relationship concerning activities undertaken or contemplated during the Decade;
(v) A report on the action of the Office of Public Information with respect to the Decade;
(vi) A report on any action hy the United Nations Institute
for Training and Research in relation to th~ Decade.
(g) Adequate resources shall be made available to the
Secretary-General to enable him to undertake the activities
entrusted to him under the Programme for the Decade and. in
particular, to enable him to provide the Economic and Social
Council with such assistance as may be necessary for the
performance of its functions relating to the Decade.
(h) The General Assembly shall consider annually the item
entitled "Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Raci:il
Discrimination" on the ba,is of the report of the Economic
and _Social Council and of other relevant reports which it may
receive from the Secretary-General. and shall review the
implementation of this Programme.
(i) The General Assembly shall address itself at the e.irliest
opp~rtunity to t_he question of ways and means of ensuring
the 1mplemcntat1on of United Nations resolutions on apartheid, racial discrimination and rcl:Jted matters.

3058 (XXVIII). Protection of journalists engaged
in dangerous missions in areas of armed
conflict

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2673 (XXV) of 9 December 1070 and 2854 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971, in
which it expressed its conviction that there was a need
for an additional humanitarian international instrument
to ensure the better protection of journalists engaged
in dangerous missions in areas where an armed coullict
was taking place,

74

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

Recalling also its decision of 12 December 1972 to
include the item in the agenda of its twenty-eighth
session and to consider it as a matter of high priority,7
Aware that the provisions of the humanitarian
conventions at present in force do not cover certain
categories of journalists engaged in dangerous missions
in areas of ::irmed conflict and do not correspond to
their present needs,
Having examined, article by article, the draft articles of a convention proposed by Australia, Austria,
Denmark, Ecuador, Finland, France, Iran, Lebanon,
Morocco and Turkey, 8 as well as some related amendments,
Taking also into account that the Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed
Conflicts will be held at Geneva from 20 February to
29 March 1974 under the auspices of the Swiss Government,
l. Expresses the opinion that it would be desirable
to adopt a convention ensuring the protection of journalists engaged in dangerous missions in areas of armed
conflict;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and
Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflict'> the draft articles and
amendments annexed to his note of 9 July 1973,9
together with the observations and suggestions made
during the twenty-eighth session of the General Assembly, and to invite the Diplomatic Conference to submit
its comments and advice on the above-mentioned texts;
3. Decides to continue the examination of this
qu_estion a_t its twenty-ninth session, as a matter of prionty, havmg regard to the deliberations and findings
of the Diplomatic Conference.
2163rd plenary meeting
2 November 1973
3059 (XXVIII). Question of torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment

The General Assembly,
Mindful of article 5 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, which affirms that no one shall be
subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment,
Gravely concerned that torture is still practised in
various parts of the world,
Bearing in mind that this subject has been brought
before various organs dealing with !iuman rights,
through various reports relating to violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms,
Bearing in mind also that the Sub-Commission on
Pa:evention of Discrimination and Protection of Minori-·
ties has asked the Commission on Human Rights to
authorize it to include in its agenda for the next session
an item on the human rights of persons subjected to
any form of detention and imprisonment,
l. Rejects any form of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Sessi011, Plenary Meetings, 2107th meeting, paras. 9 and 10.
s A/9073, annex I.
G Ibid., annexes I and II.

2. Urges all Governments to become parties to
existing international instruments which contain provisions relating to the prohibition of torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the
General Assembly, under the report of the Economic
and Social Council, of the consideration which may
have been given to this question by the Sub-Commission · on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection
of Minorities or by the Commission on Human Rights
and other bodies concerned;
4. Decides to examine the question of torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in relation to detention and imprisonment as
an item at a future session of the General Assembly.
2163rd plenary meeting
2 November 1973
3060 (XXVIII). Observance of the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling that in its resolution 2860 (XXVI) of
20 December 1971 it expressed its conviction of the
historic significance and enduring value of the Universal Declarat\on of Human Rights as a common
stan~ard o~ achievement for all peoples and all nations
and its destre to mark, in 1973, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration in a manner which would
fit the occasion and serve the cause of human rights,
Also recalling that in its resolution 2906 (XXVII)
of 19 October 1972 it reaffirmed its adherence to the
principles, values and ideals contained in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, and approved a programme of suitable activities which could be undertaken in observance of the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the Declaration,
Recalling its resolution 2919 (XXVII) of 15 November 1972, in which it decided to launch the Decade
for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination and to inaugurate the activities thereof on I O December 1973, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
.f!..egretting that there are still many objectives of the
Umversal Declaration of Human Rights which have
n~t yet been implemented and urging renewed commitment bv all peoples and all nations towards achieving this end,
Having examined the progress report 10 submitted
by the Secretary-General in accordance with resolution
2906 (XXVII),
Noting with satisfaction the measures and activities
undertaken or contemplated in connexion with the
programme for the observance of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
l. Urges Governments, the specialized agencies and
other intergovernmental organizations, and non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council, to rededicate themselves
during and after the observance of the twcnty--fifth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights to adnpting further measures designed to serve
the cause of human rights and the implementation of
the Declaration;
10 A/9133 and Corr.I and Add.1-3.
