S/2021/322

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 April 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 1 April 2021 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to paragraph 31 of resolution 2550 (2020), in which
the Security Council requested that I hold joint consultations with the Governments
of the Sudan, South Sudan and Ethiopia, as well as other relevant stakeholders, to
discuss an exit strategy for the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) and develop options for its responsible drawdown and exit. I further refer
to the request of the Security Council that I report no later than 31 March 2021,
elaborating on those options, which should prioritize the safety and security of
civilians living in Abyei, account for the stability of the region and include an option
for a responsible drawdown and exit of UNISFA that is not limited by implementation
of the 2011 agreements.
Pursuant to the above request, my Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa
undertook consultations in February and March 2021. Consultations with the
transitional Government of the Sudan took place in Khartoum through discussions
with the Chair of the Sovereign Council, Lieutenant General Abdel Fattah Al-Burhan;
the Prime Minister, Abdalla Hamdok; the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mariam
Al-Sadiq Al-Mahdi; the Minister of Defence, Lieutenant General Yassin Ibrahim
Yassin; and representatives of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee. Owing to the
severe impact of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in South Sudan, consultations with
the Government of South Sudan were held remotely and in writing through the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, Beatrice Khamisa Wani Noah, and the Minister of East African Community Affairs, Deng Alor, holder of the
Abyei portfolio. Consultations with the Government of Ethiopia were conducted in
person with the State Minister in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Redwan Hussein,
while additional consultations were held with former President of South Africa,
Mr. Thabo Mbeki, in his capacity as Chair of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel. Although in resolution 2550 (2020) the Council requested a
joint consultation, travel restrictions in the region resulting from the COVID -19
pandemic, as well as complex regional dynamics, resulted in separate in dividual
consultations being conducted instead.
Since the end of the regime of the former President of the Sudan, Omar
Al-Bashir, the Sudan and South Sudan have been experiencing a period of
rapprochement. Both countries have stopped accusing each other of supporting or
hosting anti-government armed movements and instead have been mutually
reinforcing each other’s efforts to end internal conflicts. Most recently, the
rapprochement can be demonstrated by the constructive role played by the
Government of South Sudan in successfully mediating the peace process between

21-04406 (E)

120421

*2104406*

S/2021/322

the transitional Government of the Sudan and some of the armed movements in the
Sudan. However, despite their improved relations, the Sudan and South Sudan have
held limited bilateral engagements within the framework of their cooperation
agreements and have instead continued to focus on their respective internal conflicts
and political transitions. While both countries announced a review of all their bilateral
agreements in October 2020, including on Abyei, very little concrete action has since
followed. Moreover, in recent months, increasingly tense relations between the Sudan
and Ethiopia owing to the dispute over the Fashaqah area on their shared border and
protracted negotiations on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam have had an impact
on the position of the Sudan on UNISFA.
Consultations
In the consultations, the Government of the Sudan expressed the view that,
despite the security situation remaining volatile in the Abyei area, UNISFA ha d
played an important stabilizing role since its establishment in 2011. The Sudan
indicated that a responsible drawdown of UNISFA could be considered immediately
but should proceed gradually over a one-year period to allow time for the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to establish the mechanisms provided for
in the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of the Sudan and
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement on temporary arrangements for the
administration and security of the Abyei Area (Agreement of 20 June 2011). The
Government of the Sudan therefore would be in favour of a mandate renewal for
UNISFA which would also enable the parties in the meantime to hold consultations
with the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Deve lopment on
successor arrangements.
The Sudan indicated that, should tensions remain high with Ethiopia, it would
consider making a request for Ethiopia to withdraw as a troop -contributing country
from UNISFA and be replaced with a multinational African force. The Sudan is of the
view that such a force could be considerably scaled down from the current troop level
of UNISFA and should be in place until a new mechanism established by the parties
becomes operational.
The Government of the Sudan further expressed the view that the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism continued to play an important role and
should be maintained. However, it would require facilitation to fulfil its mandate more
impartially as the parties work towards a replacement mechanism.
The Government of the Sudan raised concern that the Abyei area was not fully
demilitarized, suggesting that Sudan People’s Liberation Army (now South Sudan
People’s Defence Forces) elements have been present in Abyei since 2018. Sudanese
interlocutors stated that the border demarcation process was not proceeding as
planned because of delays created by South Sudan but stressed that the Sudan and
South Sudan should be able to work more cooperatively to demarcate the border.
Concerning outstanding bilateral issues, the Sudan underscored that relations
with South Sudan were amicable and strengthening, as exemplified by Minister for
Foreign Affairs Mariam Al-Sadiq selecting Juba as the first place to visit upon
assuming her duties in the new cabinet. The Sudan stated that it intended to recommit
to all the bilateral agreements it had signed with South Sudan and to resolve all
outstanding issues peacefully, including on Abyei, with a view to attaining a mutually
beneficial solution in which Abyei would become a “soft border” and an example of
peaceful coexistence, development and shared prosperity for the local communities.
In this regard, the Sudan would like to see the resources currently expended on
UNISFA redirected to addressing development needs in Abyei. The Government of
the Sudan stated that it had established communication channels with the Misseriya
2/5

21-04406

S/2021/322

and the Ngok Dinka communities to foster harmony and tolerance, and that it
continued to deploy efforts to reduce violence between the two commun ities with a
view to finding a sustainable final solution that would not necessarily translate into
the separation of Abyei. Sudanese authorities stated that the Sudan and South Sudan
would establish a joint police force as envisaged in the Agreement of 20 June 2011,
alongside the joint administrative structures and the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee. In this connection, the Sudan committed to working closely with South
Sudan to reach an agreement that would rid Abyei and South Sudan of armed
movements, thereby reciprocating the mediation efforts of South Sudan that led to the
signing of agreements between the Sudan and its armed groups. The Sudan stressed
that, while it prioritized a new forward-looking strategic partnership with South
Sudan and other countries anchored on peace, the continued support of the United
Nations would be crucial in ensuring progress was made in the implementation of the
Agreement of 20 June 2011.
The Government of South Sudan expressed the view that UNISFA had proven
to be effective in the implementation of its mandate and the protection of civilians in
Abyei since its establishment in 2011, despite a number of operational challenges,
and the mission’s exit should be envisaged only after the resolution of the final status
of Abyei.
South Sudan insisted that security concerns remained in Abyei and in
neighbouring Western Kordofan State that warranted the continued presence of
UNISFA. South Sudan cited the assassination of the Paramount Chief of Ngok Dinka
in 2013, and the killing of civilians on 22 January and 13 April 2020 by the Misseriya,
as examples of continuing security concerns.
South Sudan rejected the establishment of joint institutions with the Sudan,
arguing that previous attempts had resulted in two wars in 200 8 and 2011 owing to a
lack of trust between the parties. It further claimed that the Sudan had dissolved the
Abyei administration and delayed its reconstitution, causing events to be
subsequently overtaken by the African Union proposal on the final status of Abyei,
which South Sudan espoused. According to South Sudan, the current stalled peaceful
settlement of the situation in Abyei was due to the rejection by the former President
of the Sudan of both the ruling of the Permanent Court of Arbitration on Abye i’s
boundaries and the recommendations of the African Union High -level
Implementation Panel regarding the referendum on the final status of Abyei.
In the interim, South Sudan advocated continued collaboration between the
Juba-appointed administration of Abyei and the Misseriya administration in Muglad,
outside of Abyei, as well as cooperation between the two administrations regarding
the Misseriya grazing rights and other issues of mutual concern.
South Sudan expressed concern that the continued presence of Sudanese Armed
Forces in Kec (Diffra) in Abyei not only stoked insecurity by fostering the activities
of what it referred to as Misseriya militia and criminals but also prevented the return
of internally displaced persons to their places of origin.
Lastly, South Sudan called for the expedited appointment of a civilian deputy
head of mission who would spearhead responses to the political and humanitarian
issues, including the implementation of an exit strategy that should lead to the final
status of Abyei.
Ethiopia was of the view that UNISFA had been successfully executing its
mandate and that, if it were to be withdrawn prematurely, the security situation in the
Abyei area would likely deteriorate. Ethiopia stated that, as the mission was
established following the joint agreement of the Sudan and South Sudan, its
drawdown should be agreed by both parties. Ethiopia believed that South Sudan was
21-04406

3/5

S/2021/322

comfortable with the presence of Ethiopian troops in UNISFA. Ethiopia viewed
UNISFA as playing an important role in preventing conflict between the Sudan and
South Sudan and therefore contributed to ensuring security for Ethiopia as well, as
such a conflict would have repercussions for Ethiopia and the wider region.
For Ethiopia, a reduction in the troop level of UNISFA, combined with a lack
of cooperation by the Sudan, would prevent UNISFA from fully implementing its
mandate. A further reduction of forces, in its view, would put the remaining troops of
UNISFA at risk and lead Ethiopia to withdraw them fro m the operation for their own
safety.
Ethiopia maintained that UNISFA was efficient in implementing its mandate and
that any lapses could be attributed to the unwillingness of the Sudan to resolve certain
issues that could enhance its performance, such as the timely issuance of visas for
UNISFA personnel, authorization for UNISFA to use the Athony airstrip and approval
of the appointment of a civilian deputy head of mission.
The Government of Ethiopia linked the issue of UNISFA to other current
regional developments, notably the ongoing negotiations over the Grand Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam and the dispute of Ethiopia with the Sudan concerning the Fashaqah
area. Ethiopia described the stance of the Sudan on these issues as a recent change in
position that could impact the amicable relations between the two countries.
The African Union High-level Implementation Panel underscored that it had
already provided its position on the final status of Abyei, which was adopted by the
African Union Heads of State in 2013. It recalled that the process went through three
stages of consultations and a decision was taken that the Security Council should
endorse the report. There was still no agreement on Abyei between the Sudan and
South Sudan and the rapprochement between them had proved insufficient to resolve
outstanding issues.
In the view of the African Union High-level Implementation Panel, without
UNISFA, the security situation in Abyei would deteriorate, partly because armed
movements use Abyei as a base to regroup. Therefore, the drawdown of UNISFA
should not be a political or hasty decision but should rather take into consideration
the security situation on the ground. Furthermore, considering the current
developments in the region, a premature withdrawal of UNISFA would reverse the
gains achieved so far in Abyei.
The African Union High-level Implementation Panel stated that efforts would
be deployed shortly for the Peace and Security Council of the African Union to meet
in early April to engage the Sudan and South Sudan and thus enable the African
members of the United Nations Security Council to be appropriately informed on their
positions before the Security Council discusses the mandate of UNISFA.
Observations
The Security Council requested that the joint regional consultation lead to the
development of options for the responsible drawdown and exit of UNISFA, and that
the Secretary-General elaborate on those options, which should prioritize the safety
and security of civilians living in Abyei, account for t he stability of the region, and
include an option for a responsible drawdown and exit of UNISFA that is not limited
by implementation of the 2011 agreements (resolution 2550 (2020), para. 31).
This consultation was inconclusive and, given the separate engagements with
the parties and their different positions on the future of UNISFA, no options that
would be minimally acceptable to the parties could be formulated.

4/5

21-04406

S/2021/322

While all parties continue to recognize the usefulness and relevance of UNISFA,
albeit for differing reasons, their positions diverge on its composition and the
continuation of the operation. Following the reinvigoration of its mandate in 2018,
all parties recognize that UNISFA has also been instrumental in addressing tensions
between the Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya communities through community dialogue
and reconciliation initiatives, although its operations have been constrained by
administrative bottlenecks.
I note that the parties recognize the important security role of UNISFA, which
has contributed significantly to the stabilizing of Abyei, notwithstanding intermittent
clashes between the two communities. In this regard, I sincerely hope that Ethiopia
and the Sudan succeed in amicably resolving their political tensions. This will permit
UNISFA to maintain its current configuration and continued focus on the security and
stability of Abyei, as well as monitoring and verification along the border, as
contained in my letter dated 20 August 2018 addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2018/778). Alternatively, the ability of UNISFA to implement its mandate
in its current composition would be negatively affected with significant c onsequences
on the stability in Abyei, as well as there being serious implications for the relations
between the Sudan and South Sudan.
A longer-term and more sustainable solution in Abyei, resulting in a safe and
complete drawdown of UNISFA, would need to be predicated on good neighbourly
relations between the Sudan and South Sudan and the parties reaching an agreement
on the final status of the Abyei area with the support of the region, the African Union
and the United Nations.
The views expressed by the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan during
the consultations are based on their political positions and differing interests related
to their diverging views on the Agreement of 20 June 2011 and the settlement of the
final status of Abyei. These positions continue to have a significant impact on efforts
to stabilize Abyei and on mandate implementation of UNISFA, and will continue to
do so as long as there is no agreement on the final status of the Abyei area.
Against this background, I call on all partners to assist both the Sudan and South
Sudan to resolve their outstanding issues, particularly to reach a settlement on the
final status of Abyei, which would also require finalizing consultations with the
African Union Peace and Security Council on this important matter. I further
encourage the Sudan and South Sudan to implement their commitment, announced in
January 2020, to establish a joint security mechanism that would assume some of the
UNISFA Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism tas ks.
The resolution of an outstanding acrimonious issue, such as the killing of the
Paramount Chief of Ngok Dinka, would significantly contribute to the promotion of
harmonious relations and the reduction in community tensions. In this regard, I am
reassured by the commitment of the African Union to hand over the investigation
report to both countries.
Finally, I commend the Sudan and South Sudan for the considerable
improvement in their bilateral relations and the constructive efforts each country has
made to support the other in ending internal conflicts. I hope that this rapprochement
can be further strengthened through progress on the status of the Abyei area that will
result in improved safety and security of all civilians living in Abyei, as well a s the
wider region.
(Signed) António Guterres

21-04406

5/5
