UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/11
10 March 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3508th meeting of the Security Council, held on 10 March 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Angola", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the Secretary-General’s report of
5 March 1995 (S/1995/177) on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III).
"The Security Council welcomes the assessment by the Secretary-General
that the cease-fire is generally holding. It also welcomes the continued
deployment of United Nations military and police observers to sites outside
Luanda. It notes, however, that this deployment has been complicated by a
lack of full cooperation by the parties, in particular UNITA. In the month
since the adoption of its resolution 976 (1995), a number of developments
have taken place which give rise to serious concern. These include the
lack of progress in disengagement around Uige and Negage, the escalation of
tensions in the last few weeks, especially in the northern region, the lack
of security clearances to visit certain areas and restrictions on movement
of UNAVEM III personnel, attacks on villages, mine-laying, unauthorized
movement of troops and military air activity, and attacks on United Nations
aircraft, in particular that by UNITA in Quibaxe on 13 February 1995. The
Council calls upon the parties, particularly UNITA, to refrain from such
activities, to end negative propaganda, to improve their cooperation with
each other and the United Nations through the Joint Commission and to
cooperate fully with humanitarian operations.
"The Security Council reiterates its call upon President Dos Santos
and Dr. Savimbi to meet without delay as a sign of their joint commitment
to the peace process and urges the Government of Angola and UNITA to
finalize arrangements towards this end immediately, with a view to ensuring
the necessary political momentum for the successful implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol. It also encourages the observer States to the peace
process, the Organization of African Unity and the neighbouring countries
involved to continue their efforts aimed at the full implementation of the
peace process.
95-06861 (E)

100395

/...

S/PRST/1995/11
English
Page 2

"The Security Council reaffirms the obligations of all States to
implement fully the provisions of paragraph 19 of resolution 864 (1993) and
reiterates its call upon the Government of Angola and UNITA to cease the
acquisition of arms and war matériel as agreed in the "Acordos de Paz".
"The Security Council notes that the United Nations is currently
pursuing with the Government of Angola the provision of critical services
and access to key facilities such as ports and airports for UNAVEM III.
Early and positive responses from the Government of Angola to the United
Nations requirements in this respect are essential to UNAVEM III’s
deployment. It calls on both parties to expedite the completion of the
initial tasks in order to ensure the prompt deployment of UNAVEM III units.
The Council reiterates the importance it attaches to the Government of
Angola and the United Nations agreeing on a Status of Forces Agreement by
20 March 1995 as called for in paragraph 13 of its resolution 976 (1995).
It will continue to monitor closely developments in these areas.
"The Security Council commends the United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations for their continuing efforts to distribute
humanitarian relief throughout Angola. It reiterates the importance it
attaches to a well-coordinated and comprehensive mine clearance programme
which will, inter alia, improve the logistics of humanitarian operations.
It calls upon both parties to cooperate with the United Nations and with
the non-governmental organizations to put this in place. It deplores the
killing on 2 March of three Angolans and one German, all members of the
"Cap Anamur" non-governmental organization involved in demining activities,
as well as attacks in the last month on ICRC aircraft and road transport
and reminds the parties of its repeated demands that they refrain from all
actions which could jeopardize the safety of humanitarian personnel in
Angola.
"The Security Council endorses the Secretary-General’s conclusions
that the Government of Angola and UNITA must provide more concrete signs of
cooperation and goodwill in the implementation of the peace process. It
reminds the parties that the deployment of the units of UNAVEM III will not
take place unless the conditions contained in paragraph 32 of his report of
1 February 1995 (S/1995/97) have been met. It has taken careful note of
the Secretary-General’s statement that, unless he can report by
25 March 1995 that the parties have complied with these conditions, it will
not be possible to ensure that deployment begins on 9 May 1995. Time is
short if the opportunity created by the Lusaka Protocol and the Council’s
resolution 976 (1995) is not to be lost. The Council joins the SecretaryGeneral in calling upon the parties to take the necessary steps now to
ensure that deployment of these units can begin as planned on 9 May 1995.
It requests the Secretary-General to keep it closely informed of
developments in this regard."

-----
