S/2020/536

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 June 2020
Original: English

Situation in South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2514
(2020), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) until 15 March 2021 and requested me to report on the
implementation of the Mission’s mandate every 90 days. It covers political and
security developments between 16 February 2020 and 31 May 2020, the humanitarian
and human rights situation and progress made in the implementa tion of the Mission’s
mandate.

II. Political and economic developments
Key political updates
2.
Further to the 7 November 2019 tripartite meeting, held in Entebbe, the
President of South Sudan, Salva Kiir, dissolved the Transitional Government of
National Unity on 21 February and appointed Riek Machar as First Vice -President
and Taban Deng Gai, James Wani Igga and Rebecca Nyandeng de Mabior as Vice Presidents. The new presidency of the Revitalized Transitional Government of
National Unity was sworn in on 22 February, marking the end of the pre -transitional
period. On 23 February, the President selected Hussein Abdelbagi as the fourth Vice President from a list submitted by the South Sudan Opposition Alliance (SSOA), after
the coalition failed to reach a consensus.
3.
On 12 March, following prolonged discussions among the parties on the
allocation of 35 ministerial portfolios pursuant to the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, the Presi dent appointed
the Cabinet. The former Government retained 20 ministries; the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition (SPLM/A-IO) received 9; SSOA received 3;
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM) “Former Detainees” (SPLM -FD)
received 2; and the Other Political Parties (OPP) coalition received 1. The Revitalized
Transitional Government fell short of the 35 per cent quota for women envisioned in
the Revitalized Agreement, with only nine women (25 per cent).

20-07525 (E)

170620

*2007525*

S/2020/536

Impact of the coronavirus disease
4.
As at 31 May, 1,317 cases of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) had been
registered in South Sudan, including 14 confirmed cases within the UNMISS
protection of civilians sites (11 in Juba and 3 in Bentiu). Despite the limited testing
capacity, underreporting and subclinical disease, the assumption is that the country is
experiencing community transmission.
5.
On 20 March, the President established a high-level task force to combat
COVID-19, with Mr. Machar heading operations. On 15 May, the President dissolved
the high-level task force and appointed a new 13-member task force led by
Mr. Abdelbagi.
6.
On 20 May, Mr. Machar, the Minister of Defence, Angelina Teny, and the
Minister of Information and Communication, Michael Makuei Lueth, confirmed tha t
they had tested positive for COVID-19, along with a number of Cabinet ministers.
7.
The pandemic affected peace and security dynamics in South Sudan, including
critical elements of peace implementation. Following the confirmation of the first
case within the United Nations, anti-United Nations sentiment, hate speech and
harassment emerged, and the Organization was accused of spreading the virus.
Government-imposed restrictions negatively affected peacekeeping and humanitarian
activities.
Implementation of the Revitalized Agreement
8.
On 27 March, the President established a new security mechanism, the National
Transitional Committee, to coordinate and implement the transitional security
arrangements. The mechanism took over the outstanding tasks of the defunct National
Pre-Transitional Committee.
9.
At the end of the reporting period, approximately 35,000 personnel remained at
cantonment sites, waiting to transition to training centres or for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. The Joint Transitional Security Committee issued a
directive on 25 March requesting training centres to suspend activities to comply with
the guidance of the high-level task force. According to the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification Mechanism, conditions in
cantonment and training sites remained dire, with a lack of basic resources, which led
to large numbers of troops leaving the sites.
10. On 6 May, the Joint Defence Board held its twelfth meeting to discuss
implementation of the transitional security arrangements, at which the parties agreed
to graduate the trainees to the necessary unified forces within one month.
11. The parties continued to disagree on the sharing ratio for gubernatorial
positions, leaving those key positions vacant. On 7 May, the Office of the President
issued a statement that the parties had agreed to divide up the States. The former
Transitional Government of National Unity was allocated six States, the SPLM/A -IO
three and the SSOA one. The same day, Mr. Machar, in a letter to the reconstituted
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, rejected the decision, claiming that it
had not been reached by consensus. The leader of the National Democratic Movement
(NDM), Lam Akol, and a section of OPP also objected to the decision. To overcome
the impasse, on 9 May, the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission referred the matter to the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) Heads of States and Governments.

2/19

20-07525

S/2020/536

Peace process developments
12. Increased fragmentation among the opposition parties continued. Within SSOA,
NDM accused the other parties of failing to adhere to democratic principles in
determining the allocation of its allotted positions within the Revitalized Transitional
Government of National Unity. Some members of OPP also complained that the
President had filled their ministerial post without consultation.
13. Within the SPLM/A-IO, several defections and desertions were noted,
especially following the formation of the Cabinet. On 17 March, four SPLM/A-IO
generals, led by Lieutenant General James Koang Chuol, defected to the South Sudan
Peoples’ Defence Forces. A member of the SPLM/A-IO political bureau and former
national Minister of Petroleum, Dak Duop Bichiok, led another group of defectors,
accusing Mr. Machar of nepotism and failing to govern the movement appropriately.
SPLM/A-IO criticized the President for allegedly encouraging and facilitating
defections at a time when reunification was essential.
Engagement of regional partners
14. On 9 April, the African Union Peace and Security Council (AUPSC) held its
917th meeting on the situation in South Sudan. The Council urged the parties to
adhere to the Revitalized Agreement, in particular the reconstit ution of the
Transitional National Legislative Assembly and the appointment of State governors.
It further requested the holdout groups to continue to respect the permanent ceasefire,
in line with the 12 January Rome declaration concluded under the auspice s of the
Sant’Egidio community.
15. On 23 April, the IGAD Council of Ministers met and issued a communiqué in
which it urged the President to reconstitute the Transitional National Legislative
Assembly before 10 May and called on the parties to reach an a greement on
responsibility-sharing within 15 days. The Council of Ministers expressed
appreciation for the commitment of the Government to take remedial measures to
rectify alterations made by the constitutional amendment bill. It urged the President
to undertake appropriate consultations with the officials and organs concerned when
making public political appointments in the future.
Economic situation
16. Falling global crude oil prices and the COVID-19 pandemic negatively affected
the economy, resulting in the International Monetary Fund revising the gross domestic
product growth rate for 2020 from 8.2 per cent to 4.9 per cent. The loss in revenue is
expected to create new challenges with regard to funds available for the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement.

III. Security situation
17. While the permanent ceasefire largely continued to hold, the security situation
deteriorated as disagreement over gubernatorial positions and the ensuing lack of
authority at the State level compounded tensions and exacerbated communal violence
and crime. Concurrently, Government and SPLM/A-IO clashes with the South Sudan
Opposition Movements Alliance (SSOMA) saw an uptick in late April and mid -May
in the Equatorias, following a general lull since the signing of the Rome declaration,
which was intended to bring the non-signatories into the peace process.

20-07525

3/19

S/2020/536

Greater Equatoria region
18. Efforts to implement the Rome declaration faced challenges, as clashes
escalated between the National Salvation Front (NAS) and an alliance between the
South Sudan Peoples’ Defence Forces and SPLM/A-IO. At least 14 clashes occurred
in Central Equatoria, with both sides trading blame for violating the declaration.
19. The SPLM/A-IO in Western Equatoria split when the Division IX B
Commander, Major General James Nando, defected to join the South Sudan Peoples’
Defence Forces on 26 March, prompted by and internal leadership dispute and the
perception of marginalization along ethnic lines.
Greater Bahr el-Ghazal region
20. The SPLM/A-IO internal discord continued to foment and instigate instability
in the greater Bagari area. A fight broke out on 6 May between forces under Major
General Abdallah Ujang, and those led by Brigadier General Rizek Otto, loyal to
Major General Daniel Dongo, who defected to the Government in February. On
14 May, Colonel William Gabriel Farah and 15 soldiers loyal to Dongo defected to
the Government, further indicating disunity within SPLM/A -IO.
21. The cross-border conflict between armed cattle keepers from Tonj and farmers
from the Jur River area led to tensions between the South Sudan Peoples’ Defence
Forces, which supported the cattle keepers, and SPLM/A-IO, which provided
protection to the local farmers. Tensions also emerged when SPLM/A -IO prevented
cattle keepers from accessing drinking water in Kuajena and issued an ultimatum for
them to leave.
Greater Upper Nile region
22. The intra-Nuer conflict in Maiwut continued, with civilians drawn into both
military clashes and communal violence. Forces loyal to Major General Ochan Puot
and SPLM/A-IO remained positioned in strategic locations and engaged in sporadic
clashes, in breach of their ceasefire commitment.
23. On 24 April, Major General Matthew Puljang was removed as the commander
of the South Sudan Peoples’ Defence Forces special forces in Unity, resulting in
insecurity and the spillover of violence into neighbouring States. Young people
associated with Puljang denounced his dismissal and threatened to instigate violence
in Warrap. A cattle raiding incident on 2 May in Dam village in Warrap, in which
eight people were killed, allegedly involved those loyal to Puljang.
Intercommunal conflict
24. There was a sharp increase in intercommunal violence, including owing to the
leadership vacuum at the State and substate levels, where government institutions
remained dissolved, which allowed seasonal and perennial inter- and intracommunal
tensions to continue unchecked.
25. In Jonglei, violence spiked owing to attacks by Lou Nuer and Dinka Bor on
Murle communities in late February, in which hundreds of people were killed and
injured, numerous women and children abducted, cattle looted and thousands of
civilians displaced. The process of the return of the abductees was facilitated by
UNMISS through local peace engagements, including intra-Lou Nuer and Murle
dialogues, virtual meetings between leaders and proactive deployment of pat rols to
hotspots. The COVID-19 prevention measures restricting movement and public
gatherings have delayed the process of identifying and assembling the abducted
Murle. Planned consultative peace meetings of Murle youth facilitated by UNMISS

4/19

20-07525

S/2020/536

in Pibor were indefinitely postponed. In mid-May, hundreds of Murle men conducted
a coordinated attack against Lou Nuer communities, targeting over a dozen villages
in Uror county. The ensuing fight between the two sides resulted in the killing of
hundreds of people and the displacement of thousands of civilians.
26. In Warrap and Lakes, violent incidents occurred among Dinka communities,
typically resulting from land ownership claims, disputes over grazing lands and a
culture of revenge. In addition, cross-border attacks by Bul Nuer actors from Unity
into Warrap occurred in April and May, resulting in dozens of deaths and looting of
cattle. In the same period, an uptick in intra-Nuer violence was also observed in Unity.
UNMISS deployed military patrols and integrated teams to hotspots in Warrap, Lakes
and Unity to engage communities and reinvigorate previously signed peace
resolutions. In addition, UNMISS facilitated direct communication between
influential community leaders from the affected areas, including through sa tellite
phones and video conferencing.

IV. Humanitarian situation
27. South Sudan continues to be gripped by a serious humanitarian crisis. The
cumulative effect of prolonged conflict, chronic vulnerabilities and weak essential
services compounded by emerging health risks have left some 7.5 million people in
need, while hunger threatens over half of the population.
28. The existing crisis conditions have made the population extremely vulnerable
to experiencing illness associated with the transmission of COVID-19. In a country
where 56 per cent of the population has no access to even primary health -care
services, along with existing comorbidities, the loss of life resulting from COVID -19
will be almost impossible to prevent. Moreover, the p andemic poses a significant risk
to the precarious health system; the potential for health worker absenteeism owing to
sickness, death or protest will mean that primary health care will suffer and such
diseases as malaria, diarrhoeal disease and malnutrition could result in excess
morbidity and mortality far exceeding the fatalities directly related to COVID -19.
29. Displaced persons in camps or camp-like settings are particularly vulnerable to
the virus owing to overcrowding, poor access to safe water and sanitation, and limited
health-care and related services. With school closures, over 2 million school -age
children enrolled in formal and non-formal institutions have not been able to attend
school regularly, in addition to the approximately 2.4 million ch ildren estimated to be
out of school in 2020. The school closures have also limited the access of parents to
essential services, such as school feeding and health and nutrition programmes.
30. Infection prevention measures that limit movement and curtail e conomic
activities exacerbate threats to food security and livelihoods in a country where
6 million people were already acutely food insecure between February and April,
according to the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification. An additional 500,000
people are expected to be acutely food insecure in the coming months, and increases
are likely owing to the impact of COVID-19.
31. Restrictions on freedom of movement heighten the risk of gender-based
violence, limit the transportation of personnel and e ssential drugs and medical
supplies, and impede access to populations in need. Any cessation of the assistance
reaching the broader population could risk an influx to existing locations for
internally displaced persons and refugees, where services and assi stance could be
perceived as more available, thereby increasing transmission.
32. A spike in intercommunal fighting, cattle raiding and revenge attacks between
armed youth groups has caused civilian displacement and casualties in Central
20-07525

5/19

S/2020/536

Equatoria, Jonglei, the greater Pibor area, Lakes, Unity, Western Bahr el-Ghazal and
Warrap and led to the suspension of humanitarian services in affected areas.
According to the International Organization for Migration, more than 36,000 persons
were internally displaced by communal violence, cattle raiding and fighting between
armed groups in the first three months of 2020. Clashes between NAS, the South
Sudan Peoples’ Defence Forces and SPLM/A-IO, along with intercommunal violence
in Central Equatoria, affected over 30,000 people and displaced more than 19,100.
Military operations in Central Equatoria disrupted humanitarian operations and
access to affected populations.
33. Overall, almost 4 million people remained displaced, driven mainly by years of
conflict, intercommunal violence, food insecurity and recent natural hazards, such as
floods. That number included close to 1.7 million internally displaced persons.
According to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), 2.2 million South Sudanese remained displaced as refugees in six
neighbouring countries. However, 49,000 South Sudanese refugees spontaneously
returned between January and April. In parallel, during the same period, more than
17,000 people fled South Sudan, mainly to Uganda, the Sudan, and Ethiopia, to seek
asylum.
34. A total of 170 humanitarian access incidents were reported in the first quarter
of 2020, an 18 per cent increase from the 144 in the same period in 2019, owing
mainly to localized intercommunal violence. More than 110 aid workers were
relocated as a result of escalating tensions. From 1 April to 21 May, 99 access
incidents were recorded, of which 22 per cent were related to COVID -19 restrictions,
hindering the movement of humanitarian actors and the delivery of assis tance.
Related to COVID-19, humanitarian personnel experienced movement impediments,
visa suspensions and denial of entry into the country. Several international
non-governmental organizations reduced their footprint through the relocation of
non-essential staff.
35. A total of 24 ambushes were reported in the first quarter of 2020, compared with
15 incidents during the same period in 2019. In Pibor, one aid worker was killed by
unknown armed young people in February. On 16 May, 3 humanitarian workers were
killed in Jonglei, bringing the number of aid workers killed in South Sudan since the
conﬂict began in 2013 to 119. The vast majority of those killed were South Sudanese.
36. As of 31 May, $487 million had been secured against the $1.54 billion requested
for the 2020 Humanitarian Response Plan. An addendum to the Plan will be released
in June to account for new needs and priorities related to COVID -19. During the first
quarter of 2020, humanitarian organizations provided assistance to some 3.5 million
people. That number represented 63 per cent of the targeted 5.6 million people, a 35
per cent increase compared with the number of people who received assistance in the
same period of 2019.

V. Implementation of the Mission’s mandated tasks
A.

Protection of civilians
37. During the reporting period, UNMISS worked within COVID -19 restrictions to
prioritize implementation of its protection of civilians mandate both within and
outside of the protection of civilians sites through a sustained presence in con flict
hotspots, safe engagement with communities and support to reconciliation and
dialogue initiatives. For example, in Jonglei and Warrap, UNMISS established
temporary operating bases at Likuangole and Tonj to deter violence and instil
confidence in displaced communities. However, the Mission faced considerable

6/19

20-07525

S/2020/536

pressure from security forces to either restrict its activities or shut down its temporary
operating bases on the grounds of COVID-19 prevention measures.
38. UNMISS conducted 13 workshops, community dialogues, peace campaigns and
actions to disseminate local and national peace agreements, along with capacity building activities for traditional authorities, women and young people, reaching a
total of 2,700 participants, including 1,267 women. Those initiatives were scaled
down owing to a nationwide ban on public gatherings owing to COVID -19. Continued
community engagements and the dissemination of migration agreements sustained
peaceful coexistence between pastoralists from Warrap and host farmers i n Western
Bahr el-Ghazal, as both resolved isolated incidents based on previously signed
agreements. In Ruweng, pastoralists from the Sudan and host Dinka communities also
renewed their commitment to uphold previously signed migration mechanisms, while
local authorities agreed to allocate grazing lands to both sides and share water
resources to reduce competition.
39. In Western and Eastern Equatoria, UNMISS disseminated the Revitalized
Agreement to help improve intercommunal relations. UNMISS also encoura ged
influential local leaders to promote social cohesion and counter hate speech and the
spread of misinformation as a measure to address COVID-19 fears across the country.
40. With regard to COVID-19 measures, movement restrictions were not uniformly
applied to all protection of civilians sites. In Bentiu, while the host nation security
services cautioned against mass movement and emphasized social distancing, security
forces were not deployed, nor were the internally displaced persons harassed. In
contrast, at the Juba and Malakal protection of civilians sites, internally displaced
persons experienced government movement restrictions. In Malakal, the State
Security Committee decided to lock down the protection of civilians site for 14 days.
In Juba, UNMISS negotiated with the authorities to allow the supply of vital services,
such as water and medical supplies, to the sites. In an effort to mitigate the risk of
COVID-19 in the densely populated sites, the UNMISS leadership engaged with the
Government and the opposition to encourage and support internally displaced persons
in the protection of civilians sites to relocate to their places of origin to decongest the
sites.
41. UNMISS force and United Nations police operations within and outside the
protection of civilians sites were refocused to mitigate the risk of COVID -19
transmission and comply with government restrictions. Following the confirmation
of a case within the Bentiu protection of civilians site in mid -May, the force and police
components minimized their face-to-face interactions while maintaining surveillance
and communications remotely. They continued to carry out mounted patrols around
the weapons-free zones and maintained a presence at entry points. A quick reaction
force remained on standby and United Nations police intervened when violence
necessitated entry to protect women from sexual violence or to safeguard
humanitarian activities.
42. United Nations police conducted 2,061 patrols and 1,134 access control
activities within the protection of civilians sites and continued to expand their
outward projection posture and footprint through 904 confidence - and trust-building
patrols, 45 short-duration patrols, 19 long-duration patrols, 3 dynamic air patrols and
458 high-visibility patrols. United Nations police community policing activities,
search operations within the sites, co-location with the South Sudan National Police
Service and capacity-building and technical assistance workshops, were suspended
owing to COVID-19.
43. In conjunction, the UNMISS force established 19 temporary operating bases and
conducted 15,979 patrols, including 1,749 short-duration patrols, 463 long-duration
patrols, 159 dynamic air patrols and 13 riverine patrols. To enhance its protection
20-07525

7/19

S/2020/536

impact, the UNMISS force carried out threat and risk analysis in areas of return and
developed a contingency plan for transition to the wet season.
44. UNMISS aviation assets were used to support UNHCR in facilitating the return
of 34 internally displaced persons from the Juba protection of civilians sites and 1
from the Bor site to areas of return. Approximately 2,962 internally displaced persons
in Juba, 79 in Malakal, 500 in Bentiu and 939 in Wau requested return assistance;
however, COVID-19 measures hindered movement. In addition, humanitarian
partners provided return assistance to 1,675 internally displaced persons from the
Wau protection of civilians site.
Rule of law and accountability
45. UNMISS continued its support for national accountability measures for security
incidents affecting protection of civilians sites. A total of 101 persons suspected of
being responsible for serious security incidents within protection of civilians sites in
Juba, Bentiu and Malakal were detained in UNMISS detention facilities. UNMISS
referred 17 persons to national authorities for investigation and prosecution. From
16 to 22 February, UNMISS facilitated a mobile court session in Bentiu, which
resolved 26 individual cases, including allegations of rape, sexual assault and damage
to United Nations property. Owing to COVID-19 restrictions, other planned mobile
court sessions were postponed. However, UNMISS facilitated remote investigations
and bail hearings for nine individuals accused of murder, armed robbery, attempted
rape and assault to address a backlog of 13 cases in Bentiu. A total of 20 witnesses
appeared. Remote hearings for the remaining four cases were paused owing to
increased COVID-19 measures.
46. UNMISS also continued to support justice actors to promote accountability for
serious offences and process priority cases. As part of its support for juvenile justice
reform, from 9 to 13 March, UNMISS facilitated a practice-based training for 50
prison officials assigned to the Juvenile Reformatory Centre in Juba. The curriculum
was designed to reinforce the operations manual for juvenile reformatories that
national prison officials had developed with technical support from UNMISS. In
March and April, UNMISS provided technical, logistical and coordination support to
national justice actors to hold juvenile hearings at Juba Central Prison. Owing to the
onset of COVID-19, UNMISS advocated to secure the summary release of juveniles
on bail as an immediate measure. which led to the release of 84 juveniles on remand,
out of a total of 109 juveniles detained at the Juvenile Reformatory Centre in Juba. In
addition, UNMISS collaborated with the United Nations Children’s Fund and partners
to ensure family reunification as well as support to juveniles whose families could
not be traced. Trials were completed or initiated in 95 cases, resulting in 5 cases being
summarily dismissed, 28 juveniles tried and acquitted, and 14 juveniles tried and
convicted.
47. UNMISS provided technical support to the South Sudan Prison Service to
develop a COVID-19 action plan, focusing on prevention and three key areas:
(a) education outreach and hygiene; (b) decongestion and early releases; and
(c) reduction of admissions. To urgently aid decongestion, UNMISS provided
technical assistance on the identification and expansion of categories of prisoners that
could be considered for release, which enabled the Director General of the national
Prison Service to release prisoners across all prisons and facilitated coordination with
other justice actors to ensure prioritization.
48. UNMISS continued to support the South Sudan Peoples’ Defence Forces
Military Justice Directorate in promoting accountability for conflict -related sexual
violence and other serious human rights abuses. Specifically, UNMISS facilitated the

8/19

20-07525

S/2020/536

production of advocacy materials to assist military personnel of the South Sudan
Peoples’ Defence Forces in eliminating sexual violence and protecting citizens.
49. UNMISS continued to provide technical assistance to increase national
oversight mechanisms, supporting implementation of the Revitalized Agreement. In
March, UNMISS supported the Financial Intelligence Unit of the Ministry of Finance
and Economic Planning in raising awareness of oversight functions and reporting
obligations of financial institutions pursuant to the Anti-Money-Laundering and
Counter-Terrorist Financing Act, 2012. The Financial Intelligence Unit plays an
important role in anti-corruption efforts by detecting and supporting the investigation
of crimes related to money-laundering and related offences.
50. UNMISS reviewed a number of key laws, including the National Audit Chamber
Act, 2011, and the Anti-Corruption Commission Act, 2009. UNMISS conducted an
internal review of the Political Parties Act, 2012, to ascertain areas in which further
engagement by the Mission and partners might be required to ensure compliance with
international best practices on the free and democratic registration of political parties.

B.

Monitoring and investigating human rights violations
51. UNMISS documented a total of 295 incidents that negatively affected the human
rights and protection situation, including arbitrary killings, abductions, conflict related sexual violence, arbitrary arrests and detention (including proxy detention),
torture and ill-treatment, forced military recruitment and the looting and destruction
of civilian property. The incidents resulted in at least 1,314 civilian casualties (733
killed and 581 wounded), including 136 women and 62 children. Of those incidents,
216 were attributed to community-based militias and self-defence groups; 27 to the
South Sudan People’s Defence Forces; 14 to NAS; 8 to the National Security Service;
7 to the South Sudan National Police Service; 6 to SPLM/A -IO; 2 jointly to the
National Security Service, the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces and the South
Sudan National Police Service; and 1 jointly to the South Sudan People’s Defence
Forces and SPLM/A-IO. Attribution for 14 other incidents remained pending.
52. As was the trend throughout 2019, the majority of civilians were killed and
injured during violence involving community-based militias and self-defence groups
(691 killed and 563 injured). Armed raids in northern Jonglei and the Greater Pibor
Administrative Area involving Murle armed elements pitted agains t allied Dinka and
Nuer “White Army” militias resulted in at least 225 killed (including 74 women and
16 children) and 134 injured (including at least 9 women and 9 children), as well as
266 abducted (72 women and 194 children). Attacks led by White Army e lements in
February showed a degree of planning and coordination, with the alleged involvement
of some SPLM/A-IO and South Sudan Peoples’ Defence Forces elements and a Lou
Nuer spiritual leader.
53. Clashes involving forces affiliated with Major General Ochan Puot and
SPLM/A-IO in Upper Nile resulted in at least 6 civilians killed and 5 injured, bringing
the total of civilian casualties to at least 48 killed and 13 injured since clashes began
in July 2019.
54. In the context of COVID-19, the United Nations documented a number of
violations linked with the enforcement of measures to prevent the spread of the
disease, including arbitrary arrest and detention, ill-treatment, and extortion by
national defence and security forces. Women and people living with di sabilities were
disproportionately affected by the measures, in particular with regard to income generating activities. The lockdown of protection of civilians sites in response to the
announcement of cases of COVID-19 among United Nations personnel also raised

20-07525

9/19

S/2020/536

concerns about the disproportionate and potentially discriminatory impact of such
measures on internally displaced populations at those sites.
55. UNMISS continued to receive reports of censorship, harassment and arbitrary
arrest and detention by the National Security Service of journalists, activists and other
civilians expressing critical or dissenting views from those of the Government. For
example, Agamlong, an English-language newspaper circulated in Juba, was shuttered
by the National Security Service in March following the publication of articles critical
of a senior government official.
56. During the reporting period, UNMISS continued to advocate for measures to
preclude the application of the death penalty, including through de facto and de jure
moratoriums, and supported legal aid providers representing juveniles and other
defendants on death row.
57. On 19 May, UNMISS and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR) jointly published a report on the right to health care for
conflict-related sexual violence survivors in South Sudan. According to the report,
the Government had not sought to make funding of the public health sector a priority,
impeding access to medical and psychosocial care for survivors of con flict-related
sexual violence, despite the substantial presence and funding of international
stakeholders in the country. The report contained recommendations to address those
gaps, including improving access to and delivery of health services on an equita ble
basis at the community level.
58. In support of cantonment and training, UNMISS carried out three human rights
due diligence policy risk assessments of assistance to non-United Nations security
forces.
Children and armed conflict
59. The South Sudan country task force on monitoring an d reporting on children
and armed conflict supported the release of 57 children (54 boys and 3 girls) by the
South Sudan Peoples’ Defence Forces (1 boy), the South Sudan National Police
Service (1 boy), SSOA (2 boys), the South Sudan United Front/Army (SSU F/A)
(15 boys) and SPLM/A-IO (35 boys and 3 girls).
60. A total of 38 children were released by SPLM/A-IO, including 26 (23 boys and
3 girls) from training centres, while 12 boys were informally released by SPLM/A -IO
in Jonglei and Unity. The South Sudan Peoples’ Defence Forces released 15 boys
affiliated with SSUF/A who had been apprehended in August 2019 during clashes
between the forces. Two boys attributed to SSOA and one boy attributed to the South
Sudan National Police Service were also released, while one boy escaped from the
South Sudan Peoples’ Defence Forces in Unity and reunited with his family.
61. The number of children affected by grave violations increased from 23 children
in the previous reporting period to 32 children (23 boys and 9 girls), attributed mainly
to the number of children affected by explosive remnants of war, which increased
from 8 to 20 children.
62. A total of 27 children (21 boys and 6 girls) were victims of killing (6 boys and
1 girl) and maiming (15 boys and 5 girls) in 11 incidents. Three children (two boys
and one girl) were abducted in three violations, and two girls survived rape. Children
were most affected in Western Equatoria (12 children: 9 boys and 3 girls), Upper Nile
(9 children: 6 boys and 3 girls), Northern Bahr el-Ghazal (5 boys), Unity (3 boys),
Central Equatoria (2 girls) and Eastern Equatoria (1 boy).
63. Children were victims of violations perpetrated by crossfire between the South
Sudan Peoples’ Defence Forces and Misiriya armed cattle keepers (5 childre n), NAS
10/19

20-07525

S/2020/536

(4 children), forces loyal to Major General Ochan Puot (2 children) and the South
Sudan Peoples’ Defence Forces (1 child); 20 children were casualties of explosive
remnants of war.
64. UNMISS delivered child protection capacity-building training to 410 members
of the security forces (263 male and 147 female); 65 members of SPLM/A -IO (all
male), 50 members of the necessary unified forces (45 male and 5 female),
20 members of SSOA (18 male and 2 female), 320 community members (180 male
and 140 female) and 29 government officials (25 male and 4 female).
Conflict-related sexual violence
65. Despite an overall decrease in political violence, conflict -related sexual
violence remained prevalent and was perpetrated by the parties to the conflict,
community-based militia and other armed young people, exploiting protracted
insecurity and a lack of protection by authorities. UNMISS verified 38 incidents of
such violence, involving 51 survivors, including 14 girls. They were subjected to rape
(21), gang rape (15), forced nudity (9), attempted rape (3), threat of rape (2) and
forced marriage (1). The incidents were attributed to the South Sudan Peoples’
Defence Forces and allied forces under Major General Ochan Puot (13); community based militias (9); the South Sudan National Police Service (2); SPLM/A-IO (1);
forces under Major General Nando (1); and NAS (1). The perpetrators’ affiliation in
11 incidents had not been conclusively determined at the time of reporting.
66. UNMISS documented 14 additional incidents of conflict-related sexual violence
that occurred prior to the reporting period, involving 19 survivors, including 6 girls
and 3 men. The incidents were attributed to the South Sudan Peoples’ Defence Forces
and allied forces under Major General Ochan Puot (5); SPLM/A-IO (5); NAS (2); and
community-based militias (2). Investigations are ongoing concerning the abduction
of at least 150 women and girls, who were likely subjected to sexual violence, during
intercommunal violence in Jonglei between December 201 9 and March 2020.
67. Notably, an SPLM/A-IO commander allegedly involved in widespread conflictrelated sexual violence, including sexual slavery, which was documented in a joint
2018 public report by UNMISS and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, defected to the South Sudan Peoples’ Defence
Forces and returned to Yambio in mid-April to begin recruiting forces. Investigations
are ongoing, with some arrests made in relation to conflict-related sexual violence
cases in Lakes and Central Equatoria.
68. On 6 March, the South Sudan National Police Service established a national
committee to oversee the implementation of its action plan. UNMISS is providing
technical support to the South Sudan Peoples’ Defence Forces to develop a
standardized conflict-related sexual violence curriculum for staff colleges.

C.

Creating conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance
69. UNMISS continued to conduct long- and short-duration patrols across the
country to support the delivery of assistance or the protection of humanitarian
workers. UNMISS provided force protection to 339 integrated missions, enabling
access to high-risk areas. It conducted 4,421 force protection patrols supporting
convoys, including those of non-governmental organizations.
70. UNMISS horizontal engineering companies undertook the rehabilitation of key
supply routes, which ensured efficient and quicker delivery of humanitarian
assistance. However, the COVID-19 prevention measures imposed by host nation

20-07525

11/19

S/2020/536

security forces on UNMISS significantly impeded maintenance efforts in Warrap and
Western Equatoria. Work was fully suspended between 7 and 29 April and partially
resumed from 30 April.
71. In response to the ongoing COVID-19 emergency, UNMISS reprioritized its
activities in support of national response efforts to prevent, mitigate and respond to
the outbreak, focusing in particular on areas where local capacity is limited at the
subnational level. Awareness campaigns have been intensified, usin g mobile teams,
promotional trucks, Radio Miraya and other local radio stations. Construction
projects to renovate or rehabilitate health facilities have been launched in eight
locations, building isolation and treatment wards in State-level hospitals. The Mission
is donating various medical and other supplies as well as depreciated equipment to
local authorities and health facilities. Hand-washing facilities were installed by the
Mission in population centres, such as markets, in several locations, includi ng Juba,
Yei and Torit. That support was provided in coordination with State -level COVID-19
task forces and humanitarian partners, using existing Mission resources, including the
force engineering capacity, and is expected to be expanded in the coming week s.
72. The Mine Action Service surveyed and cleared five sites, including three where
humanitarian hubs were being constructed. It also supported UNHCR in conducting
an assessment of the proposed way station for internally displaced persons. It carried
out the assessment of a proposed extension area of the University of Science and
Technology in Bor and assessed and cleared several borrow pits for road rehabilitation
in Rumbek, Lakes, and Sopo, Western Bahr el-Ghazal. Clearance of a former
battlefield adjacent to the internally displaced persons camp in Unity continued.
73. The Mine Action Service deployed 25 teams, which surveyed and released
6,708,608 m² of land and removed and destroyed 2,218 explosive items and 182,846
rounds of small arms ammunition.

D.

Supporting the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement and
the peace process
74. My Special Representative continued to exercise good offices to support the
peace process and engage with senior government and opposition officials and
traditional leaders, as well as with IGAD and African Union member States, to
facilitate the formation of the Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity.
On 22 February, my Special Representative participated in the swearing -in ceremony
of the new presidency, at which he reiterated the support of the United Nations to
South Sudan.
75. Notwithstanding the challenges to mandate implementation posed by the
COVID-19 pandemic and government response, UNMISS leadership continued its
engagement with key stakeholders to monitor and advocate for the implementation of
the Revitalized Agreement through the new committee appointed by the President to
oversee implementation. The Mission continued to explore and implement new and
creative ways of working with partners to foster civic and political space and
encourage unified messages for advancing peace, including by expanding its radio
broadcast and dialogue programming.
76. Despite COVID-19-related challenges, UNMISS provided transport to deliver
20 storage containers and 418.55 metric tons of food and non-food items across 10
locations in support of implementation of the transitional security arrangements.

12/19

20-07525

S/2020/536

Women and peace and security
77. UNMISS conducted three workshops to strengthen the capacity of women’s
organizations to continue advocating their participation in governance institutions, as
well as to develop skills for participation in decision-making processes.
78. Direct contact with women’s organizations was limited owing to COVID -19,
but UNMISS remained engaged remotely to sustain the gains. COVID-19 has opened
new entry points for women as agents for change through awareness-raising on modes
of transmission in communities and prevention measures, referral of increasing
domestic violence cases and economic empowerment alternatives, such as the
production and sale of masks and soap.

VI. Mission staffing, the status of deployments, and conduct
and discipline
79. As at 31 May, the number of UNMISS civilian personnel stood at 2,278,
comprising 885 international staff members (245 women, or 28 per cent) and 1,393
national staff members (195 women, or 14 per cent), as well as 401 United Nations
Volunteers (159 women, or 40 per cent).
80. The police strength stood at 1,888 (of an authorized 2,101 police personnel),
comprising 665 individual police officers (200 women, or 30 per cent), 1,148 personnel
in formed police units (220 women, or 19 per cent) and 75 corrections officers (18
women, or 24 per cent).
81. Of the authorized 17,000 troops, UNMISS troop strength stood at 14,558
military personnel: 210 military liaison officers (34 women, or 16 per cent), 416
military staff officers (70 women, or 17 per cent) and 13,93 2 military contingent
personnel (604 women, or 4 per cent).
82. In collaboration with the United Nations country team and other partners and
stakeholders, UNMISS continued to address possible misconduct by strengthening
prevention, enforcement and remedial actions. From 1 February to 31 May, UNMISS
registered a total of 40 allegations on the Misconduct Tracking System, of which 5
were assessed as sexual exploitation and abuse. All information on unsatisfactory
conduct received during the reporting period was processed in accordance with the
applicable policy and within the required timeline.
83. From 1 February to 31 May, a total of 9,632 UNMISS and affiliated staff were
trained on United Nations standards of conduct and the zero-tolerance policy on
sexual exploitation and abuse. The Mission adopted a standard operating procedure
to enhance and streamline training efforts and ensure maximum compliance with
mandatory courses.
84. The sexual exploitation and abuse risk registers and workplans have been
completed in 10 field offices in line with the sexual exploitation and abuse risk
management toolkit. The collaboration between the community-based complaints
mechanisms and the Mission continues to be enhanced through training and other
capacity-building efforts to ensure that all such mechanisms remain effective in
reporting allegations.

20-07525

13/19

S/2020/536

VII. Violations of the status-of-forces agreement
85. UNMISS recorded 75 status-of-forces agreement violations compared with 64
in the previous reporting period. Some 55 violations involved movement restrictions
imposed by the Government impeding the Mission’s ability to implement its mandate.
86. On 10 April, despite the previous correspondence between the Mission and the
Joint Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, the South Sudan Peoples’ Defence
Forces detained a convoy of UNMISS contingent-owned equipment to be returned to
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland after completion of the
engineering company deployment. Following engagement with the lead ership of the
South Sudan Peoples’ Defence Forces and officials of the United Kingdom, the
vehicles were released on 25 April.
87. UNMISS noted the continued unlawful assertion of jurisdiction by domestic
courts over the United Nations, its funds, assets and personnel in disregard of the
privileges and immunities of the Organization. On 11 May, UNMISS received a court
summons requesting that a former UNMISS staff member who was linked to a road
traffic incident in May 2019 and who has since checked out from the Mission should
appear before the court. An UNMISS vehicle that was impounded by the South Sudan
National Police Service on 30 April 2020, on the orders of the same domestic court
in relation to the same road traffic incident, has not been released des pite
representations by the Mission to the Government that the vehicle, as a United
Nations asset, is immune from confiscation.
88. The whereabouts of two national staff members arrested in 2014 remain
unknown. The Government has neither granted UNMISS access to them nor provided
information about their condition, despite regular requests. UNMISS recorded five
new arrests and detentions by the Government of Mission personnel, involving four
national and one international staff members. All were released af ter being detained
for periods lasting a few hours to a few days.
89. UNMISS recorded one incident of SPLM/A-IO interference with the
implementation of the Mission’s mandated tasks, in which a Mission patrol was
denied access to the Sue cantonment site in Western Equatoria.
90. The Mission continued to notify the Government of the violations through notes
verbales and regular engagements and to share with it the monthly matrix of incidents
prepared for the Security Council.
Impact of the coronavirus disease on Mission personnel and operations
91. On 3 March, the Chief of General Staff of the South Sudan Peoples’ Defence
Forces informed UNMISS that the rotation of uniformed personnel from five
countries affected by COVID-19 had been suspended. On 6 April, a United Nations
entity staff member was identified as the first reported case of COVID -19 infection
in the country. By then, the Mission had already put in place adequate measures to
prevent the spread of the virus. The same day, host nation security services blocked
movements in and out of UNMISS compounds in Juba (United Nations House),
Kuacjok, Malakal, Rumbek, Torit and Yambio. In Torit, security forces warned United
Nations personnel not to leave their compounds and threatened to arre st anyone found
outside and impound their vehicles. UNMISS patrols to several locations were
restricted on the grounds of COVID-19 prevention. The security forces claimed they
were acting on instructions from the high-level task force.
92. In Eastern Equatoria, security services denied access to an UNMISS patrol to
Opari Payam near Torit to monitor the progress of a quick-impact project, ostensibly

14/19

20-07525

S/2020/536

referring to instructions of the high-level task force to restrict public gatherings to
prevent the spread of COVID-19.
93. On 7 April, security services blocked access in and out of United Nations House
and physically assaulted an UNMISS national staff member, preventing access to the
premises. On 9 April, following the engagement of my Special Representative w ith
the authorities, the Government lifted restrictions in Juba, and subsequently on
UNMISS compounds in Rumbek, Malakal, Kuacjok and Yambio. On 23 April,
restrictions were lifted from the compound in Torit on the condition that only essential
movement take place.
94. In Northern Bahr el-Ghazal, since November 2019, the South Sudan Peoples’
Defence Forces have directed all checkpoint commanders to deny access to UNMISS
patrols not accompanied by members of the Joint Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism, including patrols to their Wunyiik Division III headquarters for weekly
information-sharing meetings. With the onset of the pandemic, the South Sudan
Peoples’ Defence Forces continued to impede the Mission’s mandated activities in the
area citing the implementation of COVID-19 prevention measures.
95. With the increase in domestic and international travel restrictions, critical
transport, such as medical evacuations and previously approved flights organized by
the Mission to reduce its footprint, were initially delayed. A special flight request for
a medical evacuation was delayed by over 28 hours owing to a lack of clearance from
the National Security Service. The Mission engaged with the high -level task force on
the challenges faced by the Mission in navigating the multiple avenues of approvals
required to dispatch flights. As a result, approval for subsequent medical evacuations
and special flights improved towards the end of May. Out of the 16 special flights
organized by the Mission to transport staff out of South Sudan, 8 were successful.
96. However, COVID-19 has also impacted pre-existing agreements and flight
approvals with neighbouring countries, undermining Mission safety and security
protocols for the extraction of critically ill staff. With almost 18,800 United Nations
personnel on the ground, the limited critical care capacity to accommodate potential
incidents of serious COVID-19 cases is of grave concern. The Mission is currently
operating in an environment where medical evacuations of its intern ational staff for
either COVID-19 or non-COVID-19 cases are challenging, in the light of severe
restrictions on movement of patients and global shortages of suitable assets and
treatment facilities for COVID-19 cases, in particular.

VIII. Performance of the uniformed components
97. During the reporting period, 13 units were evaluated, with 10 reports completed
and three more under way. The evaluations covered mandate comprehension and
support, command and control, training and discipline, sustainment a nd health. The
units evaluated included four infantry battalions, eight force enablers and one sector
headquarters. Operationally, the performance of four units was rated as “above
average”. Five units were rated as “excellent”. Four units were rated as “satisfactory”,
while one enabler was rated as “below satisfactory” in sustainment. To further
enhance the force’s efficiency in mandate implementation, each unit received specific
recommendations.
98. During the reporting period, four formed police units we re evaluated and found
to be satisfactory or excellent with regard to mandate comprehension and support,
command and control, training, discipline and health. They were also assessed on
shortfalls with regard to sustainment, including the replenishment or replacement of
ammunition, non-lethal equipment and crowd control gear owing to factors beyond

20-07525

15/19

S/2020/536

the control of the police-contributing countries. Each unit received a performance
improvement plan, and UNMISS and police-contributing countries are taking all
necessary steps to remedy the issues identified.

IX. Observations and recommendations
99. I welcome the formation of the Revitalized Transitional Government of National
Unity, in line with the 7 November 2019 Entebbe tripartite agreement. It is a
significant achievement in the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement, which
is a hallmark of the beginning of the transition period. I thank the IGAD Heads of
State and Government for supporting South Sudan in reaching this milestone. I also
welcome the calls to the parties by the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union and IGAD to accelerate efforts, among others, to appoint State governors and
reconstitute the Transitional National Legislative Assembly.
100. While it is encouraging that the ceasefire among the parties is largely holding,
progress on the transitional security arrangements was marginal and the disaffection
between Government-aligned and opposition forces in Upper Nile remains
unresolved. The recent clashes in Central Equatoria between the South Sudan
Peoples’ Defence Forces and the Sudan People’s Liberation Army in Opposition
(SPLA-IO) on one side against NAS on the other is of concern. The intercommunal
conflict, fuelled in part by a governance and security vacuum resulting fro m the delay
in the appointment of governors, has caused a significant disruption to civilians in
several areas. The spillover of this violence risks destabilizing the country, eroding
peace gains and spilling into politically charged conflict with disastro us
consequences. I strongly reiterate my call for a global ceasefire and urge the South
Sudanese to focus on our common enemy: COVID-19.
101. I note with serious concern that the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement has slowed considerably, including through a shifting focus to
COVID-19-related challenges. Nevertheless, such provisions must not come at the
expense of the implementation of peace. In this regard, I urge the parties to advance
the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement as an urgent priority and to continue
their consultations in good faith. I call on IGAD to impress upon the parties the need
to follow through on the stipulations in its most recent communiqué, which is
particularly important for overall stability in the subregion.
102. I commend the decision of the President to establish the high -level task force to
combat the pandemic. The earlier appointment of the First Vice-President, Riek
Machar, and later, the Vice-President, Hussein Abdelbagi, to head the daily operations
of the task force was in itself a testament to the progress made in the peace process. I
encourage the new national task force to take advantage of the expertise offered by
the international community and to continue in the steps of the high -level task force,
with a high level of transparency, in particular to address delayed and erratic reporting
of COVID-19 laboratory results and to guard against political interference in testing
resources. I urge the President to continue engaging the public to clearly and
effectively implement prevention measures.
103. I am alarmed by instances of hate speech, incitement to violence and harmful
misinformation targeting foreign nationals, including United Nations personnel and
international and non-governmental organizations. Such stigmatizing rhetoric risks
exacerbating existing social divides that could lead to violence and obstruct efforts to
tackle the spread of the virus. I encourage the Government to enhance efforts to
counter hate speech and misinformation in their public messaging, while adhering to
the principles of freedom of opinion and expression. In this regard, I appreciate the

16/19

20-07525

S/2020/536

statements made by the President condemning the stigmatization of the United
Nations.
104. I encourage the Government to ensure accountability for serious violations of
obligations under international human rights law and international humanitarian law,
including compliance with the provisions in the Revitalized Agreement prohibiting
sexual violence by all parties. I urge the Government to establish a specialized court
on sexual and gender-based crimes, the Hybrid Court for South Sudan, and to provide
support to survivors.
105. In our united fight against COVID-19, I assure the people of South Sudan of the
support of the United Nations to the fullest extent. I commend the Mission’s
assistance to the national COVID-19 response effort, as well as initiatives facilitating
the prevention and mitigation of COVID-19 transmission across the country and in
the protection of civilians sites, in collaboration with humanitarian partners. The
projected impact of COVID-19 on the population of South Sudan is deeply
concerning. I acknowledge the good offices provided by my Special Representative
and support from other United Nations agencies, funds and prog rammes and,
significantly, the World Health Organization, to the task force and the Ministry of
Health through technical advice and expertise. More funding is needed to address the
growing humanitarian needs. The Humanitarian Response Plan is currently onl y
30 per cent funded.
106. The efforts of UNMISS to leverage its country-wide presence to enhance the
capacity and capability of State-level health facilities to better support efforts in the
field is commendable. The impact of COVID-19 risks undermining an already fragile
health system that is critical to preventing other curable diseases. I commend the
efforts to prevent, bolster and maintain the limited health worker capabilities, which,
if lost, would result in excessive collateral mortality among youn ger generations.
107. Despite the comprehensive efforts of UNMISS to prevent the spread of the virus
and compliance with the guidelines of the task force, the Mission continues to face
unmitigated violations of the status-of-forces agreement. Unwarranted and
widespread restrictions on the movement of United Nations personnel impede the life saving and critical work carried out by peacekeepers. The United Nations understands
the need for the Government to safeguard its people against the spread of COVID -19,
but such restrictions should not interfere with United Nations property, restrict access
to and from UNMISS compounds and arbitrarily deny entry to personnel who
obtained clearances in good faith. The United Nations is in South Sudan to support
its people in a time of grave need and relies on a spirit of cooperation to enable this
to happen. I request the Government to ensure unhindered access to the United
Nations for operations and humanitarian activities.
108. I endorse the efforts of UNMISS to continue prioritizing sustained support to
the peace process, along with force deployments for the protection of civilians
interventions that are at the core of the Mission’s objectives and responsibilities and
are essential to preserving the hard-earned peace gains.
109. I urge the Government to move forward together and fully implement the
Revitalized Agreement in letter and in spirit so that the people of South Sudan can
finally realize the benefits of peace and stability they deserve. I also urge the member
States of the African Union, IGAD and the Security Council to ensure consistent and
unequivocal messaging to the parties in that respect and to strengthen their political
support for the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism and the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission,
including the appointment of the permanent chair of the Commission at the earliest.

20-07525

17/19

S/2020/536

110. The imperative to accelerate and consolidate peace implementation has never
been so urgent. I also strongly encourage the Government to establish transparent
resource allocation and oversight mechanisms that enhance the confidence of
international partners in continuing to provide financial support to South Sudan.
111. In conclusion, and in view of the unparalleled challenges posed by the
COVID-19 pandemic, I convey my deep appreciation to the uniformed and civilian
personnel of UNMISS and to my Special Representative, David Shearer, for their
tireless efforts to implement the mandate for South Sudan. I th ank the troop- and
police-contributing countries for their contributions. I am also grateful to the United
Nations country team and humanitarian partners for providing vital assistance across
the country, often in an insecure environment. Last, I acknowled ge the indispensable
efforts of the Heads of State and Government of IGAD, the Chair of the African Union
Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat, the Executive Secretary of IGAD, Workneh
Gebeyehu, the Special Envoy of IGAD, Ismail Wais, and the Sant’ Egidio Commu nity
towards ensuring peace in South Sudan.

18/19

20-07525

20-07525

S/2020/536

19/19
