United Nations

A/S-23/PV.10

General Assembly

Official Records

Twenty-third special session

10th meeting
Friday, 9 June 2000, at 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gurirab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Namibia)

In the absence of the President, Mrs. Ismail
(Nigeria), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/S-23/6/Add.3)
The President: I should like to draw the attention
of the General Assembly to document A/S-23/6/Add.3.
In the letter contained in that document, the SecretaryGeneral informs the President of the General Assembly
that since the issuance of his communications
contained in documents A/S-23/6 and Addenda 1
and 2, Bosnia and Herzegovina has made the necessary
payments to reduce its arrears below the amount
specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in that
document?
It was so decided.
Agenda items 8 and 9 (continued)
Review and appraisal of progress made in the
implementation of the twelve critical areas of
concern in the Beijing Platform for Action
Further actions and initiatives for overcoming
obstacles to the implementation of the Beijing
Platform for Action

The Acting President: I first give the floor to
Her Excellency The Honourable Indira ThacoorSidaya, Minister of Women, Family Welfare and Child
Development of Mauritius.
Mrs. Thacoor-Sidaya (Mauritius): On behalf of
the Government and the people of the Republic of
Mauritius, I wish to thank the United Nations for this
special session of the General Assembly, which
symbolizes the march that we women started in Beijing
in 1995. Five years later, our march continues as we are
gathered here to measure our progress, to learn from
our mistakes as well as our successes and to chalk out
our common future.
My country signed the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, and in 1995 at Beijing undertook strong
commitments to which it has remained faithful. Thus
gender equality has been integrated into our national
legislation through the introduction of a Protection of
Human Rights Act; amendments to the Civil Code to
ensure strict equality between spouses in the
administration of property and parental rights;
amendments to the Criminal Code to make penalties
against sexual abuse and family abandonment more
severe and to establish sexual harassment as an
offence; amendment of the Citizenship Act to give to
the foreign spouse of a Mauritian woman the right to
citizenship; and the introduction of a Protection from
Domestic Violence Act.
Institutional mechanisms have been strengthened
for more effective service delivery and support to

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

00-47343 (E)
`````````

A/S-23/PV.10

women. Mauritius has a full-fledged ministry for
women headed by a cabinet minister. A National
Women’s Council functions as a coordinating body for
women’s associations. A Gender Bureau has been
established to ensure the implementation of a gender
management system based on the Commonwealth
Secretariat’s guidelines. A consultative mechanism,
known as the National Advisory Committee on the
Status of Women, comprised of non-governmental
organizations,
ministries,
the
United
Nations
Development Programme, the private sector and other
stakeholders, provides critical inputs on gender policy.
A national women entrepreneur council has been
established by an act of Parliament to promote women
entrepreneurship. Economic empowerment has been
one of our main thrusts for action, as we believe that
without the means of livelihood no woman can enjoy
her rights fully. In 1998, within its poverty alleviation
programme, the Government of Mauritius introduced a
microcredit scheme based on the Grameen model of
Bangladesh to provide loans to women without
collateral for income-generating activities. Marketing
being a serious impediment for women, a market centre
provides a free marketing outlet, while a common
facility centre offers training for skills development.
In order to support working mothers, an early
childhood development policy is being implemented
for the training of childcare givers and the
establishment of childcare facilities in deprived areas.
Violence against women and children is an
unacceptable form of human exploitation. In 1997, the
Government of Mauritius introduced the Protection
from Domestic Violence Act, which has enabled
thousands of silent women to break their silence and to
benefit from legal protection. Structures for the
provision of 24-hour service, free legal assistance and
psychological counselling have been set up. One study
has been conducted on the factors leading to domestic
violence and another one on the criminological aspects
of violence at home.
Mauritius offers equality of opportunity and
access to education, health, social services and
employment, and there is no disparity in the enrolment
rates of girls and boys. However, problems such as
sexual exploitation have retained our attention, as they
mostly affect the girl child. A study of the commercial
sexual exploitation of children was conducted in 1997,
followed by information, education and communication

2

campaigns in high-risk areas. Child-watch network
groups have been set up with the help of social workers
and community-based associations for surveillance and
early intervention.
Women’s access to information and technology
has been improved, with new centres for women and
families set up in under-served regions and the opening
of an information technology centre exclusively for
women.
As far as political participation is concerned,
despite some improvements since 1995, women’s
participation is still relatively low, with women
comprising 7 per cent of the Parliament, 8.5 per cent at
the municipal level and 2.8 per cent at the village level.
Women make up less than 20 per cent of the senior
managerial level in the public sector.
Leadership training programmes are being
conducted to encourage self-assertiveness and
confidence-building among women. The National
Gender Action Plan has also proposed that 30 per cent
of seats be reserved for women. Preparing the National
Gender Action Plan has been a gratifying experience.
The Plan outlines our vision for the attainment of
gender equality by the year 2005. It was formulated
after wide consultations with all stakeholders,
including women at the grass-roots level, and addresses
health, human rights, human resources development
and gender equality. As an immediate consequence, an
engendering of the budget initiative has started,
coupled with training and research programmes.
Advancing the cause of gender equality is not
without its difficulties. In addition to inadequate
resources, the problems of shortage of specialized
skills in gender planning and analysis, the lack of
research and data on gender and the low priority
accorded to gender equality objectives hinder our
actions significantly.
This special session of the General Assembly is a
unique opportunity to reverse negative attitudes and to
think of a new world order based on partnerships and
participation within the country and beyond the
national frontiers. We women have to develop a new
sense of leadership and responsibility and to create a
true culture of peace. We should not forget that we hold
the keys to our own future. Therefore, we should not
lose this special opportunity to shape a better vision for
the future of women and for humanity.

A/S-23/PV.10

The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Mrs. Nana Aicha Foumakoye, Minister for Social
Development, Advancement of Women and Child
Protection of Niger.
Mrs. Foumakoye (Niger) (spoke in French): I
would like, through you Madam Vice-President, to
extend to all the members of the Bureau my warm
congratulations on the excellent way the work of the
twenty-third special session of the General Assembly
on the follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on
Women is being carried out. I would also like to extend
my congratulations to you for your personal
commitment to the defence of the cause of women.
I would also like to extend the cordial greetings
of His Excellency Mr. Tandja Mamadou, President of
the Republic of Niger, to all the participants in these
deliberations, and to convey to them our wishes for
success in the pursuit of the objectives that have
brought us together here today.
Like other members of the international
community, Niger has resolutely committed itself to
implementing the 12 critical areas of concern of the
Beijing Platform for Action. Five years after the
holding of the Beijing Conference, we must take note
of the fact that the progress achieved by my country
has not been linear in nature and that it has varied in
relation to time and area of concern.
With regard to institutional terms, in 1996 Niger
adopted a national policy for the promotion of women,
which sets out the Government’s major guidelines for
the promotion of women. It is in this framework that a
national monitoring office for the advancement of
women was established. Once it becomes operational,
that office will be a clearinghouse for appropriate
dialogue for all actors in the area of the advancement
of women. Furthermore, a national committee was
established and given responsibility for following up
the implementation of the Beijing recommendations.
Niger’s policy for the advancement of women,
like the policies of other countries represented here, is
not the result of Government action alone. This issue
gives rise to great enthusiasm among all partners, State
and private alike, and Niger has seen the emergence of
a number of civil-society associations and nongovernmental organizations, which work together
vigorously to promote the rights of women and
children.

In the legal sphere, the constitution of the Fifth
Republic guarantees equality before the law for all,
irrespective of sex or of social, racial, ethnic or
religious origin. Yet the women of Niger continue to
face persistent social impediments arising mainly from
tradition and from an erroneous interpretation of
certain precepts of Islam, my country’s principal
religion.
A striking indication of the political courage
shown by the leaders of the Fifth Republic is the
adoption of a number of texts intended to improve the
status of women. Some of these aim to bring national
legislation into conformity with international
conventions and treaties that my country has ratified,
such as the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, to cite but
one example.
Although it is difficult for the women of Niger to
enjoy certain rights, because the circumstances that
would make this possible do not exist, those women
consider that they have reached a major milestone with
Niger’s accession to the Convention. That milestone
also marks another important improvement: an
evolution in thinking. Indeed, the discussions leading
up to Niger’s accession to the Convention were an
occasion for the pluralistic and democratic expression
of opinions. Subjects once taboo were openly and
freely discussed. We can now proceed to considering
them in greater depth and to making progress on them.
This year, 2000, we shall review all the legal
texts relating to women with a view to bringing them
into conformity with the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women. The fact that civil society, development
partners and the State are all part of this process is in
itself a significant advance that we must continue,
consolidate and enhance.
I turn now to the economic side of the issues
before us. Here, my country has an economic recovery
programme one of whose priorities is the war on
poverty. Studies show that 63 percent of the Niger
population is poor, and 34 per cent very poor; women
account for 73 per cent of this group. Sixty per cent of
the plan’s budget is targeted for programmes and
projects for women. The women of Niger appreciate
this and have welcomed it, especially because
increasing the income of women is an integral part of
the national framework programme for the war on

3

A/S-23/PV.10

poverty, which has enabled recipients to improve their
standard of living at the community level, and to own
property, especially land.
Turning to social issues, the gross educational
enrolment rate remains low, at 32.23 per cent, a figure
that is even lower for girls: 25.36 per cent. Because of
this imbalance, a unit for the enrolment of girls was set
up in 1996; its work helped to increase the enrolment
rate for girls from 36 per cent in 1996 to higher than 39
per cent in 1998-1999. Schools are encouraged to aim
for at least 50 per cent enrolment of girls by the end of
2000. There are indications that this goal could be
broadly attained within the time-frame.
Eighty per cent of the population — 91 per cent
of women — are illiterate. To address this, my country
began in 1988 to promote functional literacy for
women, through linking literacy to the involvement of
women in income-producing activities. The Beijing
commitments in this sphere have helped bolster this
approach. Literacy remains an essential element of all
programmes for women. The tangible results in this
area gained Niger a 1999 United Nations Educational,
Cultural and Scientific Organization (UNESCO)
literacy prize.
To the under-enrolment of young girls and the
illiteracy of women we must add the various forms of
violence of which they are victims. Indeed, the rise in
new forms of violence, including sexual violence,
against women, and especially against girl children, is
a source of real concern. Hence, with encouragement
from the Government, a great national movement
quickly arose to eliminate all forms of violence against
the physical and psychological integrity of women.
Through their campaigns to increase awareness about
violence against women and the girl child, religious
organizations have made a valuable contribution to
combating this phenomenon.
Along with those organizations, the media too
have made a contribution through the formulation and
implementation by the Network of Communication
Technicians of a communication plan. The Network has
done a fine job of spreading knowledge about the
Convention o the Rights of the Child and about the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, and it is a powerful
lever for necessary social mobilization on the priorities
that have been established. Similarly, the contribution
of the National Association of Traditional Chiefs,

4

which is involved in promoting the schooling of the
girl child and in combating violence against girls, is a
source of hope, especially because, with their moral
authority, traditional chiefs can help efface social ills.
In the health field there has been progress in the
area of reproductive health: the rate of contraceptive
use rose from 4.4 per cent in 1992 to 8.2 per cent in
1998. This admittedly modest achievement was gained
with the involvement of Islamic organizations, through
information and awareness campaigns among the
population — of which, I would recall, 90 per cent is
Muslim.
I wish now to speak of the low participation of
women in decision-making bodies and in public life in
general. My country experienced instability between
1995 and 1999, when women’s participation in the
Government and in the National Assembly fell sharply.
Women are under-represented in decision-making areas
of State administration. On the other hand, many
women are extremely active in our political parties and
in civil society. I must acknowledge that we are far
from meeting the expectations born of our country’s
democratization with respect to women’s membership
of high decision-making bodies. In fact, soon after this
process began, women’s participation in the National
Assembly and in the Government improved slightly,
but it later decreased.
During the Second Republic, there were five
women deputies and one minister. From 1991 to 1993
there were two women in the Government and three in
the High Council of the Republic, the parliament of
transition. The First Government of the Third Republic
included five female ministers, while the National
Assembly had two women. Three women were in the
Government, the so-called Transition Government,
installed after the dissolution of the National Assembly
in 1995. From January 1995 to January 1996, two
women were appointed ministers in the Government of
Cohabitation, and three women were elected to the
National Assembly.
The First Government of the Fourth Republic had
four female ministers, one of whom was Minister of
State. The Second Government of the Fourth Republic
also included four female ministers, one of whom was
Minister of State, and the Third Republic had three,
one of whom was Minister of State. During that same
period, only one woman was elected to the National
Assembly. The Fifth Republic does not augur well,

A/S-23/PV.10

with two women in the Government and only one in
the National Assembly.

These are some of the ideas that I wanted to
present to the Assembly.

However, women are making some improvements
in other spheres, such as diplomacy, higher education
and central and territorial administration. As regards
the specific case of technical instructions, a letter
circulated by the 1999 Transition Government
instructed Ministers that women should be favoured in
promotion to higher posts if their diplomas and
competencies were equal. Furthermore, it was noted
that there was an increase in female candidates in the
latest legislative elections — that is, 63, 29 of whom
were incumbents, compared to fewer than 40 before.
Here it is appropriate to hail the contribution made by
the committee of the network of female African
ministers and parliamentarians, which has led an
awareness campaign for women, urging them not only
to exercise their right to vote but also to run for office.

The Acting President: I give the floor to Ms.
Khofifah Indar Parawansa, State Minister for the
Empowerment of Women of Indonesia.

Recently a law was adopted instituting a quota
system to benefit women. According to the terms of
this law, at least 25 per cent of the candidates on each
list for different elective posts should be women, and
10 per cent of the posts ought to go to women. Also, 25
per cent of posts in the Government and in the central
and territorial administrations and other high-level,
non-elected posts should be filled by women.
Much remains to be done, but what has been
attained should be encouraged, and strategies under
way require the entire support of the international
community in order to overcome all the challenges we
face at the beginning of this twenty-first century
marked by globalization.
Speaking of challenges, I would like to
underscore the fact that my country remains persuaded
that sustained attention should be focused on the
responsibility and mobilization of all, through dynamic
world partnership with a view to universal access to
basic social services and equality between the sexes, to
make this a living reality.
But how can we attain such objectives if we
continue to witness, without reacting, the drastic
reduction of official development assistance, which
constitutes the principal source of external financial
support for the poorest countries? How can we attain
these objectives if the heavily indebted poor countries,
such as my own, do not benefit from more flexible
conditions alleviating the debt that strains their already
too meagre resources?

Ms. Parawansa (Indonesia): It is a great honour
and privilege for me to join you here today in this
twenty-third special session of the General Assembly.
As a developing country contending with
formidable social, economic and political challenges,
Indonesia has not found it an easy task to translate the
global concepts of women’s rights and gender equality
into practical country-level strategies; nor has it been
easy to replicate the best practices from all over the
world in promoting the welfare of women.
Nevertheless, we have been greatly inspired by the
strong commitment of the international community to
fulfil the Beijing Platform for Action and the Nairobi
Forward-looking Strategies, as well as by the current
efforts to mainstream the gender perspective into all
policies and programmes in the United Nations system.
In 1999, Indonesia’s People’s Assembly adopted
its new broad State policy guidelines that, inter alia,
identify gender equality and gender justice as one of
our national development objectives. Moreover,
Indonesia’s newly reconstituted State Ministry for
Women’s Empowerment has conducted an internal
reorganization and policy review, which has resulted in
far-reaching changes on how the Ministry defines and
carries out its mission. We are now drafting
presidential instructions in order to affirm the joint
roles and responsibilities for gender mainstreaming.
In order to obtain nationwide support in our quest
for gender mainstreaming, bureaux of women’s
empowerment have been established in 14 out of 27
provincial government offices. There are 89 centres for
women’s studies located all over the country.
Moreover, there are numerous institutions to end
violence against women and promote women’s human
rights, such as the National Commission on Human
Rights, the National Commission on the Protection of
Children and the National Commission on Violence
against Women.
In November 1999, Indonesia strengthened its
commitment to the objective of eliminating violence
against women as a key barrier to gender equality. At
that time, the State Minister for Women’s

5

A/S-23/PV.10

Empowerment officially announced a joint State and
Community Proclamation to Eliminate Violence
Against Women. A Government and civil society
partnership has developed a national action plan based
on a “zero tolerance” policy.
In February of this year, Indonesia signed the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
(CEDAW). The Government is now also reviewing
from a gender perspective all of Indonesia’s laws and
regulations to identify those that discriminate against
women. A large array of Indonesian women’s nongovernmental organizations, women’s rights groups
and human rights organizations have played an
important role as partners and supporters for the
harmonization of amendments of laws, policies and
programmes with a view to bringing them into line
with the Women’s Convention, the Beijing Platform
and the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies.
The financial crisis has had a profound impact on
the quality of life of all Indonesians, and on women in
particular. A national survey in 1998 showed that the
problem was compounded by the fact that 12.95 per
cent of Indonesian families are headed by women, a
majority of whom are divorced or widowed and work
outside
the
home.
Studies
reveal
that
a
disproportionately high number of families among the
poor are headed by women and that childcare in such
families is inadequate, thereby adversely affecting the
growth and development of children, especially girls.
The economic crisis has also increased maternal
mortality rates and the incidence of poverty among
women, as well as drug abuse. Indonesia is carrying
out various programmes in response to these
challenges.
One of those programmes is the strengthening
and revitalization of community service centres, called
POSYANDU. There are over 200,000 POSYANDU
spread out in urban and rural areas. POSYANDU
basically provide integrated services for health,
nutrition, family planning and activities aimed at
generating income for women as part of the poverty
alleviation strategy. As I am also the Chairperson of the
National Family Planning Coordinating Board, I intend
to launch a social education campaign to further reduce
maternal and infant mortality and to help prevent the
spread of sexual transmitted infections, including
HIV/AIDS, through promoting a more active role of
husbands in reproductive health.

6

Marriage at an early age is still common in many
parts of the country and exposes the girl child to health
risks. It also stands in the way of her attaining the
education that will provide the knowledge and skills
necessary to empower her and enable her to improve
her life. It is therefore essential that social and cultural
barriers to the proper education of women and girls,
including the widespread practice of early-age
marriage, be eliminated.
The Government is also endeavouring to uphold
the human rights of women in the workplace. Having
ratified all of the core conventions of the International
Labour Organization, including Convention No. 182 on
the elimination of the worst forms of child labour,
Indonesia is embarking on a programme to reform the
labour laws. Furthermore, Indonesia is committed to
reversing the negative effects of the crisis on women
and to removing entrenched barriers preventing their
full participation in political life and economic
development. We are also taking immediate and
vigorous action to stop ruthless practices, such as
trafficking in women and children, child prostitution
and pornography.
We are pleased to note that prominent women’s
and human rights non-governmental organizations at
the national and international levels have extended
their support and assistance to Indonesian women
migrant workers. We hope that more countries and nongovernmental organizations can join together to give
women migrant workers a safe and dignified life and
working environment.
In our common noble endeavour to improve and
promote the rights of women and children, we in
Indonesia have a long way to go and, undoubtedly,
international support and cooperation are needed.
Nevertheless, Indonesia remains committed to helping
women and children realize their full human rights and
an enhanced quality of life. To realize gender equality,
equity and justice, we pledge our readiness to work
together with all members of the international
community in enhancing the status of women
everywhere for the well-being of all of humankind.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Her Excellency Mrs. Shirley Gbujama, Minister for
Social Welfare, Gender and Children’s Affairs of Sierra
Leone.
Mrs. Gbujama (Sierra Leone): I bring greetings
from the Government and people of Sierra Leone,

A/S-23/PV.10

especially the women working at the grass-roots level
and those men who are working in partnership with us
to achieve equal status and opportunities for both men
and women.
My delegation welcomes the opportunity to
assess what we have done in Sierra Leone in the past
five years to empower women to be more effective in a
strong coalition as equal partners with men as we enter
the twenty-first century. The advancement of women in
Sierra Leone or anywhere else in the world cannot be
achieved outside this partnership, treated in isolation as
a women’s issue. We cannot achieve our goals on our
own, without partnership being strengthened in social,
political, economic, environmental and cultural
matters.
It is against this background of working in
partnership between government and civil society,
between women and men, between the richest and
poorest States, between the able and the not so able and
between the international community and our
individual nations that the Beijing Platform for Action
must be reviewed and appraised.
As we consider the subject of this special session,
entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development
and peace for the twenty-first century”, we must be
clear in our minds that when we speak of equality, we
mean equal opportunities, equal rights, equal status,
equal approaches to our common problems. It is not a
question of physical strength or even bravery, because
women, too, have these attributes, in addition to their
special qualities of beauty, delicacy, determination and
special perception.
The United Nations heard the cries of women in
the early 1970s, responding with much positive action
before Beijing. But it was the Beijing Platform for
Action in 1995 that set out a full and complete agenda
in the critical areas of concern which must be
overcome in this century, and not the next. This is why
we trust that, with the aim of achieving a happier
world, the final document of this Conference, with its
recommendations to the Millennium Summit, will take
us way beyond Beijing+5 without taking anything
away from what we achieved in Beijing.
Sierra Leone adopted the Beijing Platform for
Action in 1995, but there were a few institutional
structures to address the situation, and such structures
were generally disjointed. Therefore, in 1996, with the
first democratically elected Government in two

decades, the Ministry of Gender and Children’s Affairs
was established, not only to advocate and ensure a
more equitable distribution and rational use of public,
financial and organizational resources, particularly for
women and children, but to coordinate and develop
strategies for cementing the interrelationship between
government and private institutions and international
agencies which address the issues covered under the 12
areas of concern.
Other
institutional
structures
that
were
established include a women’s research unit and a
gender and research and documentation centre at the
University of Sierra Leone. Women themselves took
the initiative to set up non-governmental structures to
facilitate the Beijing Platform for Action, including
such organizations as the Campaign for Good
Governance, the Women’s Forum, the Sierra Leone
chapter of the Forum for African Women’s Education,
the Sierra Leone Association of University Women, the
Alliance of Female Journalists, Sisters Unite and,
recently, the Network of Women Ministers and
Parliamentarians, to name a few.
In the area of power and decision-making, the
Government of Sierra Leone appointed women to the
important Ministries of Gender and Children’s Affairs,
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, Housing
and Country Planning and, recently, the Ministry of
Development and Economic Planning. Women have
been made heads of important commissions, such as
the National Commission for Democracy and Human
Rights, and have been appointed as chairpersons of
strategic parastatals, such as those dealing with mining
and general services. The number of women has also
increased in junior ministerial positions, and even
though men continue to dominate parliamentary
representation,
at
92.2
per
cent,
women’s
representation, at 7.8 per cent, marks an improvement
when compared with the situation before Beijing.
Regrettably, with regard to women and armed
conflict, in the course of the brutal rebel war that has
prevailed in Sierra Leone, women, especially young
girls, have been abducted, raped and used as sex slaves.
This notwithstanding, women remain undaunted. They
have encouraged and participated in the settlement of
disputes through negotiation, mediation, dialogue,
arbitration and reconciliation. One of the most
remarkable contributions that women have made to the
consolidation of peace in our country since the 1998
Lomé Peace Agreement was their massive turnout

7

A/S-23/PV.10

several weeks ago to protest the illegal detention of
some 500 United Nations peacekeepers by rebels of the
Revolutionary United Front. Two days later, the
women came out again and joined in a mass national
demonstration for peace. The result was that 21 people
were shot dead, including women, and many wounded
by rebels. This was a turning point in the current search
for peace.
In the area of poverty, we have intensified
implementation of our poverty alleviation programmes
and embarked on strategic action with a strong policy
focus aimed at war victims. A programme of social
action for poverty alleviation geared towards gender
mainstreaming is headed by a young woman.
The health problems of women and girls are
being addressed, too, with special attention on maternal
mortality, unsafe abortion, teenage pregnancy and
sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS. In
all of this, the international community, through the
United Nations system, especially the United Nations
Population Fund and the United Nations Children’s
Fund, has been solidly behind us.
The education of women and the girl child has
been given prominence. One noteworthy achievement
is that the educational system has been restructured,
among other things, to give prominence to the
education of the girl child, especially in the previously
male-dominated area of science. In the area of training,
many technical and vocational institutions have been
established to address the training needs of all young
people, girls included. With improved advocacy, these
technical and vocational institutions, especially those
for girls, have filled what used to be a very big vacuum
in the educational system.

The focus on education for the girl child as one of the
priority areas is therefore understood and justified.
With respect to the economy, concrete steps have
been taken to establish and strengthen local
mechanisms for the advancement of women in the area
of business with access to microcredit schemes,
financial institutions and skills development, resulting
in a steady increase in small business enterprises
owned by women. A special women’s unit within the
Ministry of Agriculture, for example, ensures that
women have access to agricultural services, linkages
with donors and other development partners to build
women’s capacity for agriculture-related activities.
In the media, much awareness has been created of
women’s rights, participation and training in relation to
the media. Since Beijing, two media associations have
been founded: the Sierra Leone Association of Women
in the Media and the Alliance of Female Journalists.
With a view to minimizing violence against
women and in a bid to express concern, we have
concentrated on the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women and
condemned the level of abduction, rape, violence,
amputation, maiming and other atrocities suffered by
women and girls in particular. Women’s nongovernmental organizations and the Ministry of Social
Welfare, assisted by the United Nations system, are
now working together to have a centre to which women
subjected to violence can go, especially for free legal
services. In the meantime, government and its partners
continue to provide counselling services and medical
and health education to battered and sexually abused
women and girls.

For the girl child in Sierra Leone, traditional
practices within various cultures continue to pose
serious challenges to her advancement. A new and
significant problem, however, has been the increase of
girl mothers resulting from the rape and abduction of
children by rebels. Many of the girl children released
following the Lomé Peace Agreement were either
pregnant or with babies. A new educational policy
published in 1995 helps the situation by emphasizing
affirmative action in favour of basic education
programmes for girls.

Concerning women and human rights, the
sensitization of the public on the rights of women
continues in various media, including radio and
television programmes and a nationwide consultation
held in 1998, facilitated by the United Nations
Development Programme and carried out jointly by my
Ministry of Social Welfare, Gender and Children’s
Affairs and the Ministry of Local Government, insofar
as customary laws are involved. We have also had a
team of women legal practitioners who are currently
examining our laws with a view to identifying and
seeking revision of any discriminatory provisions.

More than 70 per cent of our women are illiterate.
Women have continued until recently to fare very badly
in the area of educational opportunities and privileges.

In spite of all the difficulties and problems that
have abounded throughout the five-year period since
Beijing, due to a senseless rebel war, it is evident that

8

A/S-23/PV.10

whatever we have achieved has been done through
sustained action only during the very brief peaceful
periods, amounting to no more than two and a half
years, which is only half of the period under review.
The success of whatever policies Governments
make for the empowerment of women will depend
largely not only on the institutions, organizations and
networks which we ourselves as women establish and
maintain to keep the pressure on, but also on our own
sincerity as women in these matters. There are many of
us who shy away from what we must do and leave men
to do it. We cannot afford to do that. The private sector
of society must have a commitment, too — women
should have a commitment — if there is to be any
progress.
Whatever we have achieved in my country, Sierra
Leone, a lot of credit goes to United Nations agencies,
friendly Governments and our partners in the
international arena. Without their support, development
and peace would have eluded us completely. I thank
God that the United Nations hostages have been
released, but we should not forget that there are still
thousands of Sierra Leoneans who are refugees or
displaced people — women and children, mostly,
among them — some of whom are still held against
their will by the rebels, with continued atrocities and
violations of women. They must be released, too, and
assisted to resume their normal lives.
I take this opportunity to appeal to the
international community through this special session to
help us maintain commitment to action on the Beijing
Platform for Action, first, by devising some action plan
against all those in the international community who
have contributed directly or indirectly to the
prolongation of the conflict in Sierra Leone; secondly,
by taking action against the illegal sale of Sierra Leone
diamonds, which have fuelled the conflict and have
brought so much pain and suffering to our people,
particularly women, whom we are here to honour
today; thirdly, by helping us strengthen the government
machinery for more effective coordination of women’s
matters; and fourthly, by further assisting the poorest of
the poor nations with adequate funding for muchneeded social amenities to war widows and those many
women who are heads of their homes and family.
The Acting President: I call on Mrs. Rachel
Dea, Minister for Social Affairs, Advancement of the

Family and Disabled Persons of the Central African
Republic.
Mrs. Dea (Central African Republic) (spoke in
French): We are meeting here today, five years after
Beijing, to assess together, mid-way, the efforts made
towards implementing the commitments undertaken to
improve the status of women. This assessment, which
is a real tribute to the United Nations, was necessary to
appreciate the position women hold in each of our
States.
However, Madam President, before doing that, on
behalf of the delegation of the Central African
Republic, I wish to extend to you and to the members
of the Bureau warm congratulations on your election.
The special qualities of the President will ensure the
success of our work, and he can be assured that he has
my delegation’s full cooperation to that end.
I also bring wishes for the success of the special
session expressed by the President and head of State of
the Central African Republic, His Excellency
Ange-Félix Patassé, and Madame Angele Patassé
whose faith in the ideals of the United Nations remains
unshakeable.
It is a pleasure for me to renew to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, Mr. Kofi Annan, who
recently granted us the honour of visiting us in the
Central African Republic, our country’s great
appreciation for what he is doing for peace and
development in the world and particularly my country,
through the presence in the Central African Republic of
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINURCA), now represented by the Bureau
of the United Nations in the Central African Republic,
BONUCA.
The Government of the Central African Republic
participated actively in the Beijing Conference and
subscribed to the resolutions and recommendations
adopted during that important meeting. Like other
States of the world, the Central African Republic
committed itself to adopting the concrete measures
necessary to put them into action. Before giving a
comprehensive survey of the implementation of the
Beijing Platform for Action in the Central African
Republic, I first wish to carry out a noble duty and
express, on behalf of my Government, my profound
thanks and sincere gratitude to the international
community, which reacted so quickly to halt the vortex
of civil war, which began in my country in 1966.

9

A/S-23/PV.10

The Beijing Platform for
Action
was
implemented in the Central African Republic within a
particularly difficult social, political and economic
context, marked by three rebellions by part of the army
during 1996 and 1997, difficulties associated with
signature of the agreement with the Bretton Woods
institutions and the general spread of poverty
throughout the population, especially women.
After the Beijing Conference, the Government
first began to strengthen institutional machinery for
promoting the status of women. This was translated
into decentralization of the Ministry in charge of
women’s matters in regional offices, strengthening the
technical capacity and decentralization of the National
Body for Dialogue for the Promotion of Women, the
consultative body for coordinating all actions for
women in the national territory.
The
strengthening
of these
institutional
machineries should be continued in the short term by
structuring and reconverting the National Body for
Dialogue to a national council for coordination and
dialogue for the promotion of women to link it with the
Cabinet. This council will involve the highest officials
of the State: the President of the Republic and the
Cabinet. It will also involve the representatives of all
the
ministerial
high-level
departments,
nongovernmental organization representatives and the
programme directors of United Nations agencies.
It is intended to strengthen the technical
capacities of non-governmental organizations in their
areas of intervention in order to maximize
opportunities for success in the implementation of the
national policy on the promotion of the status of
women. Indeed, since the Beijing summit, and under
the impetus of the National Body for Dialogue, there
has been growing awareness among Central African
women regarding their status, primarily through the
improvement of their living conditions and their
considerable input into the struggle against poverty in
their country. This awareness has been translated into
the establishment of more than 200 non-governmental
organizations and women’s associations which
intervene in all areas of social life.
These non-governmental organizations are today
very active, but, unfortunately, they are confronted
with the enormous difficulty of financing their
activities, a problem to which the Government cannot
respond effectively in view of the cash-flow problems

10

that it has experienced over the past few years. For that
reason, I would like to use this rostrum to ask my
country’s development partners, and more particularly
women’s non-governmental organizations of the
developed countries, to lend a strong hand to their
sisters in Central Africa, so that they can fully assume
their roles not only in Central Africa but throughout the
world, as women are the actors and the promoters of
sustainable human development.
Once this prerequisite was put into effect, the
Government redefined the national policy on the
promotion of women on the basis of the Beijing
Platform for Action, integrating new national realities.
Twelve new priorities were thus retained.
In terms of the protection of women and their
participation in decision-making, I should point to the
acceleration and adoption of the family code, the law
which was promulgated in 1998.
Access by Central African women to decisionmaking posts is still far from the 30 per cent proportion
recommended by the United Nations. However, a clear
advance of women in the national political sphere is
noticeable and can be seen in the number of women
deputies in the National Assembly, which increased
from 3 out of 85 for the period 1993 to 1998 to 8 out of
109 for the period of 1999 to 2004. This increase is due
to the large numbers of women joining political parties
following intensive consciousness-raising. There are
also three women in the Government.
The question of peace deserves particular
attention. I would also ask those present to take
measures towards securing the firm commitment of the
international community to act on the deep-rooted
causes of conflicts, because there can be no
development without peace. In this regard, I would like
to point out that the involvement of women has been
noticeable in the settlement of conflicts which resulted
from rebellions, through their associative structures.
In the health field, many studies explain the
reasons which make women vulnerable: the
arduousness of their tasks, lack of control over their
sexuality and over reproduction, a sterility rate which
has risen to 26 per cent, malnutrition, insufficient basic
health services, and traditional practices which are
deleterious to their health — all crowned by the
insufficient access by women to health services
because they lack the means to pay the costs.

A/S-23/PV.10

This concern has led us to include health, not
only as the Government’s first priority, but also as the
second priority of our national policy on the promotion
of the status of women.
Accordingly, particular attention has been
devoted to maternal and child health; family planning;
the combat against practices that are harmful to women
and girls, and against violence directed at them; and the
reproductive and sexual health of women and girls.
In terms of violence, the women of the Central
African Republic are the victims on a daily basis of
traditional practices that are harmful to their health.
This violence takes several forms: female genital
mutilation; early marriage and pregnancy; poor
treatment in the family or domestic violence;
persecution of widows; assault and battery; rape; and
sexual harassment. These acts, which are socioculturally sanctioned, are committed openly and freely,
in blatant contravention of laws against them, and have
even become socially acceptable.
To tackle this situation, the Government
established in 1996 a national committee to combat
traditional practices that are harmful to the health of
women and girls, and the violence against them. That
committee is carrying out awareness-raising campaigns
in areas where these acts are most prevalent. However,
I should note that the Committee is limited in its
activities by a significant lack of resources.
Poverty, which is on the rise in the Central
African Republic, affects many more women than men.
For that reason, the national plan that is being
elaborated to combat this scourge is placing particular
emphasis on women.
The economic underperformance of women will
be addressed through the promotion of training
activities and the establishment of a microfinance
system to support women’s initiatives, because women
contribute significantly to the gross national product.
The Acting President: The representative of the
Central African Republic may wish to conclude, as her
time is up.
Mrs. Dea (Central African Republic) (spoke in
French): The educational system in the Central African
Republic is not adapted to national realities. Teaching
materials contain discriminatory stereotypes, and
infrastructures and equipment are lacking.

That is why I make an urgent appeal, from this
lofty rostrum, to this special session of the United
Nations for concrete and exceptional measures to be
taken to help support the efforts of the Central African
Republic to implement fully the Beijing Platform for
Action.
The Acting President: I appeal once again to
representatives to be good enough to keep silent in the
General Assembly Hall in order to maintain the dignity
of the Assembly and out of courtesy to our speakers. I
also ask speakers to keep to their time limit of seven
minutes.
I now call on Mrs. Luisa María Cuculiza,
Minister for the Advancement of Women and Human
Development of Peru.
Mrs. Cuculiza (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of the Peruvian Government and on my own
behalf, I wish to extend a sisterly welcome to all of the
women of the world who are present here at this
special session of the General Assembly.
In spite of our physical, cultural and linguistic
differences, we as women face the same problems. We
must therefore maintain a spirit of solidarity among
ourselves and with those who need our support.
I also extend my congratulations to the President,
Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab, and to the members of the
Bureau for the important work that they have
accomplished.
The Peruvian Government, represented by the
President of the Republic, Mr. Alberto Fujimori,
reiterated at Beijing its belief that women should
control their own destiny, and undertook with
determination to implement the agreements and
commitments of the Fourth World Conference on
Women, which we are reaffirming today.
Accordingly, the Peruvian Government created in
1996 the Ministry for the Promotion of Women and
Human Development in order to promote and
harmonize public policies, in particular government
policies, aimed at the advancement of women, thus
taking a historic step towards integrating the gender
approach and the women’s agenda into national
priorities.
Furthermore, the 2000-2005 national plan to
ensure equal opportunities for men and women is being
implemented by the Ministry over which I have the

11

A/S-23/PV.10

honour to preside. The realization of that plan involves
all sectors of the State.
In accordance with our political will to advance
the status of women, other, higher-level bodies have
been created, such as the congressional Women’s
Committee and the Public Defender’s Office for
Women.
For more than 12 years my country was the
victim of terrorist attacks that isolated us and gave rise
to uncertainty about our future. During that time,
women played an important role, establishing a social
network and deploying the necessary efforts to weather
the crisis. I think we were very brave in the face of this
terrorist violence, which resulted in the murders of
thousands of women leaders, municipal authorities and
innocent men and women, and of thousands of
policemen and soldiers. It was a horrific situation for
us, but we did not give in. We do not wish to remember
that time and thus relive our suffering, but neither do
we wish to forget, so that we may prevent this from
ever happening again.
That is why the Peruvian people supported the
firm decision of our President to eliminate terrorism,
and today peace and democracy prevail in Peru.
Government policy for the next five years
includes the following priorities: the struggle against
poverty; the creation of jobs; modernization; and the
overall development of our country.
The efforts that have been made to alleviate
poverty through social programmes aimed at women
have taken a quantum leap forward. Schools have been
created that teach leadership and negotiating skills,
foster self-esteem and provide the training that
facilitates women’s entry into the labour force.
Legal standards are now in place in the area of
employment and wages which penalize employers that
discriminate against women by paying them lower
wages than men. The right of women to prenatal and
post-partum leave has been re-established, as well as
the right to breastfeed for one hour a day. Laws have
also been passed that prohibit the firing of women due
to pregnancy.
Initiatives have been taken to increase the
participation of women in the labour force by offering
them training, counselling, revolving loans and through
the establishment of small and micro-enterprises,
which have become sources of jobs for other women.

12

We want our women to be productive and
economically independent so that day by day they will
become less and less subject to mistreatment.
Acknowledging the importance of the political
participation of women, in 1997 the Government
enacted a law on quotas for municipal and
parliamentary elections which has already produced
positive results. In 1999 women tripled their presence
at the level of local government, and twice as many
women will be represented at the next session of
Congress, set to begin on 28 July. This measure has
made it possible for those women who are leaders of
urban, rural and sports organizations as well as women
from all walks of life to take up the challenge of
participating in political life.
Breaking with tradition, two women have
presided over Congress in recent years, and women
have also chaired various committees within this
important legislative body.
Women in Peru today have access to decisionmaking posts and positions of power, and can have an
effect in bringing about the necessary changes to
consolidate a fairer society in which there is gender
equality.
Acknowledging that the elimination of family
violence is an indispensable condition for human
development to take place, our efforts have given
priority to this area. Thus, the legislation on family
violence enacted in 1997 has been progressively finetuned on the basis of international standards and
agreements, to guarantee greater protection to victims.
In this connection, we are promoting the establishment
of comprehensive, efficient and high-quality care
centres which are completely free of charge and which
provide users police, legal, psychological, social and
medical care, as well as the services of a prosecutor for
family matters. These centres, known as women’s
emergency centres, have been set up at the national
level and have served to encourage more women to
break their silence. It is silence that very often causes
millions of women throughout the world to live hoping
that their situation will change while they do nothing.
Our Government has understood that to invest in
the elimination of family violence is to invest in our
development, since the culture of peace that we aspire
to must be consolidated from the home while
strengthening families so that they may behave
democratically and respect the rights of their members.

A/S-23/PV.10

The family, which is regarded as the basic unit of
society, should be linked by love and respect and not
by violence and mistreatment. That is why this year has
been designated in my country as the year to combat
family violence, in order to give greater attention and
effect to these measures. We have undertaken the task
of encouraging men to change, to assume their family
responsibilities and to manage their emotions so as to
allow their homes to become harmonious and peaceful
spaces in which the development of family members
takes place actively.
We acknowledge that health is a basic human
right, a right that includes sexual and reproductive
rights. We do not promote abortion as a family
planning method, and in this regard our Government
has been committing appropriate resources for
Peruvian women to be able to decide for themselves
the size of their families and when they want to have
relations, how to prevent sexually transmitted diseases,
have greater access to health services and to the
different reproductive health options.
In order to lower and eliminate maternal
mortality rates, child and maternity insurance was
recently established for all the women of my country,
and measures to prevent adolescent pregnancies have
been reinforced. I do not wish to see, either in my
country or in the world, adolescents become pregnant
as a result of an accident, lack of experience or of lack
of information.
Since education is the keystone to building an
egalitarian and democratic society, a number of
measures have been taken to increase school
attendance of young girls in the educational system.
We have placed special emphasis on health protection
and care through free school insurance for all of my
country’s students. We have carried out mass
campaigns in preventing sexual and child abuse. Our
efforts have been centred on bridging gender gaps in
girls’ school attendance rates. This has been reflected
in the changes in attitude of fathers, who have
historically given priority to the education of their male
children. Another indicator is that the number of
women between the ages of 15 and 24 years of age
attending colleges and universities now equals that of
men.
The Acting President: I would like to inform the
representative of Peru that her time has expired and
that she may wish to conclude her statement now.

Mrs. Cuculiza (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): In the
fight to combat female illiteracy, we have succeeded in
reducing the illiteracy rate of women from 18.3 per
cent, when I took office, to 7.8 per cent in 1999.
What we have achieved in Peru illustrates the fact
that when there is political will and the willingness to
work, seemingly impossible goals can be achieved.
This is why ministries for women’s affairs are in the
hands of women, see through the eyes of women and
feel with the hearts of women. This year we had the
honour to preside over the eighth session of the
regional conference on women in Latin America and
the Caribbean, where the Lima Consensus was
unanimously adopted. That document represents the
position of our region at this important special session
of the General Assembly.
The arduous tasks of promoting respect and
recognition of the rights of women is a task incumbent
upon us all. That is why I wish to say loud and clear
that my Government pledges not to backtrack one step
on regional consensuses and to continue resolutely to
implement the Beijing Platform for Action. We women
cannot wait any longer. We cannot remain silent. The
time has come for our voices to be heard and for us to
move from words to deeds.
We are entering a new century, the century of
women. We are going to show that when women work,
problems, difficulties and pain do not exist, and that
women make headway because they were born
courageous. In closing, I would once again like to say
that the future of the entire world is in the hands of
women and that we will work for the women of the
world and for the women of the countries most in need,
as well as for our girls. May God bless you and may
you all return safely to your countries.
The Acting President: I would kindly like to
remind delegations that, in accordance with the
decision taken by the General Assembly at the 1st
plenary meeting of its twenty-third special session,
statements in the debate in plenary meeting should not
exceed seven minutes, in order to accommodate every
speaker on the list at each meeting.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency Mrs.
Julienne Ngo Som, Minister for Women’s Affairs of
Cameroon.
Mrs. Ngo Som (Cameroon): I would like to thank
the President for giving my delegation the opportunity

13

A/S-23/PV.10

to make a statement during this very important special
session of the United Nations General Assembly on the
theme “Women 2000: gender equality, development
and peace for the twenty-first century”.

production, cassava processing, the informal sector,
trading, tourism, and so on. Credit schemes are being
developed at the grass-roots level to help women
finance their income-generating activities.

Taking the floor for the first time, the delegation
of Cameroon under my leadership would like to
congratulate the President and wish him even greater
success, and the guidance of God, for the rest of his
mandate.

On education and training, special attention has
been paid to advocacy and social marketing vis-à-vis
parents and cultural and religious leaders. The aim is to
create public awareness about the need to treat boys
and girls equitably when it comes to schooling. As a
result, girls’ enrolment in primary school has gone up.
With respect to non-formal education, the literacy rate
of adult women has also improved.

The Beijing Platform for Action has been
implemented under a macroeconomic context
characterized by a severe economic and financial crisis
which has affected my country for more than half a
decade. As a result, the Cameroon Government was
obliged to reduce expenditures in social sectors. This
has led to the deterioration of the living conditions of
most Cameroonians, including women.
There is no doubt that the Cameroon Government
has the requisite political will and is committed to the
advancement of women. This political will was
reaffirmed by the adoption in 1999 of a national policy
declaration on the integration of women in
development. The general objective of this policy is to
create a national framework for the implementation of
the priority areas defined in the Beijing Platform for
Action.
Permit me to review eight critical areas of this
Platform, and to look at what has been achieved by the
Government of Cameroon so far.
In order to implement the recommendations
related to the critical area of women and poverty
alleviation, income-generating opportunities for
women have been identified in the following sectors:
agriculture,
livestock,
fisheries,
aquaculture,
environment, medicinal plants, horticulture, trade, the
informal sector, handicrafts, tourism and textiles. In
1998, a national strategy declaration against poverty
was published, with a special plan of action to fight
poverty among women. A national survey using a
participatory approach has just been carried out. Its
objective was to determine the principal causes of
poverty among the women of Cameroon.
The Government has strengthened and increased
the number of technical organs for the promotion of
socio-economic activities for women. As a result, more
and more women are getting involved in incomegenerating activities, including home economics, food

14

Turning to the issue of women and health,
government policies and strategies following the
Beijing Conference have created a strong public
awareness of the need to tackle women’s health
problems. Several health and nutrition surveys have
been carried out to show the scope of these problems.
Sensitization campaigns have been carried out on
violence against women and the girl child, and
information has been circulated to the public with
respect to the consequences of violence against women.
On the question of women in power and decisionmaking positions, the democratization of public life has
attracted a large number of women into politics. Today,
many women are members of several political parties.
In the ruling party, 23 per cent of posts of
responsibility are held by women. In the parliament
and the local councils, women represent 5.5 per cent
and 10 per cent respectively. There are four women
members of the Government and two secretariesgeneral of ministries. The private sector is also
improving the situation with respect to women in
decision-making positions.
Turning to institutional mechanisms for the
advancement of women, the Government of Cameroon
has shown its commitment to the advancement of
women through the creation of strong administrative
and technical institutions at the central, intermediary
and community levels. At the central level, there is the
Ministry of Women’s Affairs, with branches at the
provincial, divisional and subdivisional levels.
Technical organs, including women’s empowerment
centres and appropriate technology centres, have been
created for the training and capacity-building of
women at the grass-roots level. In addition to this
government institutional framework, there are networks
of organizations, female professional associations and

A/S-23/PV.10

non-governmental organizations working for women’s
rights
and
education,
against
violence
and
discrimination,
and
for
the
socio-economic
advancement of women.
On women’s human rights, Cameroon has ratified
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, and the Convention on
the Rights of the Child. Relevant policies have been
formulated to promote the human rights of the
Cameroonian woman. A national committee has been
set up and a plan of action has been developed to
review all laws which discriminate against women.
With respect to the girl child, our national policy
emphasizes the elimination of all forms of
discrimination and detrimental cultural practices
against the girl child, including sexual mutilation and
exploitation.
On women and environment, efforts have been
made to create awareness on the role of women in the
sustainable exploitation of environmental and
biological resources and on the need to prevent
pollution and keep the environment clean.
As members can see, my country has made
significant efforts for the advancement of Cameroonian
women,
despite
a
macroeconomic
context
characterized by economic crisis and an unsustainable
debt burden. The Government has created an enabling
environment for the promotion of women, as a result of
which our society is gradually becoming more and
more gender-conscious and gender-sensitive. The
mainstreaming of gender issues in major sectors of
national life has become a priority, and gender
mainstreaming is gaining ground in many national
development programmes and projects.
Mr. Morel (Seychelles), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
From 1995 to date, some progress has been made,
though not without significant difficulties, and
although a lot is yet to be done. The major obstacle
encountered by my country in the implementation of
the Beijing Platform for Action has been the lack of
financial resources. A substantial amount of money
which could have been allocated to projects for the
promotion of women has been used to service the
heavy debt Cameroon owes to international creditors.
Other obstacles have been encountered with respect to
poverty alleviation, education, health, power and

decision-making positions, women’s rights, gender
mainstreaming and women and environment.
My delegation has noted that, besides these
obstacles, new trends, issues and concerns have
emerged, which need to be addressed if the goals of
equality, development and peace are to be attained for
all in this new millennium. Let me cite but a few:
globalization and new information technologies; the
role of women in the promotion of peace; the spread of
HIV/AIDS, especially among adolescents; trafficking
in children and the exploitation of the girl child;
persistent poverty among women; the deterioration of
women’s health; and the need for women’s
involvement in the promotion of their national culture
and moral values for sustainable development. Those
obstacles, together with the emerging issues, concerns
and new trends of which I spoke earlier, are to us a
timely signal that, although appreciable ground has
been covered in our efforts to advance women, a lot
more needs to be done.
The head of State of Cameroon, His Excellency
President Paul Biya, has made the substantial reduction
of poverty and the improvement of the living
conditions of the vulnerable groups, especially women,
the cornerstone of his presidential mandate. In that
perspective, my delegation hopes that Cameroon will
benefit from the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt
Initiative so as to enable the Government to fulfil its
commitments, in collaboration and sustainable
partnership with other friendly Governments,
international organizations, the United Nations system,
traditional and religious leaders, non-governmental
organizations and, above all, with men and women
themselves. In that way we could hope to make a
significant
contribution
to
gender
equality,
development and peace in the twenty-first century.
The Acting President: The Chair would like to
urge delegations to respect the seven-minute time
frame; we are running out of time.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency
Mrs. Nezha Chekrouni, Secretary of State, Ministry of
Social Development, Solidarity, Employment and
Vocational Training of Morocco.
Mrs. Chekrouni (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I
wish at the outset to convey to the Assembly the
greetings and best wishes of His Majesty King
Mohammed VI of Morocco, who is following this

15

A/S-23/PV.10

special session of the General Assembly with all due
attention and interest.
On behalf of the delegation of the Kingdom of
Morocco, I congratulate the Republic of Namibia on
the election of His Excellency Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab
to the presidency of the Assembly at this special
session, which is devoted to women at the dawn of the
third millennium. The session is intended to marshal
support for true gender equality, development and
peace.
We note with satisfaction that certain legitimate
ambitions of women throughout the world are being
attained, and this is due to the joint efforts of all; but
women continue to suffer some setbacks. There are still
areas, particularly in education and training, where the
rates of school enrolment, illiteracy and scientific
learning require more attention. Some major problems
also persist in the area of health care, where the rate of
infant and maternal mortality keeps increasing.
Women are still suffering from physical and
mental abuse caused by violence and by the spread of
AIDS, whose devastating consequences, affecting
women in particular and causing a growing number of
orphans, is felt in all societies.
We should recall here the great attention focused
on this issue by our late sovereign His Majesty King
Hassan II and the tremendous efforts he made
regarding the promotion of women. These efforts are
reflected in several major achievements, such as the
consolidation of equality between the sexes in rights
and duties, through incorporating many laws,
particularly the civil status law; by respecting the
political will manifested in the involvement of women
in decision-making; by increasing their public and
political participation; life management; by their
integration within the representative institutions; and
by becoming members of regional and national
representative and executive bodies. For the first time
in the history of Morocco, on 13 August 1997, women
were appointed ministers, serving in the cabinet of that
time, as well as in the present Government.
Building on the legacy of his father, His Majesty
King Mohamed VI gave women’s issues utmost
importance to ensure their promotion and to defend
their rights. On the occasion of His Majesty’s first
speech since ascending to the throne, as he had done on
many other occasions and in other initiatives, he
stressed the importance of promoting women’s

16

conditions, legally, socially, economically and
politically; and for the first time he appointed a woman
as one of his counsellors, while he made the condition
of women a top priority. His Majesty missed no
opportunity to stress the increasingly important role
played by Moroccan women in the modernization
process.
Morocco is also concerned with social aspects,
because it is clear that respect for women’s rights must
become part of our common culture. The promotion of
women occupies a special place in the objectives set by
the educational institutions on all levels within the
context of respect for human rights and the culture of
peace.
By decree of his Majesty the King, a universal
strategy was elaborated placing women’s issues at the
centre of its policies. A permanent ministerial
commission for women was established. The
promotion of women was placed among the top
priorities of the Five-Year Plan 1999-2003 for
Economic and Social Development. Morocco also
developed and sponsored programmes of education and
training and consciousness-raising campaigns against
violence towards women. Thus, the first national
campaign to combat violence towards women was
organized, and a partnership agreement was signed for
the first time between the Ministry for Human Rights
and the Moroccan Association of Lawyers, which
counts among its objectives the support of women and
girls in difficulty.
In order to increase the rate of school enrolment
among young girls, Morocco has made tremendous
efforts. This is reflected in an increase in the
educational segment of the budget and by the
Parliament’s adoption of the application of laws for the
implementation of the National Charter on education
and training, which enforces compulsory education
from 6 to 15 years of age. The Charter also stresses
informal education and the creation of collective
schools through partnership contracts between the
private and public sectors. In this area, we have to pay
tribute to Moroccan non-governmental organizations
and to civil society for making notable efforts to
improve the conditions of women and girls in our
country.
Globalization of the economy and new
technology and information strategies have impeded
the attainment of objectives, especially gender equality

A/S-23/PV.10

between men and women; this results from various
political and economic disparities. How can third world
countries participate in globalization and development
when they are suffering from problems such as debt?
The condition of women requires solidarity and
coordination. That is what encouraged His Majesty to
write off African debts to Morocco. We would like to
make widespread this type of solidarity in favour of
women.
Morocco is proud to be one of those countries
that promote the rule of law essential for the respect for
human rights, and especially women’s rights. In this
regard, His Majesty the King committed himself to the
implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action and
devoted himself to ensuring the equality of the sexes,
basing it on the teachings of Islam and Morocco’s
cultural particularities and the international Convention
that Morocco has signed. The lofty objectives of this
session are to strengthen women’s rights and to find
appropriate solutions to the many problems they face
throughout the world. That is why we express our true
hope for building a better future based on peace and
equality between men and women, in order to
guarantee equality between the sexes. We are aware of
the enormity of the effort that is still required from all
of us and the tremendous challenges of the future. We
should all work together to put forth the most suitable
ways to ensure women’s dignity.
Under His Majesty’s leadership, Morocco
reiterates its commitment to promote the consolidation
of women’s rights throughout the world, relying on its
authentic civilization, renewed modernism, unique
identity, its great religious and moral values, and its
multicultural character.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Alberto Paolino, Minister for
Justice and Parliamentary Affairs and Deputy Minister
in the Office of the Prime Minister of Sao Tome and
Principe.
Mr. Paolino (Sao Tome and Principe) (spoke in
French): First of all, allow me to express my warmest
thanks to the Secretariat of the United Nations, the
body that has organized the event that has brought us
together here in New York. I would also like to wish
the greatest success for our work and to express the
hope that our results will be translated into realities in
all of our countries.

In Sao Tome and Principe, an archipelago made
up of two small islands, considered one of the least
developed countries, the population in general, and
women in particular, are facing the problems of our
time, a time of change, of challenges, of a quest for
new achievements; of problems that are placed in our
paths and which we have to tackle in order to survive
as free and independent States.
The dizzying changes that the world has been
facing in recent times have made women’s problems
even more critical than ever before. The holding of the
Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing in 1995
provided
an
excellent
opportunity
for
the
representatives of more than 100 nations to carry out
an in-depth discussion of the responsibilities of all —
State
institutions
and
non-governmental
organizations — with regard to this sector of our
population.
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women was ratified by Sao
Tome and Principe only last year, but its spirit and
principles, which were already apparent in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, have always
been a part of our country’s constitutions and are taken
into account in government programmes with varying
degrees of effectiveness.
Starting with Beijing, there was a new attempt to
adopt an integrated approach to problems affecting
women, which has enabled significant progress to take
place. Indeed, the national authorities have increased
the awareness of the need effectively to ensure the
contribution of our country’s women, and women
themselves are participating more actively in the
design and implementation of solutions that allow them
to play a role in national development, primarily in
agriculture, raising livestock, trade and crafts.
Despite these achievements, however, society in
Sao Tome and Principe is still marked by great
disparities based on gender and stereotypes that seem
to attribute supposed superiority to men.
As we all know, changes in attitude take a long
time and are very difficult to achieve. However, it
cannot be denied that the major conferences organized
by the United Nations in the 1990s, such as the World
Summit for Children and the 1995 World Conference
on Women in Beijing, have given new vitality to the
cause of women.

17

A/S-23/PV.10

We have set up an institutional structure — the
department for the promotion of women and the
family — which is currently the responsibility of the
Prime Minister’s Cabinet. This department is the body
responsible for following up on the implementation of
government policies and activities with respect to
women and the family.
After Beijing, this department supported by civil
society, set up a commission which drew up a proposal
for a national platform for action which should make it
possible to implement the outcomes of this conference.
That document was then presented to civil society,
which contributed to enriching and validating it. The
conditions for the development of a plan of action for
women of Sao Tome and Principe, to be implemented
by the Government, have also been created. At the
same time, several projects have been designed to
improve the situation of women in rural and urban
areas, among which I should like to stress the project to
combat poverty. The Government has adopted
constructive measures aimed at facilitating the
participation of women in decision-making.
The authorities are in the process of creating
professional centres open to both men and women.
Furthermore, we have also begun to introduce
appropriate technologies in rural communities in order
to ease the lives of the inhabitants in general, and
women in particular. Furthermore, opportunities for
women to gain access to technical, advanced and
professional training, as well as training in other areas,
have been enhanced, so that today, 40 per cent of civil
service positions in Sao Tome and Principe are held by
women, the health and education sectors being those
with the highest percentage.
Furthermore, the Government is implementing
programmes which will have an impact on women and
children in particular. These include reproductive
health programmes, and measures to combat AIDS,
other sexually transmitted diseases and malaria.
Generally speaking, in recent years many
associations promoting women’s rights have emerged
in Sao Tome and Principe. Various non-governmental
organizations dealing with women’s problems have
been integrated into a federation, the women’s forum of
Sao Tome and Principe, which enables them to
organize themselves better and makes it easier for them
to achieve their goals.

18

I have just provided the Assembly with a very
general overview of the situation of women in Sao
Tome and Principe at the dawn of the new millennium.
But the positive achievements have not caused the
Government to forget that considerable work remains
to be done, not only because of attitudes but also, and
above all, because of the very difficult economic
situation which Sao Tome and Principe, like most
developing countries, is facing.
Nevertheless, my Government believes that one
of its most important objectives is the real participation
of women who, let us not forget, represent more than
half of the population of Sao Tome and Principe.
Our Government is thus fully determined to take
the necessary steps so that, in Sao Tome and Principe,
being a woman means being a full-fledged citizen.
The Acting President: Once again, I must appeal
to representatives to be good enough to keep silent in
the General Assembly Hall in order to maintain the
dignity of the Assembly and out of courtesy to the next
speaker. I thank them in advance.
(spoke in French)
The next speaker is Her Excellency Mrs. Fatimé
Kimto, Minister for Social Action and Family of Chad.
Mrs. Kimto (Chad) (spoke in French): It is with
real pleasure that I am taking the floor on this solemn
occasion of the holding of the twenty-third special
session of the United Nations General Assembly to
express, on behalf of my head of State, His Excellency
Idriss Deby, President of the Republic of Chad, of my
delegation and on my own behalf, our most sincere and
warm greetings.
Allow me, also, to express, through you, Sir, my
congratulations to the members of the Bureau who
have been chosen to preside over these deliberations.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
express, from this rostrum, the hope that the people,
and particularly the women, of Chad, place in this
special session which has brought together the sons and
daughters of the entire world to assess the
commitments undertaken by Governments in 1995 in
Beijing during the World Conference on Women.
This session is of special importance for us
because of its subject, which deals with gender
equality, development and peace for the twenty-first

A/S-23/PV.10

century in the form of an assessment of the distance
covered in the five years after Beijing.
It is no secret that, until recently, my country,
Chad, had been undergoing many troubles after
independence. Since his accession to the supreme
office in 1999, His Excellency President Idriss Deby
has done his utmost to ensure that my country, Chad,
can again take its place among nations as a State based
on the rule of law, governed by democratic institutions.
This approach has been characterized by several
stages: the establishment of a multi-party system; the
organization of a Sovereign National Conference; the
liberation of the private press; and the adoption of the
constitution of the Republic, which enshrines the
principle of gender equality. Hence, all the conditions
have been brought together, allowing the people of
Chad to express themselves freely, thereby favouring
dialogue rather than the language of arms.
More recently, the Government adopted a draft
law to ratify the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction.
Despite all of these undeniable efforts, some
forms of armed opposition remain in our country. That
is why human development is, I hardly need recall,
greatly conditioned by the absence of peace, which has
a serious negative impact on people’s living conditions
and keeps them in extreme poverty. Women, who
constitute 52 per cent of that population, are the
principal victims. To this, we must add ignorance,
illiteracy and a low rate of school enrolment for girls.
With respect to the 12 priority areas set out in the
Beijing Platform for Action, the Government of the
Republic of Chad has established a multisectoral
national programme of action and adopted a national
policy for integrating women in development. This
policy, enacted into law, aims at enhancing the legal
status of women; improving the living conditions of
women; enhancing women’s resources in all sectors;
promoting women’s economic status; and improving
the institutional framework for the integration of
women in development. The implementation of this
programme has been undertaken through the following
steps: the ratification and dissemination of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women; the establishment of a
technical body for the promotion of girls’ education;
the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the

Child; the recent endorsement of a draft law on
reproductive health; the integration of the gender
concept and of education on family life into school
programmes; the impending enactment of a draft code
for the family; and the establishment, within the
Ministry of Civil Service, Labour and Job Promotion,
of an entity to monitor the participation of women in
administration.
As improving our people’s living conditions is
one of its priorities, the Government of the Republic of
Chad, with the support of the agencies of the United
Nations and certain African regional institutions, is
preparing a broad poverty-reduction strategy. In the
meantime, however, it has launched an important pilot
project for reducing poverty and helping women, which
is already under way. Along these lines, the
Government has chosen to develop education and
training for women with a view to encouraging their
access to economic power. A national solidarity fund
has been set up to that end.
In the area of peace, the Government has closely
involved civil society in the resolution of conflicts. In
this respect, I would cite the establishment of a
women’s peace network; the establishment of a
network of student ambassadors for peace; and the
organization on 8 March 2000 of a day of prayer for a
culture of peace, tolerance, love and forgiveness.
With respect to promoting the status of women,
noteworthy efforts have been made by the Government.
Women have been nominated to high-level posts in the
Government, diplomacy, central administration and
territorial communities.
Despite
the
Government’s
continuously
reaffirmed political will, the progress achieved in the
various areas remains weak with respect to female
representation in decision-making bodies. The work
ahead will be arduous, but we are convinced that the
situation of women will markedly improve in the next
five years on the basis of the efforts made by States
and the new strategies to emerge from this special
session.
In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity very
sincerely to thank the United Nations Children’s Fund,
the United Nations Population Fund and the United
Nations Development Programme, whose help has
enabled many in our delegation to participate in these
deliberations.

19

A/S-23/PV.10

The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Her Excellency Ms. Ana Elisa Osorio, Vice-Minister of
Health of Venezuela.
Ms. Osorio (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of the Government of Venezuela, I wish to
convey our greetings and delight at the efforts made by
the United Nations system in convening this special
session, which is so important to the achievement of
gender equality.
We have attended this special session with the
firm goal of reaffirming our commitment to the
Platform for Action agreed on at Beijing five years
ago. For Venezuela and the rest of Latin America,
Beijing was undoubtedly a fundamental landmark for
the advancement of gender equality, which we recently
reaffirmed in the Lima Consensus, adopted at the
eighth session of the Regional Conference on Women
in Latin America and the Caribbean.
We wish to share the extraordinary success in our
country of the adoption of a Constitution with a gender
perspective through a constituent process that took into
account the specific needs, rights and aspirations of
Venezuelan women. Henceforth in my country, male
and female citizens alike will be called on for public
service; children’s planning will take girls into account
as well as boys; chairwomen will preside alongside
chairmen; women will work alongside men; and at
home, father and mother will enjoy equal importance
and equal protections.
We are entering the new millennium with a
Constitution that is the project of a country with a
gender vision and with a leader, President Hugo
Chávez Frías, who is deeply committed to it. The
Constitution of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
protects families, mothers and fathers, establishes the
right of couples to decide the number of children they
wish to conceive and guarantees them adequate
information to ensure the exercise of that right.
In Venezuela, we have created the National
Institute for Women with a major increase in the
allocation of budgetary resources that will help
establish the office of Women’s Ombudsman envisaged
in the Equal Opportunities Act enacted in 1993.
Another achievement has been the constitutional
recognition of boys and girls as enjoying full rights.
Their higher interests and the absolute priority
accorded to the formulation of policy for boys and girls

20

were reasserted by the recent entry into force of an
organic law to protect children and adolescents. This
law stipulates that boys, girls and adolescents have the
right to be informed and educated in sexual and
reproductive health so that they may engage in sex and
parenthood responsibly, healthily, voluntarily and
without risk. It also ensures access to high-quality
services and programmes for sexual and reproductive
health that protect the confidentiality of boys, girls and
adolescents.
In the context of the reform and restructuring of
the health sector, the National Programme for Sexual
and Reproductive Health was recently established.
Besides institutionalizing national commissions to
prevent early pregnancy and to promote breastfeeding,
the Programme is also charged with integrating all
health programmes so as to guarantee comprehensive
health care to all women.
One priority of our Government is the prevention
of teenage pregnancy, which has become a public
health problem. In order to address this situation, we
have drafted the Second National Plan for the
Prevention and Care of Early Pregnancy for the period
1999-2004.
Health and education have been priorities for
President Hugo Chávez. In this respect, our
Government has decided to address the adverse effects
of globalization that have affected women in particular
and led to the feminization of poverty and to a decline
of health and education indicators, resulting in high
rates of maternal mortality, increased incidence of
AIDS among women, breast and cervical cancer and
other pathologies that primarily affect poor women.
Moreover, within the framework of health care
reform, the Bolivarian Constitution stipulates health
care as a social right and that the State must guarantee
it and universal social security, explicitly including
housewives. The latter have been challenged by the
growing commercialization of the health care sector in
our country, which has resulted in the inaccessibility
and deterioration of health-care services, affecting
women, girls and boys above all.
In Venezuela, we have launched the establishment
of a new management model for ambulatory health
care, the Comprehensive Health Care Model, which
breaks with the practice of dividing the provision of
services, promotes preventive action and reduces the

A/S-23/PV.10

number of lost opportunities that have undoubtedly
affected women foremost.
Our health-care plan also prioritizes the reduction
of maternal and infant mortality and the prevention of
sexually transmitted diseases and AIDS among girls,
boys, adolescents and women, who enjoy priority
treatment with anti-retroviral medicine to block the
vertical transmission of HIV/AIDS. Most importantly,
our plan incorporates education and advice on sexual
and reproductive health and the gender equality
perspective in school textbooks.
With respect to the prevention of violence against
women, since 1998 we have had a Law on Violence
against Women and the Family that punishes all kinds
of family violence, sexual violence and provides
machinery for assistance to victims of these situations.
Our Institute for Women has also promoted a series of
activities in order to disseminate knowledge about the
law and to train the different state authorities to
implement it.
In this respect,
some
non-governmental
organizations have made important efforts in
organizing community groups for the prevention of
violence against women and in training programmes
for the police force and health-care personnel as well
as education for the adequate assistance of victims of
this serious problem.
In Beijing, the Government of Venezuela
promised to substantially reduce poverty. The National
Institute for Women promoted an employment plan for
women, management training for microenterprises, and
a strategic alliance with the Bank of the People to
develop a credit line for women.
In Venezuela, the political participation of women
is still an area where much work remains to be done.
Even though women have made significant progress in
professional training, their participation is still very
low when it comes to the highest levels of the
executive and legislative power.
Our delegation has played an active and
committed role in the negotiating process that began
earlier this year in order to ensure that the
achievements and obstacles, as well as the new
challenges that have emerged in the past five years, be
reflected in the Platform for Action. Thus, Venezuela
has worked arduously in order to define new actions
that would make it possible to move forward in the

implementation of the Platform for Action and that
reaffirm its content. All of this shows our clear
commitment to women in Venezuela and the world.
On this very important occasion Venezuela urges
governments to recognize the potential of women in
achieving gender equality, development and peace in
the twenty-first century.
The President: The next speaker is Her
Excellency Mrs. Isabelle Machik Ruth Tshombe, ViceMinister for Social and Family Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mrs. Tshombe (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (spoke in French): Allow me first of all to
carry out a very pleasant duty, that of warmly
congratulating you and Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab,
President of the General Assembly, for the trust placed
in you to chair this special session on the five-year
evaluation of the Beijing+5 Platform for Action. I
would also like to convey on behalf of the President of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. LaurentDésiré Kabila, the greetings of the Congolese people
and, in particular, those of the Congolese women.
The special session entitled “Women 2000:
gender equality, development and peace for the twentyfirst century” provides the international community
with the unique opportunity to meet and combine their
efforts in order to reaffirm and ensure the
implementation of commitments taken at the Fourth
United Nations Conference on Women in Beijing in
1995, as well as the quest for solutions within the
twelve priorities identified which remain major
objectives to be achieved.
My country places particular importance on the
matter of equality between men and women. That is
why in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
following the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, we have set
up a national action programme which is based on the
Beijing Platform for Action. This has made it possible
to adopt measures that would ensure equality in
women’s participation in political, economic, social
and cultural life at the national and local level. We are
convinced that this action plan is a great source of
inspiration for the development of programmes and
strategies to promote women, without negating our
traditional and cultural values, taking into account our
specific realities.

21

A/S-23/PV.10

The Sixth African Regional Conference in Addis
Ababa in September of last year was, for my country,
an opportunity to assess the implementation of the
Dakar and Beijing Platforms with respect to the 12
priority areas. This has made it possible to integrate in
the three-year plan for the period from 1997 to 2000
the following objectives: to ensure the economic
promotion of women through encouraging female
entrepreneurism; to ensure the legal and cultural
promotion of women through information on women’s
rights; to ensure the social promotion of women
through training, the enhancement of female human
capital, as well as the status of women; to improve the
nutrition of women and children through the
development of primary health-care programmes as
well as the alleviation of women’s daily workload; and
to help women in rural areas through technical,
material and financial means.
With respect to these objectives, the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has used the
resolutions of the National Forum on Rights and
Leadership of the Congolese Women held in September
1996, to develop the National Programme for the
Promotion of Congolese Women. This five-year
programme takes up the twelve critical areas of
Beijing.
From the point of view of strengthening the
institutional mechanism for women, the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has set up a
national council and provincial councils for women,
which would be consultation bodies that are made up
of experts who represent public institutions, nongovernmental
organizations,
unions,
religious
denominations, and delegates from the United Nations
bodies, who take part as observers.
Along the same lines, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has also begun the implementation of a
national
dialogue,
follow-up
and
assessment
mechanism to look at policies for promoting equality
between men and women. It has also adapted national
legislative texts to conform with ratified international
instruments.
However, there is still much work left to be done.
Given the very difficult economic situation, which has
been worsened by a war which is unfairly imposed on
us, the efforts made by my Government for the
implementation of the different programmes for women
is not developing in the way that we wish. I would like

22

to seize this opportunity to launch an urgent appeal to
the international community so that they may improve
their financial assistance to developing countries in
order to create the proper conditions so that men, as
well as women, can become further involved in the
promotion of equal opportunity between men and
women and to translate this into deeds.
The important role that women play in the
development process is clear to all and my delegation
feels that the special session will offer an opportunity
to assess the relevance of an idea contained in the
Programme for Action which establishes a link
between the promotion of women and economic and
social progress in the world.
We must all make a firm commitment in the quest
for sustainable development to ensure women full
participation in economic life and to effectively combat
poverty primarily in the areas of education, in training
and in health and to break with unacceptable habits
which have led societies to neglect a part of their
human resources.
However, for many countries, inadequate means
devoted to development, budgetary constraints and
restrictions are still major obstacles delaying the
achievement of the Beijing Programme for Action.
We are convinced that an active partnership with
all of the components of society, accompanied by solid
cooperation, are part of the solutions which could make
our efforts successful.
We cannot have equality or development if we do
not have peace and justice. I should like to remind the
international community of the aggression of which my
country is a victim as a result of the coalition of armed
forces of Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi, in flagrant
violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
I wish also to deplore the peculiar silence of some
in the light of the serious human rights violations that
are being perpetrated against women and children. My
country also deplores the absence of an explicit
condemnation of the barbaric murders of 15 Congolese
women, buried alive by Rwandan troops in the eastern
part of my country. Do we have to reach a certain
number of atrocities before they can be considered
flagrant human rights violations?
For us, each and every victim of this evil war —
man, woman or child — is one death too many. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo has always

A/S-23/PV.10

recognized the valuable contribution of women to the
promotion of the ideals of peace and solidarity. That is
why women must be involved in mechanisms for the
prevention and settlement of conflicts, and their
participation in peacekeeping operations must be
strengthened so that they can make available to
humankind their capacity for consensus-building,
conflict resolution and peace-building.
Furthermore, the international community must
enhance its cooperation in the area of conflict
prevention and peacekeeping, and ensure that
awareness-raising measures are taken to sensitize
people to the causes of violence that produce refugees
and displaced persons, in particular women and
children.
Peace is a prerequisite for the effective
implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action.
How can we talk about the status of women and their
access to decision-making posts, of improving their
living conditions through quality health care and
through education, or of their effective participation in
sustainable development efforts at a time when the
country is occupied by foreign aggressors — the
Rwandans, Ugandans and Burundis.
A large part of the population is in the forest,
having fled the fighting, where women and girls suffer
from malnutrition and are the victims of murder and
rape, which leads to unwanted pregnancies and to the
spread of sexually transmitted diseases, especially
HIV/AIDS, since our aggressors come from
neighbouring countries where there is a high incidence
of HIV/AIDS. The spread of the AIDS virus represents
a time bomb for the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and nullifies the efforts made by the
World Health Organization, the United Nations
Population Fund, the United Nations Development
Programme in the combat against the AIDS pandemic.
Since 5 June last, the city of Kisangani has been
the seat of bloody fighting between Rwandan and
Ugandan soldiers, claiming more than 700 lives and
injuring more than 100 among the Congolese civilian
population. These unacceptable battles between two
foreign armies on Congolese territory are continuing in
the presence of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) and despite the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement.

These atrocities have outraged the Congolese
people and women in particular. In the light of the
passive, even ambiguous attitude and the ongoing
silence of the international community, Congolese
women, through me, are calling on the international
community once again and on those who are dedicated
to the ideals of peace and justice to condemn this
aggression, to force the aggressors to leave Congolese
soil and return to their respective territories, so that the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo can
continue with national reconstruction.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Her Excellency Shaikha Hind Bint Sulman Al-Khalifa,
Under-Secretary and Assistant of the Ministry of
Labour and Social Affairs of Bahrain.
Ms. Al-Khalifa (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): It is
an honour for me to represent my country, Bahrain, at
this important international gathering — the special
session of the General Assembly entitled “Women
2000: gender equality, development and peace for the
twenty-first century”.
I should like to convey to all present the regards
of His Highness Prince Hamad Bin Isa Al-Khalifa,
Prince of the State of Bahrain, and his wish for the
successful outcome of this session, with a view to
promoting the prosperity and well-being of the peoples
of the world.
I am pleased also to convey the gratitude and
appreciation of Bahrain to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, for his initiative to hold this special
session and for the attention that has been given by the
United Nations under his tenure to issues related to
women and their role in the contemporary world.
The continued work of the international
community over five decades has achieved an
international consensus on reasserting the right of
women to development and their integration in all
international, regional and national economic and
social activities. The last few decades have witnessed
the holding of a series of world conferences aimed at
promoting the role of women in achieving
comprehensive and sustainable development, beginning
in Mexico in 1975 and through Copenhagen in 1980
and Nairobi in 1985.
The holding of the Fourth World Conference on
Women in Beijing in 1995 under the slogan “Equality,
development and peace”, which this special session has

23

A/S-23/PV.10

been convened to review, was an important world event
and a turning point of great significance to
international efforts to advance the status of women. It
focused on the role of women in development in its
work, Declaration and Platform for Action, in a manner
that made it clear that there can be no development
without the effective participation of women and that
sustainable development can be achieved only through
the improved economic and social status of women.
That call was reiterated at various international
conferences, focusing on the importance of investing in
individuals and on their health, training and education,
and on elaborating programmes of work to enable
women to participate and contribute fully and
effectively to development.
All of these ongoing efforts have promoted the
role of women and have led to the recognition that their
problems are part and parcel of the problems of society
as a whole; that finding a solution to the problems of
women cannot be done in isolation, without dealing
with the problems of society in general; and that
humankind cannot perform at its best without the
participation of women. It has become very clear that
genuine progress and development can be achieved
only through the effective participation of women on
an equal footing with men in all areas.
In conformity with this comprehensive vision,
many charters and international declarations have been
issued that promote the ideals of equality, fairness,
equal opportunity and non-discrimination between men
and women and that have opened new horizons for the
greater participation of women in the comprehensive
development of all societies.
Five years after the holding of the Beijing
Conference, we believe that now is the time for a
careful review of women’s issues in the light of the
great changes our world has witnessed. Those
changes — which include globalization, trade
liberalization and the restructuring of communications
and information technologies — make it clear that
there
are
new
challenges
confronting
the
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action. Those challenges urgently require
a greater awareness of the role of women in the
advancement of society as a whole and in full
partnership with men.
There is also an urgent need to expand
cooperation between Governments, non-governmental

24

organizations and the private sector in order to
implement the Platform for Action and to establish the
necessary mechanisms and the national constitutional
arrangements for follow-up on the achievements of the
Platform and promote the central role of women in
raising future generations to be prepared to deal with
those challenges. This should be done without regard to
regional, economic or national characteristics, the
religious, cultural and historic backgrounds of States,
or the cultural, economic or political regimes they may
adopt.
As a developing State, Bahrain long ago realized
the importance of the role of women in the
development of society, and has made great efforts to
improve the economic and social status of women
within society to open up new opportunities for them to
participate and to secure their present and prepare for
their future. This position has been fully reflected in
the government programme of 1999, in which women’s
issues took their appropriate place. The programme
reasserted the fact that the role of women should not be
limited only to promoting all aspects of development,
but that it should extend to shaping the future and
determining the direction of efforts on behalf of all
society.
The women of Bahrain made new gains when it
was declared that they would be able to participate in
the next session of the consultative council. The lofty
place accorded women in the State of Bahrain was also
reflected in our 1973 Constitution, which pays great
attention to the family as the basis of society in order
to strengthen society and protect its religious and moral
values while also protecting mothers and children. This
was also reasserted through various laws that have
given women full rights on the basis of Shariah law
and its high moral and religious values.
The national report on the status of women in
Bahrain has been submitted to the special session and
includes statistics underscoring the great progress
achieved by Bahrain in the implementation of the 12
basic areas of concern of the Beijing Platform for
Action. The Platform for Action, whose review we are
here to undertake, was based on women’s full
participation in all efforts to develop society. We hope
that the final document of this session will represent
the beginning of a new era in helping developing
countries implement their development policies, secure
their social and economic progress and create a better
future for coming generations.

A/S-23/PV.10

Finally, I would like to thank the Assembly for its
attention and I wish all of you every success in this
meeting.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Ms. Rashida Ali Al-Hamadani, Chairperson of the
Women’s National Committee of Yemen.
Ms. Al-Hamadani (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): It
is my honour and pleasure to address the Assembly on
behalf of the delegation of my country, the Republic of
Yemen, and to convey to you the greetings and thanks
of the women of Yemen for all your efforts in
preparing and convening this gathering. We look
forward at this session to further measures to
strengthen the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action.
We would also like to express our gratitude to
Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his statement, in
which he emphasized the issues of critical concern to
women in the fields of education, health, poverty and
violence. The Secretary-General also emphasized his
concern for women and asserted that women are not
just a part of the world, but that they are the foundation
of its future. The Secretary-General’s statement is
indeed a vivid testimony of the high status of women in
the world today. We hope to see the issues of critical
concern to women among the priorities of the
forthcoming Millennium Summit of the General
Assembly.
Allow me to highlight some of the most
significant achievements to have taken place in the
lives of Yemeni women since the holding of the Beijing
Conference in 1995. Women’s issues have acquired
greater importance and greater emphasis has been
placed on them as a result of the accelerated
international fundamental changes that have placed
women at the centre of the activities of States and put
them in the mainstream of overall development.
Yemen has moved towards democracy and a
multiparty system with political organizations and
parties in civil society and has developed various trade
unions,
and
associations.
Non-governmental
organizations today play an important role in the
follow-up to the Beijing Conference. Among those
organizations are the Association of Yemeni Women,
the Yemeni Women’s Planning Society, the Society for
the Economic Empowerment of Women and the
Society for the Advancement of Women. Some of those
groups are participating in this session.

Women participate positively and concretely at
all political and economical decision-making levels and
take part in elections as both candidates and voters in
urban and rural centres, thus fostering participation and
true competition. They have also become active
members of the executive offices of all the provinces of
the Republic. Statistics show that the number of
women voters taking part in the 1997 parliamentary
elections in Yemen was 1,272,073, as compared to
478,700 in 1993. Recently, the first Yemeni woman
ambassador was appointed to the friendly Kingdom of
the Netherlands. A number of women have also
assumed leading positions in both governmental and
non-governmental bodies, as well as in political
parties.
A department has been established within the
central bureau of statistics to deal with gender-based
statistics. The National Committee for Women, which
was established under the chairmanship of the Prime
Minister to prepare for Yemen’s participation in the
Fourth World Conference on Women, has been
reorganized. This attests to the fact that there is a need
to continue to implement the Platform. The Committee
has been mandated to draw up national policies and
strategies in all the critical areas defined in the Beijing
Declaration and Platform. It is made up of women
representatives from all governmental and nongovernmental sectors. The Committee has recently
drafted the second five-year plan for women, for the
period 2000 to 2005, to be included within the
Government’s five-year plan. Other departments have
been established in all ministries to implement
strategies and policies on behalf of women.
Regarding poverty, the Government of Yemen has
redoubled its efforts to address and reduce poverty; it
has adopted a number of measures and implemented a
number of programmes, including a social safety
network, whose main beneficiaries are women.
The Government has taken action in the field of
education to reduce the high rate of illiteracy among
women and to close the gender gap, especially with
respect to access to education, through a special
strategy for girls. This commenced recently with
support from a number of donor countries and
international organizations led by the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF). The Government has also
formulated a strategy for the elimination of illiteracy
and for adult education, and has enacted legislation
with respect to teachers and teacher training. Here, let

25

A/S-23/PV.10

me recall the old saying: “If you teach a man, you
teach one individual; if you teach a woman, you teach a
whole generation”.

Netherlands for its support for our women’s unit in our
efforts to implement the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action.

Yemen has adopted strategies for the employment
and vocational training of women in keeping with the
requirements of the labour market. It is to be noted that
the constitution and laws of the Republic of Yemen
guarantee the equality of men and women in terms of
both rights and duties.

The Acting President: The next speaker is His
Excellency Mr. Dennie Wilson, Chairman of the
delegation of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.

Turning to the health sector in Yemen, indicators
show a considerable improvement in the level of health
care for women, a reduced rate of maternal mortality,
improved disease-control, reduced fertility rates and an
increased use of contraception.
Having outlined the achievements we have made,
I must also mention the obstacles that we are facing
and that continue to impede the advancement of
women in all fields. Some of these are institutional,
others are geographic or social. Studies of schools and
health-care facilities have shown that there is
inadequate coverage in remote population centres and
that there is a paucity of women teachers and healthcare providers. Among the difficulties hindering the
work of women in rural areas is scattered population
and the lack of infrastructure, such as roads. The lack
of water resources also affects development and the
advancement of women, as well as the ability of
women to acquire and store water to meet the minimal
needs of families.
Let me recall that Yemen is host to a large
number of refugees, most of whom are women and
children who have been obliged by war and armed
conflict in the Horn of Africa to endure difficult social,
health and psychological conditions. In spite of our
limited means and the economic hardships we are
facing, the Government of my country is providing all
necessary social and health-care services and shelter
for those refugees, although those services may not be
optimal. We must emphasize also the need to take all
appropriate measures to alleviate the suffering of
women and girls living under occupation, embargo or
blockade.
We convey our deep gratitude to donor countries,
to international organizations and to all other
contributors to programmes for the advancement of
women and, in particular, for comprehensive
development. Here we wish to single out the
Government of the friendly Kingdom of the

26

Mr. Wilson (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Please permit me on behalf of my Government, to
extend sincere congratulations to Mr. Theo-Ben
Gurirab of Namibia on his election to the presidency of
the General Assembly at its special session on “Women
2000: gender equality, development and peace for the
twenty-first century”.
The stated purpose of this session is to reaffirm
our commitment to the goals and objectives of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, to review
and appraise progress and to identify new challenges
and trends to ensure that commitments for gender
equality, development and peace are fully realized. I
reaffirm
my
Government’s
commitment
to
implementing that vision in areas where we have not
done so, with a sense of urgency.
Five years ago, the landmark Beijing Platform for
Action was designed to place women’s empowerment
and the achievement of gender equality at the core of
development thinking and planning. Further, while five
years ago there was much planning to address the
negative effects of structural adjustment programmes,
my Government had not envisaged the obstacles which
the negative impact of globalization and trade policies
have placed in the path of implementing the high goals
of the Platform for Action.
The well-being of our small island developing
State has been rendered more vulnerable and more at
risk by the adverse effects of globalization than by
natural disasters such as an active volcano or
hurricanes. The case study of the Windward Islands
banana industry is relevant here. The decline in the
banana industry due to challenges from “friendly”
countries and to the subsequent ruling by the World
Trade Organization has impacted not only on women,
who comprise a large segment of the agricultural
sector, but also on large numbers of the population at
large. There is evidence that the living conditions of
rural women have deteriorated, leading to increased
feminization of poverty.

A/S-23/PV.10

Indeed, poverty surveys have shown the
increasing burden of poverty on women in the affected
areas. My Government has recognized the need to
move beyond these surveys, and has moved to provide
credit facilities for women, in addition to subsidies,
public assistance and public employment schemes in
collaboration with the private sector.
My Government is also encouraged by the new
policy direction of the International Monetary Fund
and the World Bank towards poverty reduction
measures at the microlevel, and has introduced a
gender focus in poverty reduction programmes.
My Government notes with grave concern that
HIV/AIDS is having a devastating effect on all regions
of the world. Indeed, statistics provided by the World
Health Organization show that, in the Caribbean,
women in the 15-to-29 age group are most affected.
For developing States without adequate access to
advanced medicine or to financial resources for such
critical health needs, the cooperation of the
international community is essential to assist in efforts
to control and eradicate this scourge. My Government
is committed to collaborating on a regional plan of
action with the health sector to deal with the AIDS
pandemic. In the interim, my Government is allocating
resources for the care of affected persons and for
adolescent reproductive care, as well as for a
strengthened family-life education programme in
schools.
Prior to the provisions in the Beijing Platform for
Action, my Government had passed progressive
legislation eliminating all forms of discrimination
against women, thus establishing gender equality.
Legislation to address the increasing violence against
women within our society was also enacted. This trend
continued as my Government adopted Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) model legislation, and it was
the first in the Caribbean to establish a family court. In
addition, St. Vincent and the Grenadines joined with 16
other regional countries in implementing a training
course in domestic violence intervention and
prevention methodologies for the police and social
workers. This bold step is being done in collaboration
with our social partners.
My Government is committed to implementing
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) and its
Optional Protocol, so as to ensure that the human rights

of women are preserved. Included in these rights is
respect for the diversity of our people’s indigenous
women, women with disabilities and the continued
access to education for pregnant adolescent and young
mothers.
My Government has also embarked on
programmes to address the needs of senior citizens,
bearing in mind the needs of older women.
My Government recognizes the contribution of
women to the development of our country and is
committed to creating an enabling environment to
encourage women to seek and win election to
Parliament. This commitment has been demonstrated
by the selection of a young professional woman to the
House of Parliament as a Senator and as Deputy
Speaker of the House of Assembly. In addition, women
continue to hold top managerial and administrative
positions throughout the public and private sectors.
My Government is aware that, in order to change
the stereotyping of women, the root causes must be
addressed, and it has targeted education as a vehicle for
change. The Government has also embarked on a
textbook series review to address gender bias in the
school curriculum, training in gender-based teaching
strategies, and it has placed gender-sensitive guidance
counsellors in schools. As a result, there is an increase
in the number of girls doing non-traditional subjects at
secondary school level. This is also true for boys. To
further these efforts, my Government will participate in
a regional programme for sex-disaggregated data on
functional literacy, school attendance and subject
selection.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines acknowledges
the importance of the media in disseminating
information on the Beijing Platform for Action. It is
equally concerned that the status of women has been
affected by negative portrayal in the media. The
educational process will provide a new image of
women, but we need cooperation and partnership with
the media. Therefore, in our institutional mechanism,
there is a media representative on the National
Commission on Women.
My Government welcomes the review process,
which is progressing to a successful completion. We
have been taking concrete steps to ensure the elevation
of women and have certainly learned from the best
practices of other countries. We are encouraged to

27

A/S-23/PV.10

pursue a process of continuing review as we implement
the Platform for Action.
In closing, my Government acknowledges the
contribution of civil society, women’s organizations,
the private sector, trade unions and other nongovernmental organizations to the development of our
country. We, therefore, recognize that it is very
imperative to involve all sectors of society at the
national level and to foster close cooperation with
regional and international counterparts if we are to
successfully implement the Beijing Platform for
Action.
The Acting President: I wish once again to
remind representatives of the necessity of remaining
silent in the General Assembly hall. I also wish to
repeat my appeal for brevity and urge delegations to
limit their statements within the seven-minute time
frame, as agreed by the decision of the General
Assembly.
The Acting President: Now it is with great
pleasure that I call on the head of the delegation of the
Republic of Seychelles, Ms. Janick Bru, DirectorGeneral of the Ministry of Social Affairs and
Manpower Development, to address the Assembly.
Ms. Bru (Seychelles): The equality of men and
women in Seychelles has been receiving the attention
of the Government from the time that the Republic was
established some 23 years ago. Seychellois women
have always been recognized as essential partners in
the development of the country.
In addressing gender-related matters, Seychelles
took a somewhat different approach from most
countries by straightaway adopting a mainstreamed
approach. More than a decade ago, a National Gender
Steering Committee, composed of individuals from
Government, the private sector and non-governmental
organizations, was established to promote and maintain
gender equality and equity. Male representation on the
Committee provided a collaborative atmosphere and
ensured that the needs of both males and females were
taken into consideration in the design of national
development programmes.
Seychelles’ constitutional charter of fundamental
human rights and freedoms applies to all citizens,
irrespective of gender. There are, however, specific
regulations within the legislative framework that
protect the civil and human rights of women. Some of
these are, first of all, the right to pass on their
nationality to their children born in Seychelles, even if

28

the husband is a foreigner; secondly, the right to own
property and to inherit; and, thirdly, the right to claim
alimony from a defaulting partner — married or
common-law.
In dealing with women and poverty, the
Government of Seychelles recognized the role of a
good education in empowering men and women
towards achieving a reasonable standard of living. A
policy of ten years compulsory and free education
ensures that all boys and girls have the same access to
education and career opportunities. School enrolment
for children, which presently stands at 100 per cent,
has guaranteed that all girls are given the essential
foundation for making important life choices. Last year
46 per cent of scholarships for professional training
went to women.
With the understanding that the human resource
is the main wealth of the country, the Ministry of
Social Affairs and Manpower Development and the
Ministry of Education work towards removing
stereotypes through education, sensitization and career
counselling for young people. Teaching materials have
been investigated to remove stereotypes, and teachers
have been systematically put through gender
sensitization programmes.
Conscious of the importance of the health of
citizens and the impact of health-care costs on the
economy, the Government has taken steps to offer
health-care services free at the point of service.
Maternity health care is provided in all districts, and
indicators show that prenatal care coverage is at 98
per cent.
Women also play a crucial role in national
decision-making. Seychellois women were fully
involved in the struggle for independence and are still
politically active. Twenty-one per cent of the elected
and nominated members of the National Assembly, and
25 per cent of the Cabinet of Ministers, are women.
Recent survey figures show that at grass-roots levels,
women are actually more active than men. Women
constitute 60 per cent of local government counsellors.
We are presently giving much attention to the
issue of domestic violence and violence against
women. Concerted efforts in public sensitization and
education have been most effective in replacing a
tolerant and passive attitude with condemnation and a
determination to break the recurring cycle. A national
family tribunal, which was set up two years ago, is
considered an important step in dealing with domestic
violence and the rights of women and children.

A/S-23/PV.10

Laws and policies have contributed to the
advancement of women in Seychelles. However,
stereotyping still exists; most women are still found in
lower-paid jobs; and women still represent the majority
of victims in domestic abuse. We believe that these
problems can be traced to inherited and accepted
cultural patterns of behaviour, which are often referred
to as “norms”, even though they are, if viewed
objectively, abnormal: patterns which are known to be
resistant to change, since they are often imbedded deep
in the human psyche. Changing them will require time
and continued and persistent effort.
It seems appropriate at this point to insert a few
questions about the role of males in all this. What
about their needs in this world of redefined gender
roles? What should be done to prepare them to be
supportive and receptive, not just benignly accepting
and tolerant?
In conclusion, we note that it is imperative for
societies to establish an environment that promotes the
self-esteem, confidence and independence of the
female half of the population. Fundamental to this are a
legal framework which protects the human rights of all
individuals equally and an educational system which
contributes to the emancipation of all capable
individuals. We believe that gender should not be
treated as a separate national issue, but that it should be
integrated in the whole system. Only in that way can
women overcome the handicaps imposed by centuries
of unequal treatment and boldly fulfil their human
potential.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Mrs. Rosleyn Tor, Director of Women’s Affairs of
Vanuatu.
Mrs. Tor (Vanuatu): My delegation and I bring
greetings from the Government and the people of
Vanuatu, a small nation in the South-West Pacific.
Allow me to congratulate Mr. Gurirab on his
appointment as President of the General Assembly at
this session and the Bureau for the efficient way in
which they have been managing this important session
throughout this week.
It is now five years since we met in Beijing and
made our commitment with regard to the
implementation of the 12 areas of concern to women
and girls around the globe. We are meeting this week to
discuss and deliberate on what we have accomplished
and to share our experiences, hopes and aspirations. We

are reaffirming our commitment to the principles and
general framework for the achievement of equality,
development and peace as contained in the Beijing
Platform for Action, and the Programmes of Action of
Copenhagen, Cairo, Barbados and Rio.
Vanuatu’s primary action after the Beijing
Conference was to hold a meeting of governmental and
non-governmental organizations to review and reprioritize the Beijing Platform for Action according to
our needs and resources and to translate it into simple
English. It was then translated to Bislama, the lingua
franca, so that the people could understand, and
entitled “Working together for women”.
The Human Poverty Index of Pacific island
countries shows Vanuatu to be the third to last of the
least developed countries. As such, Vanuatu believes
that the key to development and success is education,
but because of limited financial and human resources,
education in Vanuatu is neither compulsory nor free.
Since the Beijing Conference, the number of primary
and secondary schools has increased, as has the number
of children. However, of the total number of children in
primary schools, less than a third find a place in the
secondary school and even fewer continue to the
tertiary level. Both the Government and nongovernmental
organizations
have
established
vocational schools in the various provinces to cater for
the needs of drop-outs, or what we call “push-outs”,
but most of these cater for males. Women need to be
better educated and better informed so that they can get
out of their current plight.
But given that there are 105 languages, excluding
dialects, three official languages — English, French
and Bislama — that the schools are scattered over
some 80 islands, that financial, material and human
resources are scarce and that communication is
difficult, the need remains.
To address the issue of poverty and economic
empowerment for women, in 1996 Vanuatu embarked
on a microfinance scheme for disadvantaged women.
The first 20 women took out their loans in February
1997, with a bank balance of zero. I am pleased to
report that by May 2000, the membership had grown to
435 members, with savings of over $3,000. The demand
for such schemes is high, but resources are few.
A successful nation is a healthy nation. Since the
Beijing Conference in 1995, Vanuatu has made some
progress in improving the health of women. Infant and

29

A/S-23/PV.10

maternal mortality has decreased and life expectancy
for women has risen. This has come as the result of
cooperative efforts by both governmental and nongovernmental organizations, such as the Vanuatu
Family Health Association, the Vanuatu National
Council of Women, the Vanuatu Women’s Centre and
the Vanuatu Society for the Disabled.
Vanuatu is fortunate that it is still free from the
HIV/AIDS virus. But mosquito-borne diseases such as
malaria and dengue fever and other diseases such as
cervical and breast cancer need much work and
financial and human resources if we are to eradicate
them from the country.
Because of the rising incidence of domestic
violence, in 1992 Vanuatu set up the Women’s Centre,
with the assistance of the Australian Women in
Development Association, to cater for victims of
domestic violence. It offers counselling, advice and
temporary shelter to victims. It works closely with
government departments, the police and the Fiji Crisis
Centre to provide community education and training.
There has been a decrease in violence in the past
three years, but more still needs to be done. In March
1995, Vanuatu ratified the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women. A committee consisting of governmental and
non-governmental organizations was set up to monitor
its progress, and in 1998 a family protection bill was
drafted. Among other things, the bill proposes to
preserve and promote harmonious relationships,
prevent domestic violence at all levels of society,
ensure effective legal protection for victims of
domestic violence and provide for the punishment of
any or all persons who commit acts of domestic
violence.
Though the draft bill has more publicity
awareness workshops and consultations than any other
in the history of Vanuatu, the question remains as to
whether the 52 members of Parliament, all men, will
pass it in the August 2000 parliamentary session.
Vanuatu has made some progress in having
women in decision-making. We now have women in
the posts of Auditor General, Public Prosecutor and
Chief Registrar and in eight directorships. We have no
women members of Parliament in the current
Government, although we had one in the previous
Government.

30

The
Government
embarked
on
the
Comprehensive Reform Programme in June 1997. One
of the major issues was gender equality in all spheres
of life. Through the Programme, various mechanisms
were set up to address this issue. The Department of
Women’s Affairs became an autonomous department
under the portfolio of the Prime Minister. A Gender
Planner and Equity Officer were appointed and a public
service senior women’s network was set up to find
ways and means of addressing these imbalances. Nongovernmental organizations have worked together with
Government in lobbying various sectors of the
community and the public sector at large to effect this
change.
Women’s rights are human rights. Chapter 5 of
Vanuatu’s Constitution provides for equal treatment
under the law. However, the implementation is still far
from satisfactory. Through the Government’s
Comprehensive Reform Programme, the Good
Governance Project, the Vanuatu Women In Politics
organization and the assistance of the University of the
South Pacific, Port Vila centre, we have reviewed
Vanuatu’s legislation to ensure that it is entirely
gender-based. The recommendations for amendments
are laid before the authorities concerned.
Through the assistance of the Australian
Government’s overseas aid programme AusAID,
Vanuatu has introduced a system in the Institut
National Technique de Vanuatu, whereby girls may
enter such non-traditional areas as mechanics,
electronics, construction and carpentry. The project has
still to be reviewed to ascertain its failure or success.
In conclusion, I would like to say this on behalf
of the women of Vanuatu. The script was written and
the stage set in 1946 for the play entitled The
Promotion of Women’s Rights. Fifty-four years later, we
are still rehearsing our respective roles. It is now high
time to get up on stage and perform the play. To do
this, developing and underdeveloped countries look to
the international community of developed nations to
ensure that we all know our roles and responsibilities
in the play.
Vanuatu women’s theme is “Partnership for the
New Millennium”. We would like to extend it to all
participants in this special session. Let us all continue
to work together for the development of women
towards a better standard of living, a better, healthier
world and for gender equality, development and peace.

A/S-23/PV.10

The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Ravan Farhâdi, Chairman of the
delegation of Afghanistan.

guards for having left their homes without being
accompanied by a male family member. Medical care is
also restricted for women.

Mr. Farhâdi (Afghanistan) (spoke in French): It
is with bitter regret that I make this statement on behalf
of the Islamic State of Afghanistan. Unlike most other
representatives who have spoken on behalf of their
countries, I have no encouraging information on
progress made in the advancement of women and in the
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action of 15 September 1995. The war
imposed on the Afghan people by our neighbour to the
south has in fact had a tragic impact on the civilian
population, in particular on women and children.

Another negative aspect of the occupation of
Afghan territory by the Taliban mercenaries is the
prohibition of education for women and girls. Dozens
of elementary and high schools for girls have been
closed by the Taliban. It should be noted that
Afghanistan launched public education for girls in the
1920s. In 1937, the establishment of the first girls’ high
school in Kabul was followed by others. In the cities
and semi-urban areas of Afghanistan, progress was
being made in women’s education, as in other Muslim
countries throughout the world.

We believe that world conferences offer Member
States a gathering place where they can undertake joint
initiatives to resolve their common problems. That is
why we take this opportunity to explain to the
Assembly, which has met in special session to discuss
gender equality, development and peace for the twentyfirst century, the problems of Afghan women and girls
in that part of the territory of Afghanistan which is
under the occupation of mercenaries known as the
Taliban, who have been recruited and sent to my
country by Inter-Services Intelligence, the Pakistani
secret service agency.

Armed conflict inflicts particular suffering on
women and children. The current situation of women in
Afghanistan clearly illustrates that fact. In the forced
displacement of the Afghan population by the Taliban
in July 1999, over two thirds of refugees were women
and children. Displaced girls were victims of
“marriages” forced upon them by the Taliban. Women
were separated from the men of their own families. All
of these barbaric acts perpetrated by the Taliban have
been reported by human rights organizations, including
Mr. Kamal Hossain, the Special Rapporteur of the
Commission on Human Rights on the situation of
human rights in Afghanistan.

Ever since the arrival of the Taliban in the
territories which they and their extremist and
obscurantist allies now occupy, women have been
deprived of their right to work. Ever-deepening poverty
prevails in a growing number of urban families,
especially in Kabul, where, since September 1996, over
40,000 working widows have lost their employment, by
which they earned the livings with which they
supported their families.
Mr. Stanislaus (Grenada), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
Violence is rampant against women under the
occupation of the Taliban extremist mercenaries.
Widespread and systematic restrictions, tantamount to
discrimination, have been imposed on women and girls
in these areas through policies enacted by decree.
These policies are implemented by the notorious socalled Ministry for the Prevention of Vice and the
Promotion of Virtue. According to many witnesses,
restrictions have been imposed against women through
cruel, degrading and inhuman punishment. Some
women have even been publicly beaten by Taliban

We are firmly convinced that the present crisis in
Afghanistan, imposed by Pakistan for hegemonic
purposes, should be condemned by the international
community. Pakistan must end its support for and
sending of extremist mercenaries who, for the most
part, are from misogynist political groups that do not
belong to the present and which do not follow the true
tenets of the holy religion of Islam. Foreign military
forces and the so-called volunteer fighters sent to
Afghanistan by Pakistan must immediately leave
Afghanistan. Afghans should be allowed to resolve
their own problems by peaceful means under the
auspices of the United Nations.
With a view to strengthening solidarity
throughout the world with Afghan women, we appeal
to the international community to put pressure on the
Pakistani military junta to stop waging this
expansionist war in Afghanistan. The Afghan people,
like all peoples of the world, have a right to live in
peace. The human rights of women and children can be
respected only in a peaceful and secure situation.

31

A/S-23/PV.10

Respect for human rights, including the rights of
women and girls, should be an essential component of
the peace agreement between the parties and must be
part of any future arrangement.
I must point out that girls’ schools and high
schools are still open in the free zones in the north-east
part of Afghanistan, areas that are administered by the
Islamic State of Afghanistan. Since February 2000,
there has been a women’s association working for the
advancement of the status of women, whose members
are teachers in girls’ schools.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that in
order to ensure the advancement and the empowerment
of women throughout the world, political will and the
commitments undertaken are essential for gender
equality, development and peace to become realities.
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women provides a legal
framework which can be used for the implementation
of the Beijing Platform for Action.
The Acting President: I call on the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ms. Lidija
Topic.
Ms. Topic (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I join the
previous speakers in congratulating Mr. Gurirab on his
assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly
at this important session. It is my great honour to
address this special session on behalf of my delegation.
As one of the countries participating in the Fourth
World Conference on Women in Beijing, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, along with the rest of the world
community, expressed full commitment to the Beijing
Platform for Action adopted by the Conference.
Although my country was in the midst of conflict in
September of 1995, today we can still assess gains
made during the past five years.
Only a few months after the adoption of the
Beijing Declaration, the Dayton Peace Agreement was
brokered. As was the common practice during the
peace agreement negotiations, not a single woman
participated on either side of the negotiation table.
It was only recently that we began to address the
implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action, due
to the end of the war and the post-conflict rebuilding of
society. As the first step, the Beijing Declaration has
been translated into the languages of Bosnia and

32

Herzegovina, which has enabled wider distribution and
outreach of the document and its principles.
Today in Bosnia and Herzegovina women hold 29
per cent of the seats in the house of representatives,
which places Bosnia and Herzegovina at the top of the
scale regarding the participation of women in
parliament. Here I recognize the positive role played
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) in implementing the Rules of the
Temporary Electoral Commission, which called for one
third of the candidates nominated to be female and
introduced the requirement that three of the first ten
candidates on election lists have to be women. Only a
few years earlier, in 1996 and 1997, women held 2 per
cent and 5 per cent, respectively, of the seats in the
house of representatives. However, women are
underrepresented at all other levels in government
bodies.
In coordination with the OSCE Department for
Democratization, women in parliaments have initiated
the establishment of permanent commissions within the
parliaments to manage the issues of the promotion of
the status of women, implementation of the Platform
for Action and the launching of the initiative for
creating conditions for the establishment of
government services. With all these goals in mind, the
Government of the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina has recently opened the Centre for Gender
Equality.
Women in Bosnia and Herzegovina make up 40
per cent of the workforce. The unemployment rate in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is high at 40 per cent, and 40
per cent of the unemployed are women.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina girls have the same
access to education as boys. Slightly more male
students enrol in university, but slightly more female
students graduate from university.
Women in Bosnia and Herzegovina have fed their
families when there was no food. Women have taken
their babies for vaccination when leaving the safety of
their basement shelter was a mortal danger. Women
have educated their children when they could not reach
schools. Women from Srebrenica are still searching for
approximately 10,000 missing fathers, brothers,
husbands and other members of their families. Women
stand as the true heroes of the society in Bosnia and
Herzegovina — our grandmothers, mothers and

A/S-23/PV.10

daughters; Muslim, Orthodox, Catholic, Jewish and
other nationalities.
Never again should rape as a weapon of war go
unpunished. The International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia has recognized rape as a crime against
humanity, and the Statute of the International Criminal
Court has designated physical abuse of women a crime
against humanity. The delegation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the Preparatory Commission for the
International Criminal Court played a unique and
significant role in including, for the first time, genderbased crimes in the Statute.
The Council of Europe, in cooperation with the
United Nations Office for Human Rights and other
partners, organized a conference in Bosnia and
Herzegovina entitled “Trafficking in Human Beings for
the Purpose of Sexual Exploitation”. The conference
shed light on the scope of the placement of women and
girls in appalling conditions of slavery and servitude.
We, the Governments, have to work together to
identify and to protect victims. Rather than prosecuting
the victims, we must instead prosecute the traffickers.
We have to commit ourselves to undertaking all action
necessary to combat that transnational crime and to
understand the causes of trafficking such as economic
impoverishment and disruption of social norms, both
consequences of societies in transition. Bosnia and
Herzegovina fully supports the work of the Ad Hoc
Committee for preparation of the two protocols to the
convention against transnational organized crime,
hoping that these important instruments will soon be
finalized.
Full implementation of the human rights of
women and of the girl child, as an integral part of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms, must be
encapsulated into gender-sensitive policies and
programmes, including development at all levels, that
will foster the empowerment and advancement of
women.
Tireless international efforts and the work of local
non-governmental organizations to achieve gender
equality have played a significant part in empowering
women. In recent years the determination of civil
society and of the non-governmental organization
community in my country have helped to provide
women with counselling, support and protection. A
domestic violence information hotline has also been set
up.

We believe that gender focus is more than just an
ideological and moral issue. In our view, the common
ground needed for progress is the promotion of the
status of women in order to ensure full equality. This
will also further enhance society as a whole, regardless
of ethnicity, culture or religion.
The full realization of women’s rights is not a
gender issue but a human issue. Women and girl
children represent the most vulnerable sector of
society, and it must be our common objective to ensure
an empowering environment based on full rights for all
women.
The Acting President: I give the floor to Her
Excellency Mrs. Mary Note, Chairperson of the
delegation of the Marshall Islands.
Mrs. Note (Marshall Islands): On behalf of my
delegation, I wish to convey greetings from the
President, the Government and the peoples of the
Republic of the Marshall Islands to this twenty-third
special session of the General Assembly entitled
“Women 2000: gender, equality, development and
peace for the twenty-first century”. My delegation
commends the organization of this special session.
In 1995, at the historic Fourth World Conference
on Women, held at Beijing, the Marshall Islands joined
187 other Member nations in adopting the Beijing
Platform for Action for the advancement of women.
The Conference recognized the numerous impediments
to development facing women around the world and
provided a sound basis for positive action for gender
equality and for the social, economic and political
empowerment of women worldwide.
The Conference highlighted critical areas and
factors inhibiting women’s empowerment. Areas of
focus included poverty alleviation; equality in
education; health care; gender-based violence; armed
conflicts; limited access to economic resources;
women’s marginal role in power-sharing and decisionmaking; and persistent discrimination against, and
violation of the human rights of, women and the girl
child.
Five years later, women around the world still
face many constraints, but we should never give up. We
have much to gain from each other’s experiences. Let
us all move forward to further advance the Beijing + 5
agenda and to achieve the goals we all share, as called
for by the Platform for Action. At the same time, let us

33

A/S-23/PV.10

all celebrate those achievements we have registered
thus far; the light at the end of the tunnel is much
brighter. Indeed, we want a world in full compliance
with Beijing+5.
As we begin the twenty-first century, our small
island nation, along with all developing countries, is
challenged by fragile economic and institutional
structures which affect our lives and influence our
actions. The inadequate representation of women in our
Government, the paucity of employment opportunities
for women, materialism and waste, alcoholism and
abuse, the breakdown of the support structure from the
extended family, and deteriorating traditional cultures
and practices are among some of the other challenges
facing us today.
The Marshall Islands recognizes the important
role and potential of women as an integral part of the
overall development of the country, and respect for
their social status has long been embedded in the
traditions, cultural thinking and life of the peaceful
people of this country. The active and equal
participation of women in national development has
never been alien to the people or the Government, and
yet it is felt that programmes aimed at providing
women with opportunities for education, involvement
in the political process and in productive economic
activities, and developing their cultural awareness are
still inadequate and limited. Furthermore, the national
Government recognizes that the increased and active
involvement of women in the economic, political and
social life of the country is most desirable and
advantageous to the entire nation.
In addition to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, the Government is seriously considering, in the
not-too-distant future, acceding to the other human
rights instruments, including the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, among other international legal instruments.
As guaranteed under the Constitution of the
Republic of the Marshall Islands, women and men have
equal rights to vote and to seek and hold public office.
We are experiencing an increase in the interest of
women seeking public office, as evidenced in our
national and local elections. We are also seeing more
women in higher-level posts in the public service
sector, as well as entering the private sector.
The women of the Marshall Islands, in
collaboration with our Government, non-governmental

34

organizations, regional organizations, international
organizations and United Nations agencies, are
committed to mainstreaming gender issues. With the
adoption of our National Women’s Policy, women’s
groups are active partners in the sustainable
development programmes in our country.
The Government has taken significant steps and
measures to advance the status of women by
formulating policies to involve women as equal
partners at all levels, upgrading their skills and training
to increase their employment opportunities, and to
strengthen the coordination of women’s activities. The
formulation of the National Population and
Development Policy; the National Youth Policy; the
National Women’s Policy; the Food, Nutrition and
Agriculture Policy; and, finally, preparations for the
revitalization and reorganization of the National
Women’s Council are all convincing indications of the
Government’s serious commitment to strengthen the
role of women in nation-building and to protect their
rights.
To seal our commitment for the development of
Marshallese women, a National Women’s Convention
is scheduled for September 2000, at which women
from all over the Marshall Islands will review the
National Women’s Policy and map our course of action
in the twenty-first century. I would like to invite the
international community to join us in our endeavour.
I would be remiss if I did not touch upon the
essence of empowering women, and that is education.
There is a well-known proverb which says,
“If you educate a man, you educate a
person, but if you educate a woman, you educate
a whole family and, eventually, the whole world.”
Indeed, without a sound population and a base of
educated women in the population workforce structure,
no society can liberate itself economically, politically
or socially. The Marshall Islands highly values
education, and women are fortunate to have equal
access to education and training opportunities.
The promise of significant progress for women
through the continued implementation of the Platform
for Action can become a reality through genuine efforts
by all stakeholders. This includes the commitment of
new and additional resources from the international
community, along with specific commitments by
national and regional organizations and Governments.

A/S-23/PV.10

It is therefore the hope and expectation of the
Government of the Marshall Islands that the
international community will pledge the necessary
financial and technical resources necessary to
implement the Platform for Action and the further
initiatives resulting from this Conference.
In conclusion, I wish to acknowledge the
assistance and contribution accorded to the Marshall
Islands by our international development partners
towards the advancement of women. The Marshall
Islands remains committed to the Platform for Action,
is prepared to meet the challenges outlined by this
session and anticipates progress towards equity,
development and peace.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Her Excellency Mrs. Palanitina Toelupe, Assistant
Secretary of the Ministry of Women’s Affairs of
Samoa.
Mrs. Toelupe (Samoa): I am indeed deeply
honoured to address this gathering on behalf of the
Government and people of Samoa on the occasion of
the twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly.
By the Charter of the United Nations
Organization we the peoples of the United Nations
once again reaffirm at this great gathering our faith in
fundamental human rights and freedoms, the dignity
and worth of the human person and the equal rights of
men and women of all nations large and small.
Samoa is an independent, sovereign State in the
Pacific region. Our culture is central to our way of life.
Our people’s bond with the land and sea is founded on
our traditional values and strong Christian principles,
which motivate and sustain us physically and
spiritually.
Our Government believes that human rights and
freedoms are best nurtured in the context of our culture
and traditions. In this respect, the Constitution of
Samoa, inspired by the principles embodied in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, represents a
strong commitment to human rights and freedoms, with
particular reference to equality of opportunity for all
citizens, irrespective of gender.
The traditional Fa’a-Samoa, the Samoan way of
life, recognizes the paramount value of every Samoan
person, as he or she is an heir to a family chiefly title,
land and the Samoan language.

The Government of Samoa’s economic strategy
statement for the period 2000 to 2001 emphasizes in its
vision the essence of partnership for a prosperous
society, hence acknowledging women as equal partners
in every way. Women in Samoa have equal access to
education
and
health
services,
employment
opportunities, the protection of laws and to decisionmaking positions at all levels within the family,
community and Government. There has always been
recognition and support in Samoa of the multiple roles
women perform in the home, community, church and
their professions.
The establishment of the Ministry of Women’s
Affairs by an act of Parliament in 1990 demonstrates
the high regard that the Government of Samoa has for
its women and for their contribution to the
development of Samoa economically, socially,
politically and spiritually. Samoa is one of the few
countries in the world that has a national holiday for
women — the Monday after Mother’s Sunday each
year. This year marks the tenth anniversary since its
inception.
The establishment of the Ministry of Women’s
Affairs was also an important milestone towards laying
the foundation of ensuring equal opportunities for
women and children in all areas of the Samoan society.
This was further strengthened when Samoa ratified the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, in 1992, and the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, in 1994.
In compliance with the commitments that Samoa
has agreed to undertake by ratifying relevant regional
agreements and international conventions, a national
policy for the women of Samoa for the period 2000 to
2004 has been prepared and awaits approval by the
cabinet. The vision of the national policy is clear: for
all women of Samoa to be productive contributors to,
as well as full beneficiaries of, national development
for the attainment of quality of life for all. Its
undertaking is distinct: to develop and enhance the
capacity of the women of Samoa in all spheres in
partnership with stakeholders, ensuring in particular
that women are well informed of their human rights, as
well as ways and means of accessing needed services
and resources. We believe that it is important to
reaffirm our basic human rights and well-being through
our national policy for the women of Samoa.

35

A/S-23/PV.10

The Ministry of Women’s Affairs corporate plan
for the period 2000 to 2003 identifies key areas in both
the Beijing Platform for Action and the 1994 Pacific
Platform for Action, to which the Government of
Samoa has given priority for implementation in
partnership with non-governmental organizations.
The advancement of women in Samoa has been
facilitated by the work of many governmental and nongovernmental organizations, in particular those that
have been instrumental in advocating human rights in
relation to violence against women and the rights of the
child.
In 1995, the regional “Healthy Islands”
declaration advocated the health promotion concept
that promotes healthy settings where people live and
congregate. In this connection, the “Healthy Islands”
declaration further reaffirms the value given by the
women of Samoa to healthy homes and healthy
villages, and focuses on wellness as an asset. We
believe that this is a fundamental entry point to both
the success of women’s advancement in all areas, as
well as the practical translation of the Beijing Platform
for Action.
We do not pretend to have fully implemented the
critical areas of the Beijing Platform for Action but, as
we mentioned earlier, we have prioritized areas of
concern in accordance with our country’s realities. We
believe that the emphasis that our Government has
given to improving health and education in Samoa will
further enhance the efforts of all women and men in
translating the Beijing Platform for Action into
expected outcomes.
While it is universally recognized that the
average human being can only perform or accomplish
so much, the ability of women to fulfil their roles as
mothers, wives, caregivers, community developers and
career women is an exceptional feat. Such
extraordinary yet basic realities, however, are not
always accorded due recognition and appreciation, as
they are often overshadowed by issues surrounding the
critical areas of concern in the Beijing Platform for
Action.
Therefore, to all the women around the world we
say: we celebrate your achievements to date. Your
courage and commitments to the well-being of the
people of the world is acknowledged with the utmost
respect and admiration.

36

The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Vinci Neil Clodumar, Chairman of
the delegation of Nauru.
Mr. Clodumar (Nauru): I have the honour to
speak today on behalf of SOPAC, the South Pacific
Member States — Australia, Fiji, the Marshall Islands
the Federated States of Micronesia, New Zealand,
Papua New Guinea, Samoa, the Solomon Islands,
Tonga, Vanuatu and my own country, Nauru — as well
as on behalf of the observer States of the Pacific that
are present at this meeting — Tuvalu and the Cook
Islands.
Our Governments welcome this opportunity to
reaffirm our commitment to the implementation of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, and the
national commitments we made at Beijing.
The South Pacific region, and women in the
region, face unique challenges in achieving the goals of
Beijing. The particular economic and environmental
vulnerability of the island nations in the region
influence strategies for achieving gender equality,
peace and development.
It is also a region of remarkable diversity of
culture, history, language and geography. The
challenges of responding to the needs of women and
girls in diverse, dispersed and often isolated
communities
require
innovative
policies
and
programmes.
The health and education of women and girls are
of particular importance for the Pacific. Within the
region there has long been recognition of the
connection between the health and well-being of
women and the overall economic and social growth and
development of countries. Improving women’s
participation in in-house promotion, access to quality
health care and reproductive and sexual health services
continues to be a priority area for action in the region.
Of particular concern are continued high rates of noncommunicable diseases, maternal deaths and related
illnesses among women in most island countries. The
basic health needs of women must be addressed if
women are to contribute to their maximum potential at
all levels, from the family to the region and beyond.
Since the Fourth World Conference for Women,
held at Beijing, one of the most alarming and
devastating new trends has been the global AIDS
epidemic. Urgent strategies, including to enhance

A/S-23/PV.10

international cooperation, must be adopted immediately
to combat this growing epidemic. Education and
recognition of the specific situation of women and girls
must form an essential part of these strategies.
A key achievement in the implementation of the
Platform has been the growing recognition that
violence against women is both a health and a human
rights issue. The problem of domestic violence is one
that many countries from our region have taken steps to
address, particularly through education and public
awareness to change attitudes surrounding domestic
violence. There are also a number of successful
community-based official development assistance
projects addressing domestic violence, including many
where services are delivered by non-governmental
organizations.
Men and women must be equal partners in
contributing to and benefiting from sustainable peoplecentred development. The minimum requirement to
achieve this is equal access to basic needs, resources,
services, education and training, taking into account
the diverse circumstances of women, such as those of
women with disabilities.
The importance for all societies of the education
of women and girls cannot be overstated. Education
provides women with options and enables them to
make choices. While the past five years have seen
significant improvements in girls’ access to formal
education in the Pacific, the range of subjects of study
available to girls remains limited. A particular
challenge for the small island developing States of the
Pacific is meeting the needs and aspirations of their
young women as they seek further tertiary training and,
eventually, employment.
The environmental vulnerability of small island
developing States, as well as their contribution to
global sustainability, makes women’s involvement in
this area particularly important. Further strategies must
be adopted to ensure that women participate fully in
policy and decision-making on matters relating to their
environment. There is a chronic lack of access to new
and emerging technologies in the Pacific, and this is
felt even more acutely by women. Since Beijing, new
technologies such as the Internet have been identified
as potentially powerful tools for empowering women.
The Internet provides a powerful tool for women
entrepreneurs in isolated areas such as the Pacific,
enabling them to access hitherto unattainable markets

for their products. There are already examples of this,
including the export of coconut oils and soaps
produced by a group of women in Samoa. The
entrepreneurial skills of Pacific women are a key
resource for the region. In particular, strategies that
provide women entrepreneurs with credit and support
have been particularly successful and have highlighted
the positive impact of the full participation of women
in economic life across a range of communities, as well
as enabling them to harness the benefits of
globalization.
Since Beijing, increased attention has been paid
to the impact of armed conflict on women and on girls.
Conflict impedes progress towards full implementation
of the Platform and places women and girls at
particular risk of violations of their human rights.
Increased participation of women and adherence to
democratic principles are essential to conflictresolution and to post-conflict reconstruction.
If we are to achieve our objective of gender
equality, then we must put in place supportive domestic
environments which protect the rights of women.
Adherence to the principles of accountability,
transparency and the rule of law promotes good
governance when defining the interests of citizens and
groups in society, including women. Effective and
targeted development assistance can support the
development of the strong institutional frameworks
necessary for good governance. Respect for democratic
institutions is a value shared by the countries in our
group and lies at the heart of this.
Since 1995, the Platform has been used by
countries in the Pacific to guide national action towards
empowering women and achieving their equality. Many
countries have produced national action plans and have
developed national machineries for women, including
the establishment of government ministries dealing
with women’s affairs. The countries of the region
recognize the need for cooperation at the regional level
to assist Governments to implement and monitor the
Platform and their respective national action plans.
Gender mainstreaming has been an effective
strategy for Pacific island countries in making progress
since Beijing, and it must be supported. Further
capacity-building at all levels, including in partnership
with non-governmental organizations and United
Nations agencies working in the region, is essential for
implementing the Platform. In measuring progress for

37

A/S-23/PV.10

women in the region, the need for assistance and
technical cooperation has been particularly highlighted.
Sex-disaggregated data across all areas of society must
be collected to ensure that policies and programmes are
designed to address the specific needs of women within
their families and their communities.
Finally, our Governments also wish to
acknowledge the significant contribution of nongovernmental organizations as partners in the
implementation of the Platform. This spirit of
partnership and teamwork, and our support for their
participation in this review process, is evidenced by the
significant number of non-governmental members on
South Pacific delegations to this special session.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Mrs. Kathryn Hauwa Hoomkwap, representative of the
observer delegation of the Holy See.
Mrs. Hoomkwap (Holy See): The Holy See
delegation has participated actively in the negotiations
leading to this special session of the General Assembly,
a session which has raised issues of critical importance
to the lives of millions of women worldwide, and
which has been evaluating the progress that has been
made since the Fourth World Conference on Women.
The living heart of the initiatives called for in the
Beijing Platform for Action corresponds to the
multiplicity of services the Catholic Church has
historically provided to women, demonstrating in
action as well as in words its belief in the importance
of educating girls and women and of access for women
to education and the basic social services which they
need to pursue their own lives and family goals. The
Platform’s sections on the needs of women in poverty,
on ending violence against women and on education,
employment, land, capital and technology coincide
with the Church’s own mission, since they begin to
speak of the hope which Pope John Paul II has
eloquently summed up in his exhortation to “be not
afraid”.
But, Mr. Acting President, the truth is that I am
afraid, as are many of my sisters throughout the world.
As a wife and mother, I, and my delegation, fear for the
health and well-being of children in Africa, where the
continued prevalence of diseases like malaria, guinea
worm diseases, schistosomiasis, along with the
growing HIV/AIDS pandemic, fells so many of our
children. We worry about the number of people,

38

especially the children, who suffer from malnutrition in
a world with so much food.
The Holy See is extremely concerned about the
growing conflicts and the people who find themselves
torn from their homes and families by war and
senseless turmoil. As a mother of children, I and my
delegation, are greatly worried about those who cannot
read or write and who continue to be enslaved by
ignorance and a lack of knowledge in a world that
seems to thrive on technology and information.
For these reasons, my delegation strongly
supports the document’s provisions condemning all
forms of violence against women, upholding women’s
rights to economic and political empowerment, its
measures against poverty, and its references — brief
though they are — to high mortality rates among girls
and women, due both to chronic illness and to
widespread infections, including tropical diseases. My
delegation is particularly pleased to see in the final
document a clear acknowledgement of the need of all
women for access to basic social services, including
education, clean water, adequate nutrition and safe
sanitation.
However, in the end, the “Women 2000”
document, like the Beijing Platform, would emphasize,
seemingly endlessly, one issue — sexual and
reproductive health — to the detriment of a holistic
view of the health of women and their families, which
is so desperately needed to alleviate women’s fears.
This special session has given us an opportunity,
not only to evaluate the past, but also to plan for the
future; and my delegation and I must ask if we have
accomplished all that we set out to do. We live in a
changing world in which many people are afraid and in
which many people have lost hope. The international
community must work intensely to calm those fears
through the effective actions of the United Nations. For
all of us to cease to be afraid, we must proceed with
full and complete human development — not only
social and economic, but also spiritual.
The Holy See renews its pledge to help find an
end to hunger, to find a way towards educational
opportunities for all, towards remedy and comfort for
the suffering caused by sickness and disease, and
through these means to continually seek to extinguish
the fear that keeps us from celebrating life as the gift
that it is.

A/S-23/PV.10

“Be not afraid” is not an empty phrase; it is a
message that needs to be concretized by doing all that
we can to lead every woman and her family to the
threshold of hope.
In conclusion, the Holy See delegation wishes to
state that nothing that the Holy See has done in the
“Women 2000” process should be understood as an
endorsement of concepts it does not support for moral
reasons. Nothing is to be understood to imply that the
Holy See endorses abortion or has in any way changed
its
moral
position
concerning
abortion
or
contraceptives. The Holy See reaffirms its belief that
life begins at conception and that every human life
must be protected from the earliest moments to the end
of the life cycle.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Her Excellency Mrs. Patricia Schulz, Head of the
Federal Office for Equality Between Women and Men
of Switzerland.
Mrs. Schulz (Switzerland) (spoke in French): It
is with very mixed feelings that I take the floor at
nearly the end of this session. Sadness, perplexity, joy
and hope are all mixed up within me. We have had an
opportunity in this Beijing+5 process; have we
succeeded in grasping it or have we wasted it?
I will speak first about the sadness. Five years
after Beijing, some of the key points are still being
disputed, specifically everything concerning the right
of women to make autonomous decisions and respect
for their human rights. We have had a hard time here to
find the necessary compromises. We have not always
succeeded; nor have we always understood each other.
In spite of the decisions made before the special
session, there have been attempts to re-open the
Platform for Action and to go backwards with respect
to our commitments made in Beijing. Yet, the old
problems remain and new ones have appeared that
require all of us to work harder. Women still do not
enjoy full respect of their human rights. Violence in all
of its forms reveals itself in the banality and the horror
of domestic violence, as well as in the banality and the
horror of the violence of trafficking in human beings or
in the banality and horror of conflicts that are tearing
apart so many regions. HIV/AIDS is striking all the
continents and is particularly ravaging the young
population of Africa, destroying its future.
Globalization and new technology present
opportunities and risks. Unfortunately, we have not yet

found the means of minimizing the risks and ensuring
that women profit more from the opportunities
offered — all women, not just a privileged minority in
countries of the North. Poverty all too often reflects a
feminine visage, and the strategies for fighting it are
not enough by a long shot. Everywhere, women are
participating too little in decision-making; their
absence or their under-representation in all places of
power implies that their needs and interests are not
sufficiently taken into account or that they are not
taken into account at all. The institutional machinery
responsible for upholding the achievement of equality,
when they exist at all, continues generally to lack the
necessary resources to accomplish their enormous
tasks.
I now turn to my second point, that of perplexity.
I am perplexed by the considerable efforts that have
been invested in the Beijing+5 process and by the
answers received. Has it been worth the effort? At
Beijing, we adopted a demanding and visionary
Platform for Action. Are we completing it sufficiently
with the two new documents that we are negotiating
here? Are they sufficient, above all, with respect to the
actions to be taken, especially actions dealing with
current challenges affecting the full implementation of
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action? For
us, it was clear that we could not accept anything less
than what we agreed upon in Beijing. We achieved the
minimum, but what about all the other issues and those
attempts of so many non-governmental organizations
that followed our work?
We must await the complete document in order to
judge it completely. What we already know is that we
have achieved progress in the area of health, violence,
globalization, economic affairs, human rights and
political participation. These are areas where we have
made progress. The question now is to find out if we
have done an adequate job.
Following these questions, I would now like to
talk about joy; joy, despite the tension and frustration
which have marked many hours spent in this building.
We have learned from statements made in the General
Assembly and on parallel activities, and especially in
meetings and discussion held during negotiations,
everything that has been done over the past five years.
In one State or region emphasis was placed on the fight
against violence, elsewhere on the education of girls
and women and finally somewhere else on
participation in politics and professional life. Of

39

A/S-23/PV.10

course, it is never enough, but it is what we have done
and what we share.
This sharing has also made it possible for us to
search and often find compromise solutions that go
beyond the limits of traditional negotiation groups. The
United Nations, this irreplaceable universal forum, has
made this vital sharing possible for us, regardless of
the difficulties of negotiation.
Now I come to the fourth point; I would like to
finish with hope. We are all going to leave to return to
our countries, our organizations and our institutions.
We will each find ourselves with our own realities, but
we will not be isolated. We have shared a common
experience. We have contacts and networks. We can
benefit from the various experiences of different
people. We can access common information.
We have names and faces, and above all, we have
reaffirmed our common commitment made at Beijing
and we have developed it. We know that commitment
to gender equity is a pivotal point for all commitment
to social justice and for the fight for peace and against
poverty. This commitment remains and will always be
difficult. It demands patient work, which is often
thankless and invisible.
It is clear that we cannot accomplish this work
successfully without cooperating closely with the nongovernmental organizations. They too have their
networks, their names and their faces and they are
using new technologies to become increasingly
efficient. They accomplish their activities and
programmes and they never cease to remind us,
Governments, of our responsibilities to be faithful to
the commitments we have undertaken. We wish to
thank non-governmental organizations for their tireless
commitment and their courage.
May the Declaration and the Platform for Action,
adopted at Beijing, together with the Political
Declaration and Outcome Document we have just
completed, provide all of us with inspiration in the
coming years. We know that a real policy of equality
cannot be improvised. It requires precise skills and
instruments to guide that policy and to measure
whether the actions taken have been successful. Above
all, it requires a clear political will to be able to turn
words into actions. It is our hope, but, above all, it is
our responsibility to achieve this.

40

The Acting President: I call on Ms. Munokoa,
Minister for Internal Affairs and Public Works, Energy
and Physical Planning of the Cook Islands.
Ms. Munokoa (Cook Islands): I bring greetings
on behalf of the Government and the people of the
Cook Islands. We have prepared a formal paper on the
Cook Islands situation regarding matters before this
special session of the General Assembly. Given the
time constraints, however, I would like to speak very
briefly to the paper.
As in many other countries attending this session,
women in the Cook Islands traditionally played a role
focusing on child-raising and domestic duties.
Gradually, however, it came to be recognized that
women were capable as well of making a broader
contribution to the development of the country. They
also had a right to do so.
In fact, since approval of the Nairobi Forwardlooking Strategies in 1985 and the Beijing Platform for
Action in 1995 in particular, the status of women in the
Cook Islands in all the critical areas identified by the
Strategy and Platform for Action has improved
considerably.
In 1995 the Cook Islands adopted its first
National Policy on Women. That Policy clearly
recognized:
“... that women are an integral part of our nation.
Their involvement in community and national
development is most important. They must never
be just passive observers. It is only proper that
women should be equal partners with men in the
development process of the Cook Islands.”
In these few minutes, I would like to concentrate
on four areas in which progress has been noteworthy.
First, regarding women and the environment,
women have played a leading role in the protection of
our fragile and vulnerable ecosystem in their push for
the use of traditional marine conservation reserves
known as the “raui” to contribute to an increase in the
numbers of fish and shellfish available for present and
future generations. These conservation reserves are not
legislated, but are community-based and managed on
the basis of trust and responsibility.
Secondly, regarding violence against women,
progress has been made with regard to the
establishment of mechanisms of cooperation between

A/S-23/PV.10

Government and non-governmental organizations.
Government agencies have come to recognize that this
is not a domestic problem that should be swept under
the carpet to be sorted out between individual parties.
Rather, it is a community problem. With the assistance
of donor Governments, training of judiciary, health and
police officials in appropriate ways to deal with this
problem has been possible. The provision of victim
support and assistance is also now readily available.
Government is currently reviewing legislation related
to sexual crimes.
Thirdly, regarding women in power and decisionmaking, we have recently seen the election for the first
time of two women to our 25-member Parliament and 9
women to local government. Four women have also
been appointed to head important government agencies
and ministries.
Fourthly, with regard to women and the economy,
since strict economic reforms were made in 1996,
statistics collected indicate that exactly 50 per cent of
small businesses started up with government assistance
were done so by women. For the period from January
to December 1999, total funds accessed by small
businesses owned by women amounted to 77.8 per
cent. This figure includes applications to commercial
banks and international funding agencies and schemes.
In trying to highlight the positive areas, we are
ever mindful that much work still needs to be done in
these and other areas, which include further support
services, training and capacity-building for government
officials and civil society to address the issue of
violence against women, and domestic implementing
legislation and training concerning the various
agreements relating to women to which my
Government is a party.
Progress in the implementation of the Beijing
Platform for Action has been made possible by a close
working partnership between Government and civil
society, in particular non-governmental organizations.
To conclude, my Government would like to
reiterate its support for the strategy and Platform for
Action and will renew its commitment to meeting its
obligations. I would also like to lend our support to
issues of concern to the Pacific Island countries,
namely, the cessation of nuclear testing and the
banning of hazardous wastes from our region.

We would like this session to do two things: first,
acknowledge the hard work done by us all to meet the
goals of the Beijing Platform for Action; and secondly,
call for renewed commitment from everyone here —
the
international
and
regional
organizations,
Governments and non-governmental organizations —
to continuing to work towards achieving gender
equality, development and peace for the twenty-first
century. The Cook Islands Government looks forward
to working closely with other members of the
international community during and following this
special session. May peace be upon us all.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Her Excellency Mrs. Alimata Salambéré, Chargée de
mission for the Advancement of Women of the
International Organization of la Francophonie.
Mrs. Salambéré (International Organization of la
Francophonie) (spoke in French): Allow me at the
outset to express the emotion and pride I feel speaking
on behalf of the International Organization of la
Francophonie and especially on behalf of its SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, whose personal
commitment to what could be called the “Beijing
process” is well known to all.
I should also like to extend our most sincere
congratulations to the representative of Namibia and to
all previous speakers and to express our hope for the
success of this work.
From our perspective, the Beijing process has
followed a dual approach for many years. As has been
observed, it is continuing to evolve, I am pleased to
say. Let us recall the major world conferences that
mobilized States in the previous decade and in which
La Francophonie, which was present at the United
Nations Conference on Environment and Development
at Rio, took an active part. It will be noted above all
that the topics of these conferences were highly
complementary to one another, be it human rights at
Vienna; population at Cairo; social development at
Copenhagen; women, of course, at Beijing; or human
settlements at Istanbul.
It should also be emphasized that this dynamic
was to address at the global level all the great issues of
interest to the human species in their most diverse
components so as to call us to action on the future of
humanity in the twenty-first century. It was easy to
note at each occasion not only the interdependence of
the problems and areas considered, but also and above

41

A/S-23/PV.10

all the role and place of women throughout these
issues.
In this context, I should like to recall here that the
first Francophonie Women’s Conference, held in
Luxembourg last February, was devoted to the theme
“Women, power and development”. We felt these two
axes to be not only fundamental, but also matters of
priority with regard to the 12 critical areas identified at
Beijing. The host country of the meeting, the Grand
Duchy of Luxembourg, has submitted as an official
document of this special session the Declaration
adopted on that occasion by our 55 member and
associated States and Governments.
The Declaration invites the International
Organization of la Francophonie, especially the
Intergovernmental Francophone Agency and the
organizers of summits, along with all member States
and Governments, to enhance their action in two areas
involving, first, women in decision-making and
institutional mechanisms to promote the status of
women and, secondly, the participation of women in
development with a view to improving their socioeconomic status in the context of sustainable
development. To that end, it reaffirms that peace is an
integral aspect of development.
I would briefly recall here that our community,
representing more than one in four countries of the
world and almost one third of the States Members of
the United Nations is represented on every continent.
With great respect for their identity, it unites countries
that are very diverse but all equally dedicated, through
their common language, to the promotion of peace,
justice, security, solidarity, democracy and respect for
universal and inalienable human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
I take this opportunity also to emphasize that the
Secretary-General of our organization, Mr. Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, is eager to ensure that the voice of la
Francophonie be raised as one with that of the
international community and to make common cause
with all efforts being made to support peace and the
peaceful settlement of disputes throughout the world,
and especially on the African continent, which is home
to many of our member States and is still deeply torn
by numerous bloody conflicts.
A moment ago, I referred to the dual approach of
international meetings, including the Fourth World
Conference on Women held at Beijing. This leads me

42

now to take stock of and outline approaches better
suited to implementing its Programme for Action. The
second approach is, of course, that of the major
conferences devoted to women. I would say that today,
in a way, we are celebrating Mexico City + 25.
A quarter of a century, of course, has not been
enough to smooth away all the problems, given their
deep roots in human nature. Discrimination against
women, the effects of which are felt at various levels
and in various sectors throughout the world, underlies
the third and final theme of this special session, after
development and peace: that of gender equality. Nearly
10 years ago in Vienna, we affirmed that
“the human rights of women and of the girl-child
are an inalienable, integral and indivisible part of
universal human rights”. (Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action, para. 18)
Secretary-General Kofi Annan reiterated this point in
his opening statement to this special session.
Last October, the General Assembly adopted a
resolution that strengthened the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women by giving it an Optional Protocol. On behalf of
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, I wish to
stress the value we attach to this step. I would also
recall that it was precisely in this spirit that the eighth
Summit of la Francophonie, which was held in
Moncton, New Brunswick, Canada, in September
1999 — and which the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, Mr. Kofi Annan, honoured with his
presence — requested Mr. Boutros-Ghali to endeavour,
together with the relevant international organizations,
to draft a report on the status of the ratification of
major international legal instruments and their
implementation.
This, then, is the commitment of the francophone
community in response to the objectives of the current
special session: “Women 2000: gender equality,
development and peace for the twenty-first century”.
As I mentioned earlier, this commitment was defined in
particular in the Luxembourg Declaration. This new
century, however, offers us new challenges as
modernity asserts itself more strongly every day.
That is why, in spite of the many difficulties that
continue to hinder women in their efforts to achieve
equality, development and peace in the twenty-first
century, we should, in order to continue our efforts,

A/S-23/PV.10

mobilize to an even greater extent through a dynamic
act of solidarity that would create networks of concrete
and effective partnerships.
Moreover, as was stated in Luxembourg, if we
wish truly to change mindsets and to make equality a
reality, it is essential to create conditions that will
enable women and men both to become involved and
contribute together to achieving these goals. This
earnest aspiration was expressed by the Minister for the
Advancement of Women in Luxembourg in his
statement here last March.
Women, as it has been emphasized here, are
harshly stricken by poverty, and above all by the
growing impoverishment of all of our countries, both in
the North, which has suffered from recession and
unemployment, and in the South, which has not yet
accrued all of the benefits of industrialization.
However, the world we live in, this twenty-first century
which we are entering, should not become a uniform
one. Today, as is urged by the Secretary-General of La
Francophonie, it is clear that the only viable solution is
respect for our differences. La Francophonie, which
values solidarity, wishes to be a community with a
pluralistic nature, and it is this element which is crucial
for women. Depending on circumstances, being
different can be either a strength or a weakness. It is up
to women themselves to make it a strength, so that
women might, in dignity and in tolerance, attain to all
levels of decision-making. Once they are a majority,
they will then have to stop behaving like a minority.
May I in conclusion quote from the words of a
well-known African specialist and ethnologist:
“We should not forget that a new civilization does
not really penetrate society unless it is
assimilated by women. They are the guardians of
tradition. But it is through them that a new era
will dawn in society which will change person-toperson relations to the benefit of all individuals.”
The Acting President: I now call on Mrs.
Valencia Mogegeh, Head of Gender Affairs of the
Commonwealth Secretariat.
Mrs. Mogegeh (Commonwealth Secretariat): I
wish to express my gratitude for the opportunity to
speak on behalf of the Commonwealth Secretariat, and
I wish also to bring warm greetings from the SecretaryGeneral of the Commonwealth, the Right Honourable

Mr. Donald McKinnon, who has not been able to attend
this important forum.
Much progress has been made in achieving
gender equality between women and men since the
United Nations Decade for Women — 1976 to 1985 —
when the issue was first put on the agenda of global
governance institutions such as the Commonwealth
Secretariat. However, gender inequalities persist in
Commonwealth countries, as they do globally. Some of
this can be attributed to unequal power relations
between women and men, which are deeply embedded
in cultural values and attitudes, religious beliefs and
practices,
social
norms,
economic
activities,
development planning in all sectors, and political life
as well as public institutions.
The Commonwealth remains committed to its
endorsement and support of the Beijing Platform for
Action and this Beijing+5 review process. The
Commonwealth therefore hopes that the newly
formulated update to the 1995 Commonwealth Plan of
Action on Gender and Development, which will serve
to guide the work of the association from 2000 to 2005,
will contribute to strengthening the global agenda for
gender equality, development and peace into the
twenty-first century.
Within the framework of the 12 critical areas of
concern in the Beijing Platform for Action, the update
to the 1995 Commonwealth Plan of Action prioritizes
four major areas for action based on the fundamental
values and principles of the Commonwealth. These
areas are: gender mainstreaming through the Gender
Mainstreaming System; the integration of gender into
national budgets, macroeconomic policies and
globalization processes; the promotion of women’s
rights as human rights, using an integrated approach to
combating violence against women, and including the
impact of HIV/AIDS on women; and efforts to increase
women’s participation in political and public policy
agenda-setting, as well as in processes of peacebuilding, conflict mediation and resolution.
Secondly, the update addresses persisting gender
inequalities in areas such as poverty alleviation and
violence against women, and critical emerging gender
issues in areas such as globalization and trade, armed
conflicts and peace processes.
It also targets the strengthening of national
women’s machinery by providing responsive policy
advice; developing innovative methodologies, tools and

43

A/S-23/PV.10

publications, such as an interactive gender and
development web site which includes a joint United
Nations/Commonwealth database on training; and
promoting mutual learning through the sharing of best
practices.
Lastly, the update promotes a synergistic
approach that should strengthen partnerships, promote
the pooling of resources and enhance the achievement
of intended targets.
In conclusion, allow me to point out that the
update to the 1995 Commonwealth Plan of Action,
which spans the period leading up to the next United
Nations global conference on women — if we can go
by history — represents the commitment of
Commonwealth heads of Government and Ministers
responsible for women’s affairs to continue
Commonwealth and global efforts for achieving gender
equality. At the request of Commonwealth Ministers
responsible for women’s affairs, Commonwealth heads
of Government, meeting in Durban, South Africa, in
1999, proposed that this update be seen as a
Commonwealth contribution to strengthening the
Beijing+5 review process.
It is in this context that, on behalf of the
Commonwealth
Secretary-General,
the
Right
Honourable Mr. Donald McKinnon, I present the
update to the 1995 Commonwealth Plan of Action on
Gender and Development (2000-2005) to the twentythird special session of the General Assembly on
“Women 2000: Gender equality, development and
peace for the twenty-first century”.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Jacques Forster, Vice-President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross.
Mr. Forster (International Committee of the Red
Cross): To open this statement, the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) would like to give
a voice to a woman victim of armed conflict:
“War is destruction; our children are lost, our
husbands gone; we have nothing; our houses
destroyed — what more can I describe?”
What more need she describe indeed? It is not
even necessary to tell you where this woman is from —
it could be any of a multitude of countries at war
around the world. In fact, it was one of a host of waraffected countries surveyed by the ICRC in 1999 as
part of a worldwide “People on War” project, where

44

men and women, civilians and combatants, were given
a chance to speak for themselves about the limits in
war.
The impact of conflict on women takes many
forms, some more apparent than others. One of the
most torturous consequences of armed conflict for
many women is the issue of missing relatives.
Thousands of women are searching for news of the fate
of their relatives — generally male — who are missing.
The inability to mourn and bury loved ones has an
enormous impact on the survivors of war and the
coping mechanisms they are able to adopt. The search
for missing relatives often drags on long after the end
of an armed conflict and can be a lasting impediment to
the process of reconciliation. Humanitarian law
recognizes the need and the right of families to obtain
information regarding the fate of their missing
relatives, and the ICRC urges all parties to armed
conflicts to clarify the fate of missing people and to
inform their families accordingly.
Women are less often combatants than men and
are less often detained for reasons related to armed
conflict. However, when they are detained, their
conditions may be worse than those of men. Therefore,
throughout its visits to places of detention, the ICRC
pays special attention to the needs of women and
children.
Furthermore, women more often flee into
displacement due to fighting and are more often the
victims of sexual violence. Sexual violence is a
particularly heinous violation of international
humanitarian law. In the ICRC survey previously
mentioned, one in nine of all respondents reported that
they knew someone who was raped, and nearly as
many said the same for sexual assault. This is
intolerable. Parties to an armed conflict have a duty to
ensure protection and respect for all civilians and
persons no longer taking part in the hostilities. This
duty must become the reality.
Women are frequently widowed and find
themselves forced to take on new and unaccustomed
roles — for example, as heads of households.
Throughout the world women are continuing to
respond
to
war
with
remarkable
courage,
resourcefulness and resilience, confronting the effects
of war and the obstacles it imposes on their ability to
sustain and protect themselves and their families.

A/S-23/PV.10

In order to assist in the best possible way, the
international community needs to understand the
realities confronting all persons not taking part in
hostilities, including, of course, women. Two years ago
the ICRC initiated a study to examine how women are
affected by armed conflict around the world and how
the ICRC’s activities are responding to the needs
engendered by armed conflict. Some of the findings of
this research have already led to a renewal of ICRC
activities. This study, which will conclude this year,
will form the background for the formulation of
guidelines for the protection and assistance of women
and girl children in armed conflict. This ICRC
initiative was introduced at the International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies held in November 1999 at Geneva.
Furthermore, during the Conference the ICRC
President renewed the institution’s commitment to the
effective protection of women through a four-year
pledge.
This
pledge
focuses
especially
on
dissemination to parties to an armed conflict of the
protection accorded by humanitarian law to women and
girls on the issue of sexual violence.
From its inception, international humanitarian
law has accorded women general protection equal to
that afforded men. At the same time, humanitarian law
treaties accord women special protection according to
their specific needs. Both that general and special
protection are enshrined in the four Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and their two Additional
Protocols of 1977. The ICRC acknowledges as a
positive development the fact that the ad hoc Tribunals
for the former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda, and the
Rome Statute for the International Criminal Court,
consider sexual violence a war crime. The ICRC
welcomed the opportunity to present a working paper
on the elements of crimes, including that of sexual
violence, to the Preparatory Commission for the
International Criminal Court.
The President took the Chair.
The ICRC hopes that its recent initiatives will
lead to a better understanding of the impact of war on
women and to a more effective implementation of the
protection conferred upon women by international
humanitarian law. This ICRC statement started with the
voice of a woman victim — a woman survivor of
war — asking what more she could describe. To speak
on her behalf, one thing that would have helped her and
tens of thousands of others is clear. If international

humanitarian law was respected, much of the suffering,
loss and destruction that civilians and those hors de
combat experience every day could be reduced. The
prime responsibility for observing the rules of war rests
with the parties to an armed conflict. The ICRC
appeals today for genuine measures of implementation
of humanitarian law by States so as to guarantee the
protection of women.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Anna Diamantopolou, European
Commissioner for Employment and Social Affairs of
the European Community, who will speak on behalf of
the European Commission.
Ms. Diamantopolou (European Community):
Over the last few days, we have seen a renewal of the
commitments that were made five years ago in Beijing.
The European Community welcomes this reaffirmation
of the goals set out in the Platform for Action. We
strongly support the three principles that underlie the
Platform for Action: the recognition that women’s
rights are human rights, the empowerment of women
and the gender mainstreaming approach. The point now
is to act. The real value of this special session derives
from the discussion and formulation of policies,
strategies and practical measures that will bring us
closer to gender equality.
The struggle for equality is an ongoing one,
requiring a sustained political effort over a period of
decades. That is why gender equality has now been
enshrined in the Treaty on European Union as a
fundamental goal. The European Union experienced
both a deepening and further integration that has been
guided by the principles of democracy. Today we are
preparing for enlargement. The effects have been
positive. The deepening of the Union has fostered the
exchange of good practices between the member
States, and the partnership between the States and civil
society. Our past equality programmes have helped
develop these good practices and exchanges. Moreover,
a wide body of legislation firmly established gender
equality and rights as key principles of our democracy.
Gender equality is integrated in the Community’s
development cooperation and human rights policies.
The European Commission just a few days ago
reaffirmed its political commitment by adopting a new
framework strategy for gender equality, with
implications for every area of Commission policy. It

45

A/S-23/PV.10

also put forward a programme specifically designed to
support gender mainstreaming.
The European Community’s activities extend well
beyond the member States of the European Union.
There are strong links around the globe through trade
and development cooperation policies. All regions,
Europe included, are feeling the positive and negative
effects of globalization. The new technologies, the new
economy and the new kind of exclusion —
e-exclusion — demand new policies and new
cooperation at the global level. The changing world, as
well as our response to it has an effect on gender
equality.
Listening to the proceedings over the past few
days, I have noticed that these changes contain a
paradox. The past decade has seen astonishing
advances in science and technology, in health services
and in information-processing and communications
technology. These developments offer an enormous
potential for improving the quality of our lives. In
short, these trends hold out a vision of a truly modern,
prosperous and civilized society. The paradox is that, at
the onset of the twenty-first century, millions of women
around the globe, including in the European Union, are
still trapped in situations that would have been all too
familiar 200 years ago. A whole generation of women
is currently deprived of the enjoyment of their
fundamental human rights, suffering indignities
resulting from fundamentalist misogyny as practised by
the Taliban — and not only by them.
Moreover, women and girls continue to be the
object of trafficking. The number of women thus
brought into the European Union has grown over the
past 10 years. Paradoxically, trafficking takes extensive
advantage of new communication technologies that are
considered to be the cornerstone of modernity.
Much of the responsibility for addressing and
redressing the old and new forms of discrimination lies
with the political will of Governments and regional and
international institutions. The fundamental question
asked here is what more they can do. This brings me to
the issue of good governance. Good governance, as
exercised by national and international bodies, means
more than good policies; it is about the relationship
between Governments and their citizens, and about
how government structures affect that relationship.
Equal representation is a key issue here. The
participation of women in political and civil life is

46

fundamental to good governance. Institution-building
to meet the challenges of globalization should be
defined by the equal and shared participation of women
in all political processes. The European Community is
prepared to assist the States members of the European
Union to fulfil their commitments in this regard.
Over the past few days, questions have been
raised about the usefulness of the “+5” process of
evaluation. I think we can agree that a sound review
process based upon measurable goals constitutes a
strong incentive and a way forward for women’s
empowerment. However, three conditions must be met:
we must never go below the previously agreed goals;
we must focus our energies on supporting the
empowerment of the women who suffer most; and we
must ensure that the next generation can reap the
benefits of globalization.
This special session must be considered a
milestone by national and international decisionmakers and institutions on the way towards realizing
gender equality by placing it at the heart of democracy
and sustainable development. I truly hope and wish
that, at the end of the day, we can achieve this.
The President: I give the floor to Mrs. Ólöf
Ólafsdóttir, Secretary of the Steering Committee for
Equality between Women and Men of the Council of
Europe.
Mrs. Ólafsdóttir (Council of Europe): It is an
honour and a privilege for me to represent the Council
of Europe at this special session of the General
Assembly. Five years after the Beijing Conference, we
need to take stock of the progress made and propose
action to help us move forward. There is still much to
do, and it would be easy to lose what has been gained.
The principles contained in the Platform for
Action need to be reaffirmed again and again; they
must be respected, promoted and, most of all, fully
implemented. Our task in the twenty-first century is to
ensure that women can at last exercise fully the rights
they won throughout the twentieth century, which has
now come to a close. In a nutshell, gender equality
means equal visibility, equal empowerment and equal
participation by both sexes in public and private life.
To reach that goal, women must enter the
decision-making process at all levels and in significant
numbers. This will not happen by itself. It requires
strong political will and action on the part of those with

A/S-23/PV.10

the power to speed up the process. Some countries have
made welcome progress in this field since Beijing, and
their example should be followed. Women are tired of
waiting. It is time to act.

against women in all its forms, as a crime and as a
violation of human rights. The need for men to take
responsibility for their violence against women has
received specific attention.

The Council of Europe has long been actively
engaged in the promotion of gender equality and the
protection of women’s human rights. Progress has been
made in the legal field. In particular, the European
Social Charter has been revised; it now includes a
specific provision on the right to dignity at work. That
provision covers the prevention of sexual harassment,
as well as protection from that type of behaviour. Since
1998, the control mechanism set up under the Social
Charter has included a major innovation: a protocol
providing for a system of collective petitions.
Applications have already been received and examined.
If non-governmental organizations defending women’s
rights have recourse to this protocol, it will provide a
much more effective protection for women’s human
rights.

Another main feature of our work since Beijing
has been the efforts to develop instruments to facilitate
the implementation of gender equality policies. In 1998
a report on the methodology and practice of gender
mainstreaming was published. It has since become a
reference document all over Europe. Last month a
similar report on positive action was published. It
explains how positive action interrelates with the
principle of non-discrimination and how it interacts
with gender mainstreaming. In addition, the Council of
Europe has worked extensively on the right to free
choice in matters of sexuality and reproduction and on
the human rights of immigrant and ethnic minority
women.

It is important to make all human rights
instruments more workable for women. This year we
will celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the European
Convention on Human Rights. A draft additional
protocol has been prepared to introduce a general
prohibition of discrimination, above and beyond the
rights and freedoms set out in the Convention. It is
hoped that the draft protocol will be adopted within the
next few months.
I am happy to announce that three weeks ago the
Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
adopted a recommendation to member States on
combating trafficking in human beings for the purpose
of sexual exploitation. The adoption of that text was
most timely. Europe has seen a recent intensification of
this modern form of slavery, which is a major violation
of human rights that has become a highly profitable
criminal trade continent-wide and worldwide. The
adoption of that recommendation will initially be
followed up by a seminar to be held at the end of this
month in Athens for countries of South-east Europe,
which are particularly affected by this trade.
Other legal instruments on the protection of
women and girls against violence and on the balanced
participation of women and men in political and public
decision-making are being prepared.
Since the Beijing Conference, the Council of
Europe has put special focus on combating violence

When looking to the future, how can we ensure
that progress is made? There must be a constant
concern to protect and promote women’s human rights,
to protect women against all forms of violence and to
ensure that women participate fully in all decisionmaking bodies, not least in those that deal with peacemaking and peace-building. Women are too often
victims in wars and too rarely — almost never —
involved in the peace negotiations.
As to strategies, gender mainstreaming is a major
strategy to promote equality. If properly implemented,
it will be instrumental in the reorganization of all
policy processes, and it will integrate men more
effectively into the equality debate. It will also make it
easier to take into account the situations, needs and
interests of diverse groups of women.
More than ever, real progress in gender equality
will depend on cooperation, on networking and on
exchanges of good practice. As in the past, nongovernmental and intergovernmental organizations will
have a primordial role to play. It is within such a
framework that it is possible to act together in a
dialogue, share information and experience and provide
assistance when needed.
In October the Council of Europe will organize,
as it does every year, a forum on equality policies in
one of its new member States. This autumn it will be in
Bratislava, Slovakia, on the theme “Human rights of
girls and young women in Europe: questions and
challenges for the twenty-first century”. Non-

47

A/S-23/PV.10

governmental organizations will as usual participate in
this forum.

indeed pivotal, role to women in society, and also
in the family, the basic social unit of society.

I conclude by expressing the hope that the
twenty-first century will, through the realization of
gender equality, offer new generations of women and
men more social justice, less poverty, better societies
and a better life, based on mutual respect and
partnership and on the full enjoyment of human rights
for all. It is not complicated. It is not difficult. It is,
first and foremost, a matter of political will and a
matter of courage.

“Concerns such as those over the issue of
women in development being raised today are not
new to the Islamic world. They had been dealt
with in a judicious manner many centuries ago,
and will continue to be addressed with the utmost
importance.

The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Mokhtar Lamani, Chairman of the observer
delegation of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference.
Mr. Lamani (Organization of the Islamic
Conference) (spoke in Arabic): First, I congratulate
you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of this
special session of the Assembly. I am certain that your
wisdom and experience will contribute greatly and
effectively to the success of this sessions’ work.
The Islamic summit conference held in Tehran in
1997 decided to establish a working group consisting
of certain members to coordinate questions and issues
relating to women. Convinced of the distinctive role of
women in development, the group has held a number of
meetings at the margins of the session and has decided
on this statement to be made on behalf of the Islamic
Group. The Chairman of the Burkina Faso delegation,
as she has said, has entrusted me with making the
following statement:
(spoke in English)
“I speak on behalf of the Islamic Group at
the United Nations, which comprises 56 member
States and four observer States of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC),
spread across all geographical regions of the
world, representing about 1.4 billion people of
diverse ethnicities, languages and cultures.
“Islam, the great heavenly religion which
was revealed to mankind about 14 centuries ago,
promotes peace, tolerance and cooperation among
all human beings. It accords human dignity,
fosters human rights, emphasizes family values
and prescribes equality of all before almighty
God, regardless of sex, geographical origin,
colour, class or creed. Islam assigns an important,

48

“In fact, Islamic history is replete with
examples of women in leadership roles. In current
times we have seen women rise to the positions of
prime minister and vice-president, to numerous
levels of cabinet ministers, to seats in national
parliaments and local legislatures and to senior
positions in Governments of OIC member States.
Outside of government, women hold responsible
positions in universities and other institutions of
higher education and research, in the medical,
legal and other professions and in various
branches of industry and commerce. Their
number is on the increase. Despite the general
social and economic problems, and their
unsavoury consequences being experienced
throughout the developing world, the need to
address the economic and social constraints
hampering women’s empowerment remains a
matter of priority in the development process of
all OIC member States.
“Thus, throughout the Islamic world the
Governments, supported by emerging societal
institutions, are now endeavouring to support,
within
their
means,
social
development
programmes that cover, among other things, the
provision of education and health care services,
including reproductive health, to women so that
they may be empowered sustainably to exercise
all the rights that Islam has bestowed upon them
in society and also to be equipped to fulfil their
role as companions, thinkers, supporters,
educators and managers within the sacred
institution of the family.
“With this approach towards guarding and
enhancing the status of women, the OIC member
States participated in full measure in the Beijing
Conference and spared no effort in contributing
effectively to the formulation and adoption of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, and,
within their means and resources, they have been

A/S-23/PV.10

faithfully implementing the Beijing instrument at
national level in the perspective of the
Declaration, which calls for the implementation
to be carried out in accordance with the
respective Constitutions, laws and religious and
moral values of the countries concerned.
“At this stage I should like to refer briefly
to the role of the OIC in promoting the
advancement of women. At successive sessions
of the three-yearly OIC summit conferences and
of the annual Islamic conferences of foreign
ministers serious and continuous attention has
been paid to this aspect, resulting in actionoriented resolutions and decisions on each
occasion. Thus, the last and eighth Islamic
summit conference, held in Tehran in December
1997, reaffirmed the position of Islamic States at
the Beijing Conference and reasserted its
intention to implement the document adopted by
the Conference. It requested the OIC general
secretariat to coordinate its efforts with the
Governments of member States to encourage
forging sustainable relationships among women’s
organizations in member States. It set up an
intergovernmental working group to harmonize
the positions of all member States on issues
related to women at international forums,
particularly the United Nations. I am glad to be
able to report that the OIC working group on the
status of women here at the United Nations, in
response to this resolution of the Islamic Summit,
has actively participated in the preparatory stages
of this special session, including the efforts to
formulate its draft final outcome document.
“The strong resolve with which the OIC
member States are participating in this special
session of the General Assembly has been
demonstrated by their active collaboration in all
the preparatory phases that preceded the
convening of this session. A further indication of
our collective identification of the causes and
purposes that have united us in this worthy effort
is the fact that the delegations of 40 OIC member
States and observers are headed by women, of
which two are the First Ladies of their respective
countries, two are Vice-Presidents, two are
Deputy Prime Ministers, twenty-three are Cabinet
Ministers and two are Deputy Ministers. A large
number of non-governmental organizations of

women from the Islamic countries are also
attending this special session and have
contributed actively to its work.
“I pledge the OIC’s fullest cooperation and
collaboration in working with the United Nations
in the future to fulfil the worthy and noble
objectives that have brought us together at this
special session”.
(spoke in French)
“I wish to conclude by stressing the
undeniable fact that the concrete development of
our societies cannot be attained or pursued
without the genuine, effective participation of
women in all political, economic and social
activities. We must tackle this enormous but nonUtopian task if we are to build a happier future
and more just and more humane societies”.
The President: I call on Mr. Robert Paiva,
Chairman of the observer delegation of the
International Organization for Migration.
Mr. Paiva (International Organization for
Migration): Women’s place in today’s international
migratory flows is changing both quantitatively and
qualitatively. Quantitatively, women account for a
growing percentage of migrant populations, and in
several countries they already constitute the majority.
Qualitatively, women are migrating independently,
particularly as labour migrants, in vastly greater
numbers than was the case in their mothers’ or
grandmothers’ generation. These two factors,
commonly referred to in shorthand as the feminization
of migration, represent considerable challenges for
migrant women, for Governments, for international and
non-governmental organizations and for society at
large.
Five years ago, at Beijing, the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) made a four-point
appeal to the international community: first, to
recognize the trend towards the feminization of
migration; second, to improve understanding of the
conditions and needs specific to migrant women; third,
to promote equal access to projects and services so that
migrant women might fully participate in and benefit
from them; and, fourth, to design and implement,
where needed, programmes specifically for migrant
women.

49

A/S-23/PV.10

There has been progress since. For example,
enhanced research and improved data collection have
made for better awareness of women’s important place
in migration and highlighted some emerging issues.
These include the effects of women’s temporary labour
migration on the empowerment of women, on the
economy at the micro level and on the family that
remains behind. Having recently completed a joint
research project with the United Nations International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women (INSTRAW), which produced case studies on
Sri Lanka and Bangladesh, the IOM is pleased that this
issue has been recognized and discussed during the
Preparatory Committee process.
However, advances concerning migrant women in
some areas are not matched in others. This is
particularly true with respect to trafficking in women
and girls. Indeed, this particularly abusive form of
exploitation seems to be increasing.
No one is able to quantify the exact magnitude of
trafficking today, not least because of its frequently
clandestine nature and the lack of international
agreement on how it is defined. However, there is
steadily growing evidence to indicate that this has
become a multi-billion-dollar business, often linked to
organized criminal networks.
The IOM has been heavily involved in efforts to
counter trafficking in women for nearly a decade. We
began with research in countries of origin, transit and
destination in order to better understand how women
enter into trafficking networks and what conditions
they face before, while and after they are trafficked.
Our involvement was and is clearly linked to our
migration mandate, although from the outset it was
evident to us that trafficking in women is a human
rights issue, an economic issue, a social issue, a gender
issue and a criminal justice issue — as well as a
migration issue.
Building on our research — which continues; a
new volume on trafficking in Europe with case studies
from Hungary, Poland and Ukraine is currently with
our publisher — the IOM has focused on three areas of
programme activity. The first is help for trafficked
women: finding safe houses, providing counselling and
medical attention and assisting in return and
reintegration. Indeed, in this field, the IOM could do
much more if additional resources were available. The
second area of programme activity is capacity-building.

50

A significant component of that is contributing to and
fostering dialogue among Governments regarding their
needs and experiences in combating traffickers and
assisting trafficking victims. Regional migration
dialogues have proven to be especially useful for
advancing such policy dialogue. The third area is mass
information campaigns about the realities of
trafficking. These multimedia campaigns, while they
cannot claim to be the sole tool for prevention, have
the benefit of reaching both potential targets of
traffickers and the general public, raising awareness of
the ruses used in the trafficking trade and the abuses
waiting at the other end.
The IOM is currently running counter-trafficking
public information campaigns in Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Hungary, Kosovo and Thailand, building on
previous successful efforts in the Philippines, Viet Nam
and Ukraine. In these, as in all our trafficking-related
activities, we especially value the close partnership we
have
developed
with
the
non-governmental
organization sector.
Over the course of the past few days it has been
heartening to listen to government statements that
recognize and face the challenge that trafficking in
women represents. This is indeed an area where all
States — North or South, country of origin or country
of destination — share a common abhorrence of the
abuses human beings are subjected to.
Success in dealing with trafficking in women will
require strong and sustained international cooperation.
The IOM’s involvement to date is a clear indicator of
the depth of our engagement in raising awareness of
the realities of trafficking, as well as in meeting
concrete needs with practical responses. I would like to
underscore here today our commitment to continued
action, in active partnership with similarly concerned
governmental,
intergovernmental
and
nongovernmental organizations. In that connection, it gives
me pleasure to highlight the IOM’s growing interaction
with the United Nations system on trafficking issues.
Yes, there has been some encouraging progress
over the past five years in addressing trafficking, but
much more needs to be done over the next five years,
and experience shows that much can be done if we all
join forces.
The President: I call on Mrs. Mary Reiner
Barnes, representative of the observer delegation of the
Sovereign Military Order of Malta.

A/S-23/PV.10

Mrs. Barnes (Sovereign Military Order of
Malta): The Sovereign Military Order of Malta is
pleased to take the floor at this special session of the
General Assembly entitled “Women 2000: Gender
equality, development and peace for the twenty-first
century”.
The Order of Malta, having been a member of the
international community for many centuries, has served
others — and this includes service to and by women —
and is well qualified to understand the full meaning of
this special session. Many issues have been raised, and
much has been accomplished in the 25 years since the
first World Conference on the status of women was
convened in Mexico City. We welcome this opportunity
to review and assess progress to date and to consider
future actions and initiatives to ever more fully help all
women and girls realize their potential.
Founded in 1099, the Order of Malta serves those
who need us, regardless of nationality or opinion.
Indeed, this vocation of assistance to and solidarity
with the suffering and the weak, the victims of
discrimination and intolerance, is our centuries-old
mission. In accord with the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, we are committed to the right to life,
which is to be defended everywhere and always,
starting with the right to be born, and including rights
to proper health care and education, and finally the
right to a dignified death. Women are fully included in
our programmes for individuals with special needs,
such as our autism centre in France and our old-age
homes in Austria, Germany, Chile and the United
States, among others. In addition, we have programmes
specially designed for girls and women. For instance,
running hospitals is the Order’s oldest task, but the
Maternity Hospital of the Holy Family in Bethlehem
specifically targets the needs of women in the
community by guaranteeing normal obstetrical
treatment, prenatal, post-natal, gynaecological and
paediatric services. This hospital has become the
reference hospital for the area, including its refugee
camps, receiving an ever-increasing number of
complicated cases. It is a project supported by the
Order’s members worldwide. It has special significance
for the Order because it is located in the region where
we were founded more than 900 years ago.
The hospital also features a programme that
teaches women to be doctors and other medical
workers. Thus, the Maternity Hospital of the Holy
Family serves the mandates of recognizing and

supporting the social significance of maternity,
education and employment opportunities for women, as
set forth in the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW),
and echoed in the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies
and critical areas of concern in the Beijing Platform for
Action.
Other health-care facilities supported by the
Order of Malta include women’s clinics in Lebanon
and El Salvador. The Order of Malta also seeks to help
assuage the pain resulting from the worldwide AIDS
scourge by, among other projects, supporting a
Dominican Republic centre run by nuns who provide
housing for ex-prostitutes infected with the AIDS
virus.
In addition, “Project Crudem” in Milot, Haiti, not
only meets the medical needs of women and children
served by this hospital and medical centre, but 600
children receive their education under its auspices. An
Order of Malta hospital in Bonn, Germany, has a
nursing school and kindergarten attached to the
hospital. In Brazil, the Order has established
kindergartens in São Paolo and Brasilia, in the vicinity
of the favelas, to give unmarried mothers the
possibility of working and also to provide health care
for the children and their mothers. In São Paolo,
educational opportunities are also provided for the
mothers in the training centres attached to the
kindergartens. Other purely educational Order projects
include Portugal’s home for the education of girls.
Therefore, besides seeking to improve the health
care of women and girls and supporting motherhood by
assisting unwed mothers, the Order of Malta worldwide
supports their education and the resultant improved
employment opportunities and poverty eradication.
Further Order of Malta projects address the needs
of women suffering as a result of armed conflicts. At
the request of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the Order of Malta is one of the groups
that has implemented programmes to help traumatized
women in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo adjust
to life after the region’s war. In Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Order’s “Bosnian Women’s
Initiative” has sponsored training courses, teaching
computer skills, English and sewing, and social
programmes, including health and emergency
telephone counselling.

51

A/S-23/PV.10

The “Kosovo Women’s Initiative” has placed
great emphasis on socio-psychological programmes
entailing training courses in sewing and the
opportunity to speak of traumatic experiences, since it
is usually easier for these women to speak about such
traumas during practical activities rather than in
therapy groups.
As a result of armed conflicts in Africa, our
programmes there have included the establishment of
refugee field hospitals serving maternal needs during
crises in Ethiopia, Rwanda, Burundi and many other
places. We have a women’s project operating in the
refugee camps on the frontier between Cambodia and
Thailand.
Another Asian project that the Order of Malta
supports is the women-oriented project “Health for One
Million” in Kerala, India, which seeks to improve the
living situation of women and children in rural areas of
the Kanyakumari district of Tamil Nadu, South India.
This is accomplished by, for instance, giving classes in
basic health care, sanitation and hygiene, child care and
nutrition, and sponsoring income-generating activities
to improve women’s quality of life. Since most of the
programme’s beneficiaries are married women who are
mothers, and a mother plays an important role in
maintaining a healthy nutritional status for the family,
all the project’s activities are centred around the
mothers, through whom the entire community is
served. Unless the community standard of living is
raised or improved, the goal of health promotion
cannot be achieved. Thus this project also promotes
motherhood, health and education for women and girls,
and poverty eradication by providing incomegenerating activities as a means for women to improve
their economic position.
Further supporting motherhood, the Order
sponsors a number of homes for unwed mothers in the
United States. The needs of elderly women are also
recognized in the Order’s support of convents for older
nuns, in addition to the homes for both older men and
women that it runs.
Finally, as stated above, besides serving girls and
women, the Order has included women since it began.
At its inception many women were sisters who also
assisted in nursing, and in the mid-eighteenth century, a
medical degree was conferred on a woman at the
Order’s medical college and hospital in Malta, where
she also performed surgery. The Order’s history of

52

uniting health care and scientific research continues to
this day. Our work at the Bethlehem Hospital and also
in the ophthalmic research sector at São Paolo
University in Brazil are two examples.
Within itself, the Order is seeing an increased
presence of female members — its Dames. Also, some
of the Order of Malta’s auxiliary services provide for
young girls to participate, thereby instilling a sense of
social responsibility right from a girl’s childhood. Such
activities may be found in many countries where the
Order is active, for example, in Ireland, with its
Ambulance Corps, and in Lithuania.
Thus, as established above, the Order of Malta
has actively supported the role of women in the
development of society and the social significance of
maternity, and provided for their education and means
to employment, thereby clearly echoing mandates set
forth in the CEDAW and the Nairobi Forward-looking
Strategies. Also as noted, we have further addressed
critical areas raised in the Beijing Platform for Action
through our programmes that encompass women and
the particular issues they face concerning poverty,
armed conflict, the economy, decision-making, human
rights, as well as those special concerns of the girl
child, among others.
In sum, the Sovereign Military Order of Malta
appreciates the opportunity for exchange in this area of
great concern. It calls on all Observers and Member
States of the United Nations, non-governmental
organizations and other interested parties to support all
efforts to eradicate social injustice and poverty by
promoting the role of women and motherhood and the
education of women, whether a woman is a stay-athome mother, professional woman or both. I myself —
being a woman, Dame of Malta, wife, expectant mother
and lawyer — have more than just a passing interest in
these issues.
Finally, being politically neutral, striving ever to
promote peace in the world, and a supra-national entity
having full diplomatic relations with nearly 90
countries around the world that also has a particular
commitment with respect to international aid, the
Sovereign Military Order of Malta is uniquely placed
to serve comprehensively the needs of women and
girls, and welcomes the opportunity for further
coordination with United Nations Member States,
Observers and other entities in providing the means for
women and girls to fulfil their societal potential.

A/S-23/PV.10

The President: I give the floor to Mrs. Mariapia
Garavaglia, Vice-President of the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
Mrs. Garavaglia (International Federation of
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies) (spoke in
French): For several decades, we had believed that
inequalities between men and women would come to
an end when legislation became more balanced, women
received as much formal education as men, and the
problem of arranging day care for small children was
overcome.
In the 1990s, however, we have had to recognize
that this is not enough. It is obvious from this review
session that a much stronger political will is needed to
put the theory of gender equality into practice. In this
regard the International Federation of Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies fully supports the proposed
framework for further actions and initiatives submitted
by the Commission on the Status of Women to this
special session, and in particular the commitment to
create an enabling environment to implement the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action.
I would like to take this opportunity to recall that
the General Assembly of the International Federation
of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies last year
adopted a special policy on gender equality. Our goal is
to ensure that all Red Cross and Red Crescent
programmes benefit men and women equally,
according to their different needs, and that men and
women participate equally at all levels within our 176
national Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, our
Secretariat in Geneva and its field offices in 67
countries. The adoption of this policy has helped us to
place gender equality high on our political agenda.
The International Federation of Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies recognizes that natural
disasters, conflicts and social and political instability
may affect men and women differently and that Red
Cross and Red Crescent emergency response and longterm humanitarian assistance may also have a different
impact on men and women. Therefore, we will
continuously review our own system to incorporate
gender analysis in the assessment, planning and
reporting of programmes, including our disaster
response, disaster preparedness and provision of
community-based health services.
We also know that, despite the positive
developments within our organization, we need to

enhance further the Red Cross and Red Crescent
capacity to take the gender perspective into account in
their policies and programmes. In particular, we need
to develop the competence of staff members in
applying gender analysis in programming and ensuring
accountability in this regard. We also recognize that
new initiatives must be taken to ensure the balanced
participation of men and women from all sectors of
society in Red Cross and Red Crescent work. At the
27th International Conference of the Red Cross and
Red Crescent held last year, we pledged, inter alia, to
ensure equal opportunities for men and women of all
ages as volunteers in service delivery and leadership
and to increase the involvement of marginalized
groups.
We believe that the framework for further actions
and initiatives to emerge from this session should pay
special attention to the following areas.
It must ensure that the operational tools, skills
and knowledge necessary to the advancement of
women and gender mainstreaming are developed and
widely shared. In this regard, we believe that gender
specialists and advisers at various agencies, including
the United Nations, must play more practical roles.
It must also ensure the high quality of
humanitarian assistance that meets the different needs
of men and women in time of natural disasters. In this
relation, we would draw the attention of the special
session to the need to apply minimum practical
standards to the delivery of humanitarian assistance,
such as those elaborated in the Sphere project, based on
the Humanitarian Charter and Minimum Standards in
Disaster Response, which was endorsed by the 27th
International Conference of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent last year. The incorporation of gender analysis
in our response mechanisms will allow us to ensure
that our service is rapid and effective.
It must strengthen mechanisms of cooperation
and coordination among States, United Nations
agencies, international organizations, the Red Cross,
the Red Crescent and non-governmental organizations
in order more effectively to reduce discrimination and
violence in the home and in the community. As we said
five years ago in Beijing, States must pay special
attention to the prevention and reduction of violence
against women.
To conclude, we in the International Federation of
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies hope that this

53

A/S-23/PV.10

special session will reaffirm the commitment of the
international community to the Beijing Declaration and
the Platform for Action. Most especially, we hope that
the outcome document of this special session will be
not just a new plan, but a working tool based on
lessons learned from obstacles encountered in the
follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women.
The President: I give the floor to Ms. Francesca
Cook, representative of the Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development.
Ms.
Cook
(Organisation
for
Economic
Cooperation and Development): I bring greetings from
the Deputy Secretary-General of the Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD),
Sally Shelton-Colby, who is unfortunately unable to be
with us this evening. She would like to join previous
speakers in thanking the United Nations for organizing
this important Conference. The OECD is particularly
pleased to participate here, as we have been actively
involved in the international community’s efforts to
advance gender equality as a key element of the
development and peace agendas for some time now.
This follow-up to Beijing has inspired us, in fact, to
revitalize our own efforts to strengthen opportunities
for gender equality and we are reinforcing the way we
mainstream gender into the substantive policy work of
the OECD as a whole.
The OECD is an intergovernmental organization
concerned with promoting the triangular paradigm of
good governance, social cohesion and economic
growth. Its 29 member countries also produce more
than 60 per cent of world economic output. On that
basis, the OECD and its members have a key role to
play in the promotion of gender equality worldwide.
We encourage our members to provide policies and
incentives to equalize access by women and men to
productive resources and to the opportunities offered
by globalization.
We work for open and competitive labour and
capital markets, just legal and regulatory frameworks
and socially responsible government and business that
treat men and women equally. We encourage
Governments to listen to men’s and women’s voices
because better governed public sectors, sustainable
development and more widespread and vibrant civil
societies that enjoy human rights and social justice and
experience less violent conflict are our common global
vision.

54

We know that none of this is possible without
equality between women and men. The full utilization
of men’s and women’s contributions and the realization
of their potentials are essential in order for countries to
take full advantage of the new global marketplace. We
also know that better mainstreaming of gender
perspectives is largely a question of sustained political
will. In no society do women fare as well as men or
enjoy the same opportunities. Though gender gaps vary
from place to place, these are not dependent on
whether a country is rich or poor, whether its economy
is industrialized, in transition or developing, or whether
it is at peace or in conflict.
In fact, some developing countries outperform
OECD countries in the opportunities they make
available to women in some spheres. For example,
South Africa and Argentina follow four OECD
countries as the only six in the world where women
occupy more than 30 per cent of parliamentary seats.
The figures for the other 25 out of the 29 OECD
countries range from 29 per cent to fewer than 5 per
cent. These and other inequalities represent the loss of
important human and economic potential on a global
scale, and this poses a major challenge ahead in the
twenty-first century.
We hope to increase awareness of the importance
of gender in policy-making and to act as a catalyst for
change towards the promotion of greater equality
worldwide. We know that we need to do more in our
own countries and in our outreach and development
assistance efforts. Recognizing this, the SecretaryGeneral of the OECD has launched a renewed initiative
for active gender mainstreaming throughout the
substantive work of the organization and for improved
career opportunities in its Secretariat.
I will describe briefly a few of the major gender
initiatives of the organization.
For a number of years now, the OECD has been
promoting increased acknowledgement of the role that
women play in the economy and society, and aiming to
improve the conditions under which women run their
businesses. In 1997, we held a conference on women
entrepreneurs, which focused on their contributions to
increased employment and innovation worldwide. In
November this year, we will hold a second conference,
which will focus on encouraging women entrepreneurs’
participation in the global economy; strengthening
international women’s business networks; increasing

A/S-23/PV.10

their access to and use of new technologies; and,
finally, easing obstacles to financing their businesses.
This increased policy attention to women entrepreneurs
around the world points to a growing awareness of
their role as a driving force in economic growth and
development.
The OECD also routinely includes gender
implications in its work in the areas of education,
employment, labour markets and social affairs for
member and non-member economies. It collects
necessary statistical data, analyses the different
situations of men and women, and draws policy
conclusions as appropriate. We know, for example, that
employment patterns of women and men in OECD
countries are converging, but at the same time there are
still large differences between countries, and no
country can be said to have achieved gender equality in
the labour market. For example, while employment
rates of men and women in Sweden are now very close,
the level of occupational segregation in Sweden
remains high. And, although all OECD countries have
laws designed to ensure that women and men doing the
same jobs have equal rates of pay, in practice women
continue to receive less pay than men in all countries.
We also have a number of conferences and
publications that specifically address gender inequality.
In 1998 a conference was held on changing labour
markets and gender equality, and a publication was
issued on the future of female-dominated occupations.
We are happy to announce that we will hold a
ministerial-level conference focusing on how including
gender perspectives in economic, industry and labour
market policies renders them more efficient, effective
and equitable. Entitled “Gender mainstreaming,
competitiveness and growth: what, why and how”, it
will take place in November this year. Other work
focuses on supporting the care economy, improving the
work/life balance, and exploring how to engender
national budgets.
Finally, with regard to our outreach activities, in
preparation for the Beijing Conference, the OECD
bilateral donors of the Development Assistance
Committee adopted a landmark statement, the
“Development Assistance Committee Gender Equality
Statement”. It underlines women’s empowerment and
equality as vital for sustainable, people-centred
development. The statement established goals for
bilateral aid agencies and requested the Development

Assistance Committee to embark on a mainstreaming
strategy.
In the perspective of this special session, the
recent ministerial meeting of the Development
Assistance Committee assessed progress made since
the holding of the Beijing Conference. The report
“Progress towards gender equality in the perspective of
Beijing+5” has been distributed at this session. It
identifies nine future priorities for the international
community to push the agenda forward. Through it the
bilateral development cooperation ministers and heads
of agencies reconfirmed the basic importance of gender
equality and women’s empowerment to development
progress. They also recognized that, while there has
been much headway in integrating gender into the
development strategies of bilateral OECD donors, there
is still a long way to go in terms of real commitment to
providing the resources necessary for thorough
implementation of policies. We hope that, in
conjunction with the conclusions of this special
session, the ministers’ reconfirmations will serve as a
strong impetus for bilateral donors and their partners
and the OECD’s outreach activities.
Finally, this month at the Copenhagen+5 summit
a publication entitled “A Better World for All” will be
launched by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations. A joint publication of the United Nations, the
OECD, the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund, it will present a state-of-play report on progress
on seven internationally agreed development goals,
including demonstrated progress towards gender
equality and women’s empowerment. We hope that it
will serve as an advocacy tool and that it will be
distributed worldwide.
When the struggle for gender equality that so
many of us are waging finally succeeds, as it must, it
will mark a great step forward in human progress. We
at the OECD are working with renewed determination
to provide the necessary attention and resources to
ensure that today’s women, as well as men, contribute
their full potential to the prosperous, safe and equitable
societies of tomorrow that we all need and that we are
all striving so hard to secure.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Helle
Degn, President of the Parliamentary Assembly of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Ms. Degn (Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe): After 25 years and four United

55

A/S-23/PV.10

Nations World Conferences on Women, the poorest
women still have to fight for their rights, in the
political sense, in all aspects of life. The gap between
rich men and poor women is growing. Are we not able
to do better after 25 years? We simply have to. No mild
or soft words can be said about situations in which
women have been denied all dignity, been raped or
tortured, or in which they cannot enjoy freedom or
even the right to speak or vote.
We must insist on human rights. Violence against
women has grown. Trade in women and children has
grown. The feminization of poverty has grown. The
share of seats in parliaments for women has increased
only from 7 per cent to 12 per cent during the last 25
years’ journey from Mexico to New York. Likewise,
commitments to fanaticism have grown. We therefore
have to commit ourselves for the next women’s world
conference, in 2005.
This Beijing+5 special session is taking place in a
markedly different ideological environment compared
with that of the 1995 World Conference on Women.
However, human rights have become an inseparable
part of the quest for stable, democratic rules. And a
significant number of the world’s Governments have
committed themselves to respect and observe these
rules. Despite the dynamism of human rights
movements, a wide gulf remains between the
articulation of global principles and their application in
many national settings.
In its activities the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which I represent,
harmonizes human rights and the objectives of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. The
OSCE promotes gender mainstreaming among its
participating States. It is particularly active in areas
that are among the 12 critical areas of concern of the
Platform for Action. Furthermore, it is committed to
creating a professional work environment where all
staff members are treated equally and with respect.
The essential elements for the OSCE include its
accent on policy processes. One of the prerequisites for
gender mainstreaming is transparency in the policymaking process. Another is political will. The OSCE
promotes both the political will and the development of
gender-sensitive policies and activities.
In regard to violence against women there is an
increased awareness of violence against women and
girls not as a private matter, but as a human rights

56

violation. Another element is successful cooperation
between governmental organizations and nongovernmental organizations in preventing violence
against women.
The OSCE is effectively working with nongovernmental
organizations
and
governmental
organizations in the host countries of its field
operations. The OSCE Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights is actively developing
activities with regard to combating trafficking in
human beings. It has issued an Action Plan 2000 for
activities to combat trafficking and to assist in
legislative reform and assistance to victims of
trafficking.
We are obviously committed to women in armed
conflict and to the International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Court. The
OSCE supports the international efforts to bring the
perpetrators of war-related gender-based crimes to
justice, and accepts rape as a war crime. In its platform
for action and in its action plan for gender issues, the
OSCE refers to these efforts and it is committed to
supporting them.
The area relating to women and power and
decision-making takes note of the growing acceptance
of the importance to society of the full participation of
women in decision-making and power at all levels,
including in the intergovernmental sector. It calls for
increased wisdom on the part of men and a willingness
to share power, and to adapt organizational and
political structures to make them woman-friendly. To
empower women and to bring them into politics is,
furthermore, one of the focuses of OSCE gender
projects. The OSCE, particularly in its missions to
Bosnia and Herzegovina, has actively supported the
gender task force for the Stability Pact for Southeastern Europe.
The section on human rights refers to efforts to
mainstream the human rights of women and a gender
perspective into the United Nations system.
Gender issues are increasingly being brought to
the forefront of OSCE activities. One important
consequence of this ongoing debate has been that two
of the major OSCE institutions have appointed gender
advisers, who are now working on a broad front to
mainstream gender issues into the day-to-day work of
the OSCE. Given the impact of the work of the gender
advisers, it is my earnest hope that other OSCE

A/S-23/PV.10

institutions, including my own, will follow the example
and also appoint gender advisers of their own.
The OSCE Parliamentary Assembly also
incorporates the priority areas of the Beijing process
into its work. With respect to women and power and
decision-making, the Parliamentary Assembly strives
to ensure greater democratic political participation, and
this clearly includes women, who are at present
strongly underrepresented in almost all OSCE
participating States. As President of the Parliamentary
Assembly, I have repeatedly called for a greater
emphasis on gender equality within the OSCE, in line
with the 1998 declaration adopted at Copenhagen by
the Parliamentary Assembly. The Parliamentary
Assembly also calls for a stronger incorporation of
gender perspectives into the work of OSCE missions in
the areas of conflict-prevention and post-conflict
rehabilitation, as well as in democratization and
institution-building.
Some countries in my part of the world have seen
a resurgence of patriarchal traditions that subordinate
women within the family. In a number of countries,
traditional religious views continue to restrict women’s
possibilities for empowerment. In all OSCE countries,
domestic violence remains a major problem for
women, although too often a rather hidden one. Less
than 10 years ago, some OSCE countries were the
scene of barbaric warfare where war crimes, including
widespread rape of women and girls, were used as an
instrument of ethnic cleansing. Thanks not least to
efforts by the OSCE, that part of the world is now a
somewhat more peaceful place. However, some
regional conflicts continue to smoulder, with women
and children as primary targets and victims.
While the overall picture remains bleak, I must
stress in all fairness that the last couple of years have
seen a great debate on gender issues within the OSCE,
followed by concerted efforts to implement
commitments to ensure gender equality.
I wish this special session a successful outcome.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Hussein Hassouna, chairman of the observer
delegation of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Hassouna (League of Arab States) (spoke in
Arabic): It is my pleasure, Sir, to congratulate you
warmly on your election as President of this important
special session of the General Assembly, which is soon

to come to a close. Your experience and wisdom have
guaranteed that its work is progressing towards a
successful conclusion.
This special session of the General Assembly is
especially important because it marks a turning point
with respect to the critical needs of women, women’s
issues in general, and participation by women in all
areas of economic, social, political and cultural life as
a key element of sustainable human development.
Perhaps the most important proof of international
interest in this session and of the vital issues it is
considering is the wide participation of women from all
over the world, who are here to reaffirm their
determination to continue on their path until they reach
their noble objectives. Here, on behalf of the League of
Arab States, I hail this important gathering and the
active and effective participation by all delegations,
including those of Arab States, which throughout the
debate have put forward constructive proposals with a
view to ensuring the success of this session.
The firm and positive response of the States
members of the League of Arab States with respect to
addressing the challenges set out at Beijing through the
formulation of policies and strategies and the
implementation of programmes has brought Arab
women closer to realizing their aspirations. There have
been intensive efforts to promote the advancement of
Arab women; these are consistently followed up with
strategies and national and international plans of action
with a view to meeting the needs and addressing the
priorities of women in Arab society. Considerable
achievements have been made in this sphere thanks to
the adoption by Arab States, by Arab institutions and in
Arab workplaces, in cooperation with United Nations
institutions, of a variety of measures. Positive steps
have been taken to empower Arab women, to promote
their advancement and to enhance their capabilities.
These reflect a conviction that development plans can
attain their objectives only with the participation of
women in their planning and implementation, and as
beneficiaries of their results. On the Arab regional
level, that conviction was reflected in the formation of
a standing committee for Arab women; this took place
in 1971, well before the Beijing Conference. Moreover
the League of Arab States has a department for
women’s affairs.
At the official level, our policies have put women
on the agenda of the political plan of action, and
resolutions have been adopted to promote the

57

A/S-23/PV.10

advancement of women. National decisions and
strategies for women have also been implemented, and
women have been recruited for decision-making
positions. Arab legislation reaffirms the equal status of
women and men and the opportunity for women to
enjoy all their rights; it has eliminated all obstacles in
the way of progress for women, so that women are able
to consolidate their position and narrow the gap
between women and men in all spheres of political,
economic, social and cultural life. This is reflected also
in the growing number of Arab States that have
acceded to the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women.
In spite of all this, there have been failures with
respect to the progress of Arab women. These result
from a number of challenges, including the fact that
many Arab women experience illiteracy, poverty and
lack of participation in production and in governmental
decision-making.
Political, economic and social factors in the Arab
region, as well as wars in the region, have meant that
some objectives relating to women have not been given
national priority. This has prevented the achievement
of the desired success in women’s issues, unlike the
successes that have been achieved in health, education
and other areas of work.
In these circumstances, compounded by the
changes due to rapid globalization, we must adopt all
necessary measures to safeguard women and create an
enabling environment to increase their participation.
We must give them a greater role in development
activities and the necessary machinery with which they
can intensify development assistance in order to
alleviate poverty and improve living standards.
The League of Arab States attaches the same
degree of importance to the need to reach fair solutions
in the achievement of a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the Middle East. It also attaches great
importance to the elimination of all types of economic
embargoes imposed upon Arab countries, with a view
to eliminating their negative impact on women and
children. It further emphasizes the need to free all
prisoners of war in places of conflict.
We are convinced that the creation of a propitious
environment for the achievement of international
objectives for the advancement of the status of women
and the achievement of equality and development in
the twenty-first century means that we have to work

58

hard to write off the debt of poor countries, stop the
arms race, redirect available funds to consolidate
sustainable
development
efforts,
solve
the
unemployment problem and eliminate poverty, which
affects women more severely.
The League of Arab States expresses the hope
that considerable progress will be achieved at this
session regarding priority issues for women. We
reaffirm the plans resulting from Beijing and the Cairo
International
Conference
on
Population
and
Development, as well as the clear and established Arab
positions taken in this regard. We respect the diversity
and differences between cultures, values and human
convictions that govern human society, and we take
them into consideration in recording the outcome of
this session.
In conclusion, I emphasize that the success of this
session will depend essentially on the commitment of
participants to continue the implementation of the
provisions and guidelines of the final document.
However, the indicators for success are already obvious
in the active interaction among women throughout the
world and in the consolidation of an increased
international awareness of the importance of women’s
issues, their rights and their pivotal role in the family
and society. This awareness creates a propitious
atmosphere for the adoption of resolutions required
internationally, nationally and regionally in order to
implement the concepts and guidelines that have been
agreed upon during this session. We are convinced that
the results will be on a par with our hopes and with the
aspirations of women throughout the world.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Doutoum Mahmat, Assistant Secretary-General,
representative of the Secretary-General, of the
Organization of African Unity.
Mr. Mahmat (Organization of African Unity)
(spoke in French): On behalf of Mr. Salim Ahmed
Salim, Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), it is a great honour for me to
share with the Assembly today the OAU’s perspective
on the theme “Women 2000: gender equality,
development and peace for the twenty-first century”.
The question that confronts us all today is:
halfway through the time-frame we set ourselves for
the implementation of the Beijing framework Platform
for Action, exactly how far have we come? This
question raises an even more important question: how

A/S-23/PV.10

do we ensure that we meet the targets within the agreed
time-frame?
We are meeting here today not only because the
Beijing Platform for Action requires us to do so, but
also because of our shared concern about the
constraints on the Platform’s implementation. The
OAU remains fully committed to the elimination of all
forms of discrimination against women in all areas of
life. Our Organization regards the African and Beijing
Platforms for Action as providing appropriate
blueprints for the creation of a more just and
egalitarian society, for we should not forget that the
full and effective participation of women on an equal
basis is a precondition for sustainable peace and
development and for human progress generally.
Since our continental organization was created in
May 1963 its commitment to socio-economic progress
and the emancipation of the peoples of Africa has
remained firm and unwavering. The founding fathers of
the OAU were inspired by the vision of a continent
resplendent with success and achievements in all areas
of human endeavour. They were equally aware of the
need to create and maintain an environment that
nurtures understanding, cooperation and solidarity in a
larger unity that transcends all divisions and
ideological and ethnic disputes and
scorns
considerations of nationality or gender. In so doing, the
founding fathers enshrined forever in the OAU Charter
the bases for safeguarding Africa’s peace, security and
stability.
However, 37 years later Africa not only faces
complex and daunting socio-economic challenges, but
is also beleaguered by seemingly intractable conflicts
which, as our leaders have observed, have caused death
and untold human suffering, engendered hatred and
divided nations and families. They have forced
millions of our compatriots to the wandering life of
refugees and displaced persons, deprived of their
livelihood, human dignity and hope.
The OAU has constantly stated that peace is a
prerequisite for development and that the absence of
peace results in disorganization, disorder and the
irrational use of resources, and is both the result and
the cause of widespread violations of human rights. It
is now a truism that the oppression of women is a
violation of fundamental rights and therefore is not
compatible with peace and development. Just as peace
and development are inextricably linked, so is

development inextricably linked to the integration of
women because logically development should lead to
the improvement of living and working conditions of
all members of society.
Development
is
synonymous
with
the
transformation of society, which requires the
development of human resources through, inter alia,
education, training and access to new information
technology. This is why success in the economic sector
will facilitate the struggle for women’s emancipation.
Because of the dynamics of their productive and
reproductive roles, women are usually excluded from
the development process. Hence there is the paradox
that while society needs the emancipation of women,
which is essential for development, it makes it difficult
for them to have access to the tools of change.
The OAU devotes much of its time to conflict
prevention, management and resolution. Reacting to
the outbreak of new conflicts in Africa, the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government created in Cairo in
1993 an OAU mechanism for conflict prevention,
management and resolution. Women and children being
particularly vulnerable in conflict situations and as
displaced persons, they need to be involved in conflict
prevention, management and resolution. Therefore, in
cooperation with the United Nations Economic
Commission for Africa, the OAU established in 1998
the African Women’s Committee on Peace and
Development, with the mandate of ensuring the
effective participation of women in our continent’s
peace and development process.
Another pressing problem facing Africa is that of
HIV/AIDS. This global pandemic has had a
particularly devastating effect on Africa; AIDS claims
more victims than all the conflicts on our continent.
Women and children are particularly vulnerable to HIV
infection, especially in situations of civil unrest, social
upheaval and population displacements. The situation
is exacerbated by inadequate food security and medical
services in these situations. There is, therefore, a need
to pay special attention to the conditions and specific
needs of these women. More specifically, we now have
to link HIV/AIDS problems to women’s advocacy for
peace. For its part, the OAU has adopted declarations
on the AIDS pandemic in Africa, on children facing
HIV/AIDS and on the status of African women in the
context of family health, constituting an African plan
of action. Now we need to implement these
declarations within the framework of the new

59

A/S-23/PV.10

international partnership for the struggle against
HIV/AIDS.

Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) on this special
occasion.

In the economic area, the OAU works with
African women entrepreneurs in order to ensure
women’s economic empowerment and their integration
into the economic process.

Increased gender equity and equality certainly
enhances participatory processes required to solve
environmental, economic and social problems that
threaten peace and human well-being in this new
millennium. While it is not a complete solution to these
problems, it is crucial to open the door to more
creative, user-responsive, socially sustainable and fair
solutions to them. Several studies have shown that
improving women’s education, income and status, as
well as increasing their opportunities in the decisionmaking process, enhances their families’ food security,
health and well-being. It also has an impact on fertility
reduction and long-term effects on the capacity of
community organization to better respond to
environmental and social challenges.

With regard to education and literacy, I am happy
to state that the OAU member States have declared an
OAU decade for education in Africa, covering the
period 1997 to 2006, and that in this context the OAU
has been following up the Kampala Declaration and its
action plan.
With regard to women’s legal and human rights,
the OAU, through the African Commission on Human
and Peoples’ Rights, has appointed a special rapporteur
on the rights of women in Africa, and it is in the
process of concluding an additional protocol to the
African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights related
to women’s rights. More recently, the OAU has been
working with the United Nations Economic
Commission for Africa within the context of the sixth
African regional conference on women, held as part of
this Beijing+5 review process. The OAU Council of
Ministers has since adopted the African plan of action
resulting from the sixth regional conference for the
accelerated implementation of the African and Beijing
Platforms for Action.
These are only some of the highlights of OAU
activities to integrate into its policies and programmes
issues linked to the status of women.
In conclusion, I reaffirm the OAU commitment to
the speedy implementation of the African and Beijing
Platforms for Action, as well as its commitments to
work closely with all partners to achieve this common
goal. Therefore, it is my sincere hope that this
Beijing+5 review process will lead to the formulation
of new, more effective strategies which will allow us to
move beyond rhetoric to concrete action aimed at
empowering women to participate in the development
of our continent.
The President: I call on Mrs. Akiko Domoto,
Chairperson of the observer delegation of the
International Union for the Conservation of Nature and
Natural Resources.
Mrs. Domoto: It is an honour to speak on behalf
of the International Union for the Conservation of

60

Gender equity within participatory management
of natural resources promotes a more equitable sharing
of their costs and benefits. In addition to creating
access to and control of resources between men and
women, and empowering women in decision-making,
women’s traditional knowledge of biodiversity and
ecosystem management can be recognized, valued and
used to promote environmental sustainability. In this
way, promoting gender equity and equality is a
concrete step to enhance peace and human security in
the search for fairer and more harmonious relationships
among people and with the environment.
The IUCN welcomes the efforts made by the
United Nations following the Fourth World Conference
on Women to draw attention to the importance of
promoting gender equity and equality to ensure social
and environmental sustainability and security, while
engaging a large variety of governmental organizations
and non-governmental organizations in this initiative.
The IUCN — The World Conservation Union —
was created in 1948. It is the world’s largest
conservation-related organization, bringing together 76
States, 11 government agencies, 732 non-governmental
organizations, 36 affiliates and some 10,000 scientists
and experts from 181 countries in a unique worldwide
partnership. For more than half a century the IUCN has
made efforts to shape a just world that values and
conserves nature. Its mission is to influence, encourage
and assist societies throughout the world to conserve
the integrity and diversity of nature and to ensure that

A/S-23/PV.10

any use of natural resources
ecologically sustainable.

is

equitable

and

Concerns for social and gender equity have been
a fundamental issue for the IUCN, which understands
that conservation is a process that requires changing
social behaviour at the individual and institutional
levels. The IUCN has promoted the concepts of
sustainable development and sustainable use of natural
resources since “Caring for the Earth” in 1992, through
several initiatives carried out at the policy and field
levels, on a global, regional, national and local basis.
In 1998 IUCN adopted a policy statement on
gender mainstreaming in which it recognizes that
adopting a gender perspective means focusing on both
men and women and their relationships with each other
and natural resources. Only with a gender perspective
can a complete picture of human relationships and
human interaction with natural resources be built up.
IUCN’s rationale for integrating a gender
perspective and gender concerns is based on two
important premises: first, the recognition that gender
equality and equity are matters of fundamental human
rights and social justice, and secondly, the growing
awareness that equality is a precondition for
sustainable development and the sustainable use of
natural resources.
This year, IUCN adopted a policy statement on
social equity within the conservation and sustainable
use of natural resources. Aware of its role and capacity,
IUCN has developed tools and protocols to integrate
gender within the field project cycle and within
environmental policies. The IUCN Regional Office for
Meso-America (ORMA) has taken a clear leadership
role in this process. Since 1992, more than 2,000
people have been trained in how to link environment
and gender. Training modules and research have been
conducted in order to provide theoretical and practical
skills in linking equity and equality to sustainable
development. Ministries of environment have also
received support and collaboration in their efforts to
develop policies that integrate gender into their sectors.
A collaboration between ORMA and the Global
Social Policy Programme is making our expertise and
tools available to support similar processes in other
regions in which IUCN members are interested. The
nine training modules of the “Towards Equity” series,
produced by ORMA, are being published in English
this month.

Other regional efforts, in the form of networking
and information-sharing, have been promoted in places
like Asia, where members exchange gender
information and experience in the IUCN Gender and
Environment in Asia newsletter.
Because of its experience and success in
addressing gender equity and equality thus far, IUCN is
very happy to support its members and partners who
are committed to gender mainstreaming within national
environmental policies and sustainable development
initiatives, in addition to building the institutional
capacity to carry out this process.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I now
call on Mrs. Amabel Orraca-Ndiaye, Chief Cooperation
Officer of the African Development Bank.
Mrs. Orraca-Ndiaye (African Development
Bank): On behalf of the African Development Bank
(ADB), my delegation would like to convey its deepest
gratitude to the Secretary-General for the invitation to
this landmark event, which brings together such
distinguished personalities from all over the world.
This occasion represents the greatest honour for
me — the first daughter of a highly empowered
woman, my mother. May I pay tribute to other mothers
all over the world who single-handedly raise children,
giving them equal chances to a better education and
equal chances to better their lives, irrespective of their
sex. It is also the proudest moment for my daughter
and, indeed, for girls of her generation, that I am
speaking on behalf of the African Development Bank
and its achievements five years after the Beijing
Conference.
The mandate that was given to financial agencies
in the Beijing Platform for Action was to provide
opportunities for the empowerment and mainstreaming
of women in the economic area and to eliminate gender
biases in their operations. In this respect, I am pleased
to report that this mandate has acted as the catalyst for
a number of activities undertaken by ADB at the
policy, project and institutional level.
At the policy level, for example, ADB’s New
Vision Statement clearly identifies poverty reduction as
the primary development challenge facing Africa,
which is a priority area of concern in the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action. Thus the
utilization of the Bank’s resources are crystallized
around four themes that are central to women’s

61

A/S-23/PV.10

empowerment,
namely
agriculture
and
rural
development; human capital development; private
sector development; and good governance.

education; and health projects in Nigeria, Sierra Leone
and Mozambique, which provide specialized series for
women of child-bearing age and children in rural areas.

Furthermore, the lending policy and guidelines
adopted to operationalize the Vision Statement
underscores mainstreaming a gender perspective in all
policies and projects in order to facilitate a dynamic
and central role for women. The guidelines also
emphasize the application of gender analysis tools to
development planning and the utilization of gendersensitive indicators to assess the effectiveness of the
Bank’s approach. In this respect, it is important to note
that the Bank has adopted a Country Policy and
Institutional
Assessment
in
which
women’s
empowerment constitutes an element of assessment as
the basis for the allocation of resources to regional
member countries. This tool enables the Bank to
determine the quality and effectiveness of the policy,
legal and institutional frameworks for the advancement
of women of beneficiary countries in areas such as the
education of girls, health services and the
implementation of pro-equality legal reforms.

Since 1997, a new generation of poverty
reduction projects, including those in the Gambia,
Ghana, Malawi, Mozambique, Mali, Tanzania and
Uganda, have been designed to be participatory and
demand-driven and to pay special attention to reducing
poverty among women. In addition, 12 women-indevelopment stand-alone projects have been financed
in Senegal, Mali, Malawi, Gambia, Guinea and Ghana,
to name a few, all of which seek to address issues such
as women’s lack of education, access to factors of
production and social services.

In line with the Beijing Platform for Action, ADB
has reviewed its poverty-alleviation strategy and its
policies in agricultural development, health, education,
population, cooperation with civil societies and
governance to reflect the gender perspective.
In promoting gender mainstreaming the African
Development Bank has adopted a two-pronged
approach, namely through sectoral interventions and
through financing women in development projects.
Thus, between 1990 and 1998, a total of 134 genderrelated projects in sectors such as agriculture, health
and public utilities were financed.
Mrs. Yai (Côte d’Ivoire), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
Examples of such projects are the Rural Water
Project in Zimbabwe and the Rural Electrification
Project in Malawi, which improved women’s access to
potable water and increased their productivity in food
processing; the Palm Oil Project in the Central African
Republic and the Sugar Project in Madagascar, which
have encouraged the establishment of women’s
marketing cooperatives and enhanced family life;
education projects in countries such as Benin, Djibouti
and Senegal, among others, which have specific
components that benefit exclusively female students
with a view to raising female enrolment ratios in basic

62

Altogether, these poverty reduction activities that
ingrain gender mainstreaming and the women-indevelopment stand-alone projects amount to some
$17.2 million, that is, 11.2 per cent of the cumulative
Bank Group commitments for the period 1990-1998.
Another initiative by the Bank worth mentioning
is the African Development Fund Microfinance
Initiative for Africa, also known as AMINA, which
was set up in 1998. The objective is to strengthen the
capacity of existing African microfinance institutions
to deliver a wide range of financial services to
microentrepreneurs. At the institutional level, the ADB
is implementing a number of measures through its
recruitment and promotion procedures to enhance the
participation of women staff members in the senior
echelons of the Bank.
Although we are happy to report the progress
made by the ADB, the Bank recognizes that there is
still room for major improvements. Consequently, a
steering committee for gender issues was recently
established with a clear mandate to determine and
prioritize gender reforms, formulate an action plan and
develop gender targets, among others. In addition, the
Bank is in the process of reviewing and elaborating its
policy on gender equality, which will guide its lending
and non-lending activities. It is the fervent expectation
of my delegation that the priorities and new
perspectives arising from this special session will be
reflected in this gender-equality policy document.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing that the
focus of this session, which is to monitor progress
made in implementing the Beijing Platform for Action,
lies at the heart of the African Development Bank’s
gender work. I wish, therefore, to reaffirm the

A/S-23/PV.10

commitment of the ADB Group to promoting gender
and development issues in Africa. It is the hope of my
delegation that the special session will result in
practical recommendations that will give new vigour
and lead to the acceleration of the implementation of
the Platform for Action.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I give
the floor to Her Excellency Mrs. Aída González
Martínez, Chairperson of the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women.
Mrs. González Martínez (Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women) (spoke
in Spanish): It is an honour for me, as Chairperson of
the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women, to have the opportunity to address the
twenty-third special session of the General Assembly,
entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development
and peace for the twenty-first century”. The special
session has been convened to review the progress made
in the implementation of the Platform for Action
adopted almost five years ago in Beijing and to identify
further actions Member States must take to address the
new challenges to the advancement of women that have
arisen since 1995.
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women, drafted on the
recommendation of the World Conference of the
International Women’s Year held in my country,
Mexico, in 1975, has now been ratified by 165 States.
It is the only international instrument which sets out
human rights norms for women and girls in the entire
range of civil, political, economic, social and cultural
spheres of both public and private life. It is known
throughout the world as the charter of women’s human
rights. It is also relevant to point out that the
Convention was drafted between 1976 and 1979, just
as the United Nations was defining the policy
framework for women’s development.
Since its inception in 1982, the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women, of
which I am honoured to be Chairperson, has conducted
its work in parallel with the intergovernmental process.
Gradually, further political goals for ending
discrimination against women and achieving de facto
and de jure equality between women and men have
been established by this means.
Twenty years after Mexico, the Fourth World
Conference on Women was a crucial success. It marked

the culmination of the intergovernmental political
process for the development of women’s human rights,
recognized in the Platform for Action. It is not for
nothing that the Platform reaffirms that all the human
rights of women and the girl child — civil, political,
cultural, economic and social — are an inalienable,
integral and indivisible part of universal human rights.
For that reason, the Platform also urges universal
ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women; the
withdrawal or limitation of the scope of any
reservations; and the drafting of an optional protocol to
the Convention.
The Platform for Action entrusted a very
important role to the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women. It specifically invited
States parties to the Convention to include in their
reports information on measures taken to implement
the Platform. This has allowed the Committee to
monitor more effectively women’s capacity to enjoy
the human rights guaranteed by the Convention.
Since the Fourth World Conference on Women,
the Committee has held eight sessions, at which it has
considered the reports of 65 States parties. This has
given it a very detailed and substantive overview of the
situation of women throughout the world, the progress
made in implementing the Platform and the continuing
challenges to its implementation. Among other things,
the overview demonstrates that progress has been
particularly notable in the legislative sphere and that
significant measures have been taken to eliminate de
jure inequality between women and men. It has also
identified the persistence of stereotyped attitudes
towards men’s and women’s roles, and the adverse
consequences
which
economic
privatization,
liberalization and globalization have had for women in
a number of countries.
Global conferences are political processes which
allow critical problems to be identified and an
international policy framework to be developed for
tackling them. The human rights treaties establish
obligations which are legally binding on States and the
work of the treaty bodies, such as the Committee over
which I preside, provides a mechanism for overseeing
and ensuring the fulfilment of those obligations at the
national level. The implementation of the Platform for
Action and that of the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women are
distinct but parallel processes. The Fourth World

63

A/S-23/PV.10

Conference on Women identified the clear and essential
link that has existed since 1975 between the political
dialogue and the legal norms for the advancement of
women, a link which has been strengthened over the
past five years.

are still so many people in the Hall. It is a great
pleasure to be among delegations, women leaders, nongovernmental organizations and women from all over
the world who all think and, I hope, want to act
together.

The implementation of the Platform for Action
has been moulded in a human rights perspective and
the General Assembly’s adoption in December 1999 of
the Optional Protocol to the Convention fulfilled one of
the Platform’s recommendations in the human rights
area. The Optional Protocol has so far been signed by
35 States and ratified by three.

I had hoped to deliver a different sort of
statement today, pointing out all the progress that has
been made by women and on their behalf since we met
in Beijing five years ago. I had hoped to be able to
congratulate all of us, all the participants in this
process, on a document that would have been the basis
for our agreement to consolidate the movements
towards equality and justice for all the world’s people.

In order to emphasize the importance to women
of this human rights perspective, the Committee
adopted a declaration on the legal framework for the
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, and on the close relationship
between the Convention and the Beijing Platform for
Action.
This special session provides an opportunity to
reaffirm the central role of women’s human rights and
the importance of implementing the Convention in
achieving gender equality, development and peace. It is
also an opportunity to strengthen the links between the
policy and legal frameworks for the advancement of
women. In this context, the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women would
like to encourage the General Assembly to recognize
the very close interrelationship between the
implementation of the Platform and the Convention.
On behalf of the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women, I wish to reaffirm here
our interest in, and our commitment to, continuing to
support the implementation of the Platform and the
intergovernmental process undertaken by the Assembly
in following up and evaluating the Beijing Conference,
as well as any actions that the Assembly may soon
decide to recommend to ensure the full implementation
of the Platform for Action to bring about the full and
equal development of all the women of the world in the
twenty-first century.
I wish the Assembly every success.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I now
give the floor to Dr. Nafis Sadik, Executive Director of
the United Nations Population Fund.
Dr. Sadik (United Nations Population Fund):
First of all, I have to say how impressed I am that there

64

Unfortunately, it seems that this special session is
still having difficulties in reaching agreement on
language concerning some of the most basic human
rights as they affect women: the rights to health and
protection from violence. This is evidenced by the fact
that we still do not have a final document. This lack of
agreement is puzzling. In most cases, the subjects and
the language have already been thoroughly debated and
agreed — not once, but several times. They can be
found in the Platform for Action of the Fourth World
Conference on Women, in the Programme of Action of
the International Conference on Population and
Development (ICPD), and in the recommendations of
last year’s International Conference on Population and
Development+5 review. In other cases there may be
need for new language, but it is hard to understand why
it should take so long.
I would like to give some examples, beginning
with the question of unsafe abortion. Countries have
agreed, on the basis of strong and irrefutable medical
evidence, that unsafe abortion is a major public health
problem. They have quite rightly agreed to act to
minimize it and deal with its effects. Paragraph 8 (25)
of the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development is quite
explicit, and the consensus was further clarified last
year at the Conference’s+5 review. Yet, paragraph
107 (i) of the document produced at 4 a.m. today, on
the subject of unsafe abortion, is still in brackets.
Surely no delegation and no one among us wants
unsafe abortion and all the death, disease and suffering
that it entails. If we do not, what is the disagreement
about?
Again, paragraph 115 (a) refers to a holistic
approach to women’s health. It is still in brackets. Does

A/S-23/PV.10

that mean that some of those present want a piecemeal
approach to health? In paragraph 115 (d), what is the
objection to health services for women? Is it only men
who should have health services, when we know that a
woman’s reproductive health affects her whole life?
Who will deny her the services she needs?
With regard to paragraph 115 (h) of this
morning’s document, should women not have access to
female-controlled contraceptive methods — to female
condoms — when we know that women are contracting
HIV infections from their spouses? Do some people
think that women should die from AIDS because they
are getting it from their spouses? Who is against
developing microbicides to allow women to protect
themselves? Are any delegations opposed to finding
better means to diagnose sexually transmitted diseases?
If not, why is paragraph 115 (h) in brackets?
With regard to paragraph 119 (a), do not all
delegations agree that maternity, motherhood and the
role of parents in the family have a social significance
and contribute to society? If so, who is against
programmes to promote these roles? What is the
paragraph in brackets about?
Finally, I am quite bewildered by the brackets
around paragraphs 130 (a) and 130 (c). Who exactly is
opposed to measures against violence against women
and girls? Who wishes to let infanticide, abduction,
trafficking, dowry deaths, honour killings and acid
attacks go unpunished? Who supports female genital
mutilation? Surely not all of us. Is there anyone who is
in favour of rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution,
forced pregnancy and forced sterilization? Does anyone
support their use as weapons of war? I hope not. If not,
why should there still be brackets around these
paragraphs on the last day of these negotiations?
Excuse me, Madam Vice-President, if I am naive.
But I am frankly baffled by the inability to reach
agreement on this language among countries that I
know support all these measures and proposals —
countries where I know actions are taking place to
implement all the measures in our Programmes of
Action.
Lest any doubt remains, these negotiations are
based firmly on the sovereignty of nations and on
countries’ acceptance of human rights principles.
Nothing in the document can in any way infringe on a
country’s right to make its own laws within the
international framework. But let Member States

remember that they have agreed to these international
conventions and have subscribed to the agreements that
we so painstakingly negotiated at the International
Conference on Population and Development, at its fiveyear review Conference, and at the Beijing Conference.
These recommendations are firmly rooted in
universally accepted values and ethical principles.
They are being successfully put into action in
countries, and among peoples, of all religious beliefs.
A common regard for morality unites us all. Let others
not use ideology to divide us.
This review offers an opportunity to assess,
calmly and in a spirit of cooperation, recommendations
that are both eminently practical and completely
ethical. They reinforce the rights of individuals, both
men and women. And they encourage the development
of nations with justice and equity. I hope that the
Assembly will approach the remainder of the questions
to be decided in a spirit of constructive collaboration
and mutual regard.
We have come a long way. Let us leave the Hall
united and determined to work together for all people
of the world, and especially for the majority of the
world’s people, who happen to be women. Let us move
forward and keep moving forward, and let us resist any
actions that take us back.
I wish the Assembly all success in the rest of the
night.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I now
give the floor to Ms. Carol Bellamy, Executive
Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund.
Ms. Bellamy (United Nations Children’s Fund):
On behalf of the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), I am very pleased to address this special
session of the General Assembly to review and
appraise progress towards the goals that were set at the
Fourth World Conference on Women. From the
founding conference in San Francisco 55 years ago,
through Mexico City, Copenhagen, Nairobi and
Beijing, and on to this historic week, the United
Nations and its partners have worked tirelessly to
elevate the cause of women’s rights and girls’ rights to
the highest reaches of the international agenda.
The Beijing gathering was a watershed event in
that struggle. Like the Beijing Conference, this special
session has shown itself to be greater than the sum of
its parts. The very fact that 10,000 delegates from

65

A/S-23/PV.10

every region of the world, including young people,
have gathered in this place to meet, to debate, to
exchange ideas and information, to affirm old alliances
and to set new ones: that in itself is as eloquent and
empowering a statement as any that could be drafted.
That being said, one passionately hopes that
through this gathering we will not reverse the hard-won
gains of the past. Indeed, I can tell from the applause a
moment ago that all participants listened very carefully
to my colleague Nafis Sadik, who preceded me, and for
whom I have the most extraordinary respect. She raised
very relevant questions about why this process has
been so excruciatingly unfortunate in its outcome to
this point.
Yet I might say that for all the inspirational power
of events such as those we have seen this week, these
meetings are not in themselves what we need most to
sustain the struggle. They cannot close the gap between
the legal recognition of the rights of women and girls
and the real-life discrimination and marginalization and
outright violence that these girls and women still
endure, day in and day out, in every corner of the
world.
The realization of women’s rights will come only
through action: action to implement programmes that
will improve the daily lives of women and consolidate
their equal status. It is a process that must begin with
steps that will ensure the survival, the protection and
the full development of the girl child.
We all know that following the Beijing
Conference there has been action; there have been
successes. We have moved some steps closer to the
world we would all like. But we are still far from
fulfilling the promises that were made at Beijing.
Women and children are a majority of the 1.2 billion
people who are living in absolute poverty, and they
suffer disproportionately from the adverse effects of
globalization. Nearly 600,000 women and girls of
child-bearing age still die each year during pregnancy
and in labour. Countless numbers of women and
children endure violence, abuse and exploitation in
their daily lives as a result of armed conflict or
discrimination in their own families, a fact that is
underscored by new findings that at least one woman
or girl in three is beaten or sexually abused in her
lifetime. Women and girls are the most affected by the
pandemic of HIV/AIDS, which infects 8,500 children
and young people and kills 2,500 women each and

66

every day. Some 600 million women cannot read or
write, and the majority of the more than 110 million
children not in school are girls.
In the course of this week’s process of review and
appraisal, UNICEF has expressed its deep concern that
political will and resources and actions have yet to
match the commitments that were made in Beijing. But
we are heartened by the wealth of new ideas and
specific actions that have been discussed for
accelerating change, action that we hope will come as
we in UNICEF and others accelerate implementation of
the parallel commitments that were made at the 1990
World Summit for Children and other development
conferences of the past decade.
Throughout this process we have witnessed once
again the power of partnerships and the propellant
energy and enthusiasm of non-governmental and
women’s groups. Indeed, those groups and their power
have only grown with the influx of youth groups from
all parts of the world. Their participation has inspired
open and frank intergenerational dialogue on
everything from education, violence and social and
political participation to macroeconomic policies,
HIV/AIDS prevention and peace-building.
UNICEF remains convinced that the goals of
development, equality and peace are within reach, that
we can create a world where the rights of women and
girls are not violated or exploited, and where they are
free to develop to their full potential and to play active
leadership roles in their community.
If women are to enter and participate in
government bodies, political parties, labour unions and
community organizations and the like, then we must
free girls to expand their capacities and horizons, to
voice their opinions, to achieve their dreams. But for
this to happen, we must act now, using the tools and the
knowledge that already exist for reducing poverty and
eliminating the entrenched discrimination that
marginalizes women and children.
Fulfilling the right of every girl to education is
the key to promoting true equality between boys and
girls and men and women. That is why the United
Nations initiative on girls’ education that was launched
by the Secretary-General at the World Education
Forum in Dakar just last month is so important, and
why, with our partners, UNICEF continues to promote
quality basic education for all, with girls’ education as
our top priority. Girls’ education is a proven best

A/S-23/PV.10

investment. It is a best investment for human, social
and economic development. But most important, it is
every girl’s right.
We must break the intergenerational cycle of
discrimination and disadvantage. And we must begin
by creating environments where girls and boys are
respected and cared for equally in early childhood. We
must ensure that they are breast-fed; that they have
access to unpolluted air, safe drinking water and
uncontaminated food; that they live where there are
adequate sanitation facilities; and, above all, that they
have time and space to play, to interact with others, to
learn and to be loved. We must ensure also that there is
good care not only for young children but also for their
mothers, who often have no voice, limited access to
resources, no legal protection and no respect. And we
must involve fathers in the care of young children.
If girls are to realize their rights to education and
prepare for adulthood, they must not be deprived of
schooling for reasons of domestic labour and poverty.
At the same time, schools must be transformed into
safe places where girls can learn, participate, feel
respected and develop confidence and self-esteem.
That means eliminating all forms of gender bias
and discrimination in education systems and in the
learning process. It means that schools must have
adequate hygiene and sanitation facilities, health and
nutrition services and policies that guarantee physical
and mental health, safety and security. It also means
that schools must be equipped to deliver quality
education. We must find ways for them to be used more
creatively to reduce, rather than to increase, disparities
in access to quality learning. That includes making sure
that girls have opportunities to benefit from the
benefits of both new and old technologies, such as
Internet connectivity and radio instruction. Finally, we
must aim for socialization of girls and boys in a culture
of non-violence and respect for others’ rights, inherent
dignity and equality. Equality in relationships with men
and boys is essential if women and girls are to protect
themselves, whether against violence, HIV/AIDS or
anything else.
To achieve these ends, new collaborative
relationships are needed within communities, among
youth groups, religious leaders, non-governmental
organizations, schoolteachers, health professionals,
men’s groups and women’s groups and between

communities and policy and decision makers at all
levels.
We have entered a new era in fulfilling the human
rights of women and girls. Throughout this week fresh
ideas have emerged for making equality, development
and peace a reality. Innovative actions and strategies
have been recommended for overcoming obstacles and
addressing the emerging issues. And new partnerships
have been forged for creating and enabling
environments to fulfil the equal rights of women and
girls.
We have a framework for global action in the
Platform for Action. We have instruments, like the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, and we know what we
have to do.
Let us leave here and begin the real work.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I give
the floor to Mr. Mark Malloch Brown, Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme.
Mr. Brown (United Nations Development
Programme): The most striking single social, political
and economic transformation of the past century has
been the emergence of women as leaders in nearly
every country and in every walk of life, from the
thousands of women in India who entered local
government, thanks to the panchayat legislation, to
brave and accomplished leaders of social movements
like Bella Abzug.
As the report on the world’s women prepared by
the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) clearly showed this week, while progress
has been encouraging on so many fronts, particularly
since Beijing, there is still a long, long way to go.
Whether we are talking about women’s presence in
parliaments, in business, in education or simply the
right to vote, own property and be protected from
violence and discrimination, much, much more still
needs to be done to achieve gender equality. That is
why, if the Beijing Conference was about
commitments, Beijing+5 must be about how we are all
going to meet those commitments. It must be about
demanding
accountability
from
Governments,
businesses and civil society on achieving goals and
targets they have set. It must be about moving gender
issues from the margins to the mainstream, from the

67

A/S-23/PV.10

grass-roots reality to policy makers in everything,
everywhere, from international organizations to
national budgets to local governance.
But above all Beijing+5 must not be about
turning back. A famous lady Prime Minister in my own
country once said, in warning voters and her opponents
that there would be no U-turns, “This lady is not for
turning”. I hope the same can be said of all the
delegates here, women and men alike.
As an organization, the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) is committed to
helping answer those tough questions by using our
universal presence and strong record as trusted partner
in many countries, to help build capacity and strong
institutions that help drive human development with
gender sensitivity. That means we are striving to move
beyond treating gender issues simply as a separate set
of concerns; we are trying to mainstream gender
throughout our policies and internal working practices
and across our country offices.
There are three broad areas where we are doing
so: by playing a strong and powerful advocacy role in
raising awareness of issues and policy; helping
mainstream sound and sensible policies relating to
women; and making smart use of strategic partnerships
to help implement them. To do the first, advocacy, we
need suitable tools than can be used to monitor and
advocate the policies and processes that enable women
to take full control of their lives and the decisions that
affect them. We need the tools to measure progress and
accountability. That is why in 1995 UNDP devoted its
annual Human Development Report to the issues of the
Beijing Conference. In it, we introduced a set of key
indicators, specific to gender and development and
gender and empowerment, that have become widely
recognized. Five years later these have now become the
benchmark by which the human impact of development
initiatives is measured. By using them and their
correlates in national human development reports, we
can and must play an important campaigning role with
our partners in civil society, Governments and the
media.
UNDP views itself as a campaigning
organization, committed to stoking the demand for
change, but we are also a policy advisory agency,
helping Governments craft the policies and institutions
that drive gender equality and women’s empowerment.
That means smart, active policy to address property

68

rights, credit, communications and learning needs that
women must have addressed if they are to seize their
full potential and economic opportunities. I am
particularly interested in helping Governments forge
the right response to the information technology
revolution, so that through public/private partnerships
we can harness its transformative power to the credit
market access and learning needs of poor women.
The new UNDP is about advocacy, policy advice
and, thirdly, partnerships, inside and outside the United
Nations family. Inside, our younger sister, UNIFEM,
under the dynamic leadership of Noeleen Heyzer and
her team, have led the way in demonstrating
approaches that link micro-level actions with macrolevel policies in specific areas. Then we at UNDP can
use our own macro-strengths and country offices to
mainstream those experiences and bring them to the
attention of Governments. For example, when
UNIFEM initiated a global campaign on violence
against women, UNDP offices across Latin America
were able to contribute directly to transformation of
legislation across the region. In that way, we were able
to leverage UNDP’s strengths in advocacy, policy
formation and partnerships with positive results.
UNDP’s field expertise has also grown into a
network of gender focal points. Here our work with a
wonderful team of United Nations Volunteers (UNV)
gender specialists based in UNDP field offices has
been another outstanding example of partnership that
has attracted large donor support.
But, in the final analysis, success or failure for us
and our United Nations sisters can only be judged by
the world’s women, by whether we have contributed to
providing choices and opportunities for those who have
never had them — education for girls who have been
denied it; protection from abuse at home and in the
workplace for wives and mothers who have long had to
endure it silently; and access to real political and
economic power for all women in every country. Our
job will not be done until we achieve all the goals of
the Beijing Platform for Action.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I call
on Ms. Noeleen Heyzer, Executive Director of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women.
Ms. Heyzer (United Nations Development Fund
for Women): Beijing was the unbracketing of women’s
lives and nowhere at any time must the brackets be put
back on.

A/S-23/PV.10

I am very pleased to have this opportunity to
address participants on this final day of the Beijing+5
review. I congratulate everyone — Governments, nongovernmental organizations, the United Nations
agencies and the Secretariat — on the hard work that
has gone into the preparations and proceedings. The
stakes for women have been high and the differences of
opinions and perspectives have been difficult to
negotiate, but the fervour with which all have
participated speaks to how central the issue of gender
equality is to all other concerns.
The President returned to the Chair.
My main purpose is to talk about the ways in
which we at the United Nations Development Fund for
Women (UNIFEM) hope to work in partnership with
participants to carry forward the agenda from this
review process and to strengthen it. As the women’s
fund at the United Nations, we have a special role and,
indeed, a special kind of relationship with
Governments and non-governmental organizations
alike.
The core of UNIFEM’s work is not here in the
General Assembly or in the United States. We are
based very much on the ground in participants’
countries where women and girls live. We made a
choice at the beginning of this process to support the
concentrated effort at national and regional levels for
the preparation of the Beijing+5 review process. The
agendas that have emerged from these consultations
have led to concrete follow-up plans at regional and
national levels. UNIFEM has already begun to map out
the next steps to follow up the Beijing+5 review
process in our strategy and business plan.
As the plan indicates, we will continue to build
on the capacity of women’s economic rights. We will
engender governance and leadership and work to
promote the human rights of women, particularly the
eradication of violence against women. UNIFEM has a
unique position from which to envision a world free of
violence, poverty and exclusion. We are privileged to
work with creative and innovative partners in
Governments and non-governmental organizations in
over a hundred countries. The promising strategies that
we have supported in countries if scaled up through
increased private financial support and political will
will make a significant difference on the path to gender
equality — for example, learning from the gender
budgets initiative. In fact, this could lead to the

engendering of budgets to ensure that the prioritization
can occur so that the promises and commitments of the
Beijing+5 process can be implemented.
Learning the ways in which women have access
to markets and information technology is extremely
important. We need to ensure that women reshape
globalization from the perspective of poorer women. At
the same time, if we learn from the strategies to build
the political capacity of women, we will also make sure
that there is greater participation of women in all
countries throughout the world.
The partnerships that have developed between
Governments and non-governmental organizations to
understand the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women is extremely
important, and we have worked extremely hard to
ensure that that happens. At the same time, learning
from the countless efforts to combat the multiple forms
of violence against women is something to which we
will commit ourselves. The challenge that we face after
the Beijing+5 process is to build on the good practices
and advances that have been made in countries
worldwide. These strategies need investments that will
allow us to scale up and turn these innovations into
standard practice.
In preparation for the Beijing+5 review, we have
published a document on progress of the world’s
women to review what has been achieved for women’s
economic empowerment. Advances towards equality
have not been even, and we still have a long way to go
before the promises of Beijing can become a reality.
Progress has one message, one that we hope all
Governments and non-governmental organizations will
take with them. It is that we need greater accountability
and the kind of political will, resources and targets to
know how far we have come in our journey and how
far we have to go.
We are proud of the progress made at this review
session in the area of the elimination of violence
against women. As a follow-up to Beijing, the General
Assembly established a trust fund to help us eliminate
violence against women, and UNIFEM has allocated $5
million to 80 programmes around the world. We hope,
through campaigns and this kind of trust fund, to help
in the eradication of all forms of discrimination against
women, especially in the area of violence.

69

A/S-23/PV.10

UNIFEM hopes to be a source of support and
knowledge for the strategies developed to follow up on
this session. We want to assist countries and
communities to reach the goals and targets that have
been agreed to. We published the document on the
progress of the world’s women to highlight three
elements that are critical to any follow-up strategies:
accountability, commitment and transformation. That is
“ACT” in short, which we hope will be the theme when
all return to their countries. We need to ensure
accountability for agreements in the Platform for
Action and the regional plans of action that emerged in
Beijing, but clearly in terms of the Convention and the
Optional Protocol. We need to demonstrate
commitments to the resources made available, and we
need to promote the kind of transformation to ensure
the perspectives, interests and contribution of women
and girls to shape our world in accordance with
international human rights treaties and standards.
Let us in the next five to ten years have a strong
focus on accountability in terms of the commitments
we make and in terms of transformation. Let us act.
Only then can we bring about a world free of violence
and poverty, a world ordered in such a way that all
basic needs become basic rights. That is a world I pray
the twenty-first century will see.
The President: In accordance with the decision
taken at the meeting this morning, I shall now call on
the representatives of the five selected nongovernmental organizations. I again remind those
speakers that their statements should not exceed five
minutes.
I call on Ms. Gladys Mutukwa, Chairperson of
Women in Law and Development in Africa.
Ms. Mutukwa: It gives me great pleasure to
quickly present the perspectives and expectations of
the African women non-governmental organizations to
the special session on Women 2000: gender equality,
development and peace for the twenty-first century.
These expectations and perspectives emanate
from the meetings of the African non-governmental
organization caucus that have been taking place here
throughout the period. The caucus notes that in the last
five years since Beijing there has been some progress
in Africa in the implementation of the strategic
objectives of the Beijing Platform for Action in certain
areas. But there has also been a lot of deterioration in
the situation of women in a number of fields. The

70

African women non-governmental organizations wish
to state that great concern over this deterioration in the
situation of women in Africa inspires and influences all
our work on the ground, in the various villages, towns,
communities and cities of Africa. It also inspires our
participation in this and other conferences.
We also wish to draw the attention of the
Assembly to the fact that the eyes of millions of
women in Africa are focused here. They want to see all
Governments stand strongly behind the commitment
they made to them in the Beijing Platform for Action.
The
African
women’s
non-governmental
organizations had the following expectations from this
session. We expected an honest, candid and bold
assessment of the constraints to the effective
implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action. We
also expected a recommitment to that Platform with no
renegotiation of the agreements contained therein. And
finally, we expected an outcome document that had
specific, concrete and sustainable actions with
measurable benchmarks and adequate resources for a
speedier translation of the Beijing commitments into
reality.
We the African non-governmental organizations
gathered here state categorically that there should be no
going back on Beijing. At the dawn of the new
millennium, we should be looking towards even
stronger commitments and even better implementation
rather than either going back or perpetuating the status
quo of five years ago.
Our participation and expectations are influenced
by the following factors in Africa: the great concern
that we have that in spite of the efforts made by civil
societies, Governments and other actors, the situation
of women has continued to deteriorate in all sectors.
We are disappointed at the lack of political will shown
by some States with respect to some of the
commitments made in the Beijing Platform for Action.
We also are inspired to go on by the shocking and
rising manifestations of all forms of violence against
women in the private and public sector.
We are also shaken by the devastating HIV/AIDS
pandemic, which is completely eroding even the
minimal gains women and girls have made in the past
decade and is destroying the social fabric of the
African continent.

A/S-23/PV.10

Our work also is based on great concern that the
goals of equality, development and peace of the last 25
years are still largely unfulfilled, even at the dawn of a
new millennium. We are also greatly concerned at the
fact that an entire generation of African youth are
growing up with decreasing opportunities in all spheres
of life and that girl children and young women are
particularly vulnerable due to a lack of educational
opportunities, sexual exploitation and a lack of
protection from discriminatory laws, practices and
beliefs.

I would return to the issue of HIV/AIDS, which is
a pandemic and a major disaster for Africa. It has
exacerbated the already vulnerable situation of
women’s health and their status and ability to access
socio-economic
rights.
The
nexus
between
discriminatory laws, culture, religion and general
disempowerment has led to a situation whereby the
pandemic is gradually wiping out an entire generation
of Africans. Governments should prioritize and
institute comprehensive, proactive and multisectoral
responses to the AIDS pandemic.

The African non-governmental organizations call
on all Governments and development partners to
reinforce their commitments to, and collaborate with,
local, national, regional and international women’s
non-governmental organizations in order to promote a
transformative development agenda for Africa.

Conflict is the other priority. Inter-State and intraState conflicts in Africa have increased over the last
five years, leaving over 2 million African dead and
many more as refugees and displaced persons. Many of
these are women and children. All Governments should
adopt holistic approaches to the issues of peacebuilding, rehabilitation, reconstruction and the
promotion of a culture of peace.

At the African Regional Preparatory Conference,
we set five regional priorities, to which we would draw
the attention of Member States. We hope that even at
this last minute people will take into account the
crucial realities of Africa.
These priorities are in the field of women and
decision-making, where we say that increased
participation by women in decision-making positions at
all levels should be given serious and urgent attention.
The other critical area is the issue of women’s human
rights. We see that in spite of the ratification of several
international and regional instruments for the
promotion of women’s rights, in most of Africa women
are generally still regarded as second-class citizens,
minors and the property of their husbands. There is no
excuse, as far as we are concerned, for failing to
recognize that women’s human rights are an
inalienable, integral and indivisible part of universal
human rights. It is also not acceptable to us that culture
or religion should be used as an excuse to violate
women’s human rights.
While we acknowledge that there have been some
benefits from the process of globalization, there have
also been many negative consequences for Africa,
especially in economic terms and in terms of its impact
on the social well-being of the people. The adoption
and implementation of macroeconomic policies and
programmes that are gender-blind have continued the
marginalization of women and the feminization of
poverty.

Cutting across all of these issues is the issue of
the girl child. The girl child of Africa today is the
woman of tomorrow, and what happens to that girl
child determines what type of woman she is going to
be. If she is uneducated now, she will end up an
illiterate African woman — that is, if she survives all
of these other problems.
The
African
women’s
non-governmental
organizations are very concerned about the slow pace
of the negotiations and the fact that some Governments
want to go back on the commitments made years ago.
We are still optimistic that belief in the rights of
women will come to the fore. We are also disappointed
that unfinished issues from other meetings and other
forums are being used today to delay progress on
women’s rights. We will, however, continue to work
hard in the various countries to make sure that we
finish up the business of using the Beijing Platform for
Action and the regional Platform for Action to improve
the lives of women, children and men in the African
continent. We will do this in partnership with
Governments and with all other actors, as we believe
that the rights of women and the issues of gender
equality are the business of us all — men, women and
children.
The President: I give the floor to Ms. Pam
Rajput, Vice-President of the Mahila Dakshata Samiti.
Ms. Rajput (Mahila Dakshata Samiti): I am
speaking before the Assembly on behalf of Asia Pacific

71

A/S-23/PV.10

Women’s Watch and of the region — indeed, on behalf
of 60 per cent of the women of the world. Our voices
are the voices of the women of the world at large.
During both the session of the Preparatory Committee
and the current week, we heard, throughout the
corridors of the United Nations, our sisters raise the
same concerns.
I may, however, hasten to add that I am not
consciously using the words “grass roots voices”, as I
fear that, due to unsustainable development policies,
the grass is disappearing, not to mention the roots. We
now hear about displaced women, refugee women,
squatter women, migrant women, trafficked women
and commodified women — where are their roots?
While acknowledging some gains from the
Beijing Platform, particularly a growing acceptance of
and commitment to addressing women’s needs, the past
few years have been particularly difficult for our
region. Challenges posed by new trends perpetuate
injustice, threaten world peace and impede women’s
empowerment. These include the negative impact of
globalization; the Asian financial crisis; the
intensification of armed and other forms of violence
conflict; the escalation of the use of religious, ethnic,
cultural and other forms of identity-based constructs to
deny women equal rights and resources; and the lack of
political will to empower women beyond policy
statements and legislation.
The region has seen an increase in the number of
women living in poverty and this has been largely
caused by the impact of international influences,
including globalization and the policies followed by
the Bretton Woods institutions and such bodies as the
World Trade Organization (WTO). There is reduced
access to affordable, quality health care, including
primary health care, and increased struggle for the
means of livelihood. Food security stands endangered
and drinking water is becoming scarce. I made a
statement before the meeting of the Preparatory
Committee in March and I am going to repeat it here
again because I find the audience different. I said:
“What does Miss Universe need? Pepsi. What does
Miss World need? Coca Cola. But what does the poor
woman need? Safe drinking water.”
It is equally important to take note of the
increasing culture of violence, trafficking, forced
prostitution and honour killings and the escalating
commodification of women and girl-children and

72

violation of their human rights. The participation of
women in politics and decision-making bodies, which
is crucial to the empowerment of women, continues to
be very low.
A revolution in communications is taking place
across the world. Women’s access to all means of
communication and public expression is essential to
their equal and democratic participation in the
development of communities and societies.
While noting the strengthening and enhancement
of national machineries, we lament the low level of
political will, the relative absence of genuine
monitoring and evaluation of other institutional
mechanisms, as well as resource commitment at both
the national and international levels.
We have begun the new millennium with the two
momentous events of Beijing+5 and the Social
Summit+5. As we from the women’s movement
commit ourselves to translating our vision into reality,
we strive to create societies based on individual and
social dignity in which women feel strong, active,
creative and empowered; where the vital power of our
bodies’ functioning and healing remains intact; where
our diverse abilities and talents are valued; and where
we make decisions and choices, express ourselves and
move freely and confidently without fear of violence.
We look to further initiatives from this special
session and a commitment to not going back on the
Beijing Platform for Action. We call upon the
Governments of the world, the United Nations,
international agencies, non-State actors and civil
society to have the courage and commitment to
translate the high hopes of the Beijing Platform for
Action into concrete actions that help us to move from
conflict inequality and injustice towards the principles
of mutual respect, equality and justice.
In conclusion, I would like to say that we have a
song from the women’s movement that we sang in
Nairobi and Beijing. “We shall overcome — we shall
overcome — we shall overcome some day.” How long
shall we sing “we shall overcome?” May we hope that,
when we assemble again in 2005, the lyrics will have
changed to “We have overcome — we have
overcome — we have overcome.”
The President: I now give the floor to Ms.
Françoise David, representative of the Canadian
Research Institute for the Advancement of Women.

A/S-23/PV.10

Ms. David (Canadian Research Institute for the
Advancement of Women) (spoke in French): I have
come here to speak on behalf of the women of North
America and Eastern and Western Europe, on behalf of
the diverse women who live in our region: young and
old women; women of all religions, ethnic origins and
social strata; white women, women of colour and
native women; heterosexual and lesbian women;
migrant women and disabled women.
We are proud of our diversity but we are aware
that it is also a source of discrimination and inequality
among women. Therefore, together, we have decided to
work for change. At the end of these days of difficult
and often very frustrating negotiations, we demand that
our Governments and that all Governments of the
world commit themselves wholeheartedly to adopting
concrete measures to ensure the equality of all women.
We demand parity, institutional mechanisms to
guarantee women’s right to equality, and financial
resources in the budgets of Governments, the
specialized United Nations agencies and regional
bodies to defend women’s human rights and support
women in need. We condemn the increasing poverty of
women throughout our region, especially in Eastern
Europe,
where
transitional
economies
and
liberalization have unleashed a brutal decline in living
conditions.
We therefore demand jobs for all women; a social
security net; salaries that offer a decent living; state
support for women’s entrepreneurship; protection of
labour laws; easier access to unionization; and
recognition of women’s unpaid work.
In the context of globalization, in which life itself
is an object and commodity, women’s poverty enriches
unscrupulous multinational corporations. For instance,
thousands of Eastern European women are lured into
illicit networks with promises of false jobs in the West.
They are exploited, humiliated and detained without
any real hope of succour. We therefore demand that
States adopt measures to put an end to the traffic in
women and girls.
The clash of arms has had a heavy toll in our
region, again in the East. Thousands of women and
their children have been abruptly thrown into the street.
They have lived weeks on end in terror of being raped,
beaten and killed. We, the women of Europe and North
America, say “no more war, no more bombs”. We say

“no” to the arms merchants who grow rich so that
others may starve and die in wars.
We also remind our States that women enjoy the
inalienable right to make choices about their lives,
bodies and sexual and reproductive health. We demand
that laws recognize this right. We demand concrete
measures and joint action from Governments and nongovernmental organizations to put an end to all forms
of violence against women. We must say “no” once and
for all to those who beat, harass, rape and kill women
simply because they are women and who arrogate to
themselves the right to make decisions for women and
to possess them as if they were mere objects.
Now that the United Nations special session on
women is coming to a close, and now that we have
been able to see how difficult it is to make progress in
the struggle of women for equality and freedom, we
wish to state that our struggle will not end, because we
now need more than just wishful thinking and
speechifying.
We
demand
concrete
action,
measurement indicators and deadlines. We demand
another gathering — a fifth World Conference on
Women — in 2005, where we will demand
explanations from all the world’s decision makers. We
are determined to fight tirelessly until the rights of all
women everywhere in the world are recognized.
At the invitation of the Women’s Federation of
Quebec, of which I am the President, millions of
women will march next fall in cities and villages
throughout 155 countries to demand an end to poverty
and violence against women. The World March for
Women 2000 will culminate here at the United Nations
on 17 October, where we will meet anew to work
together towards a world based on equality between the
sexes, social justice and the redistribution of wealth.
The President: I give the floor to Ms. Virginia
Vargas, President of the Centro de la Mujer Peruana
“Flora Tristan”.
Ms. Vargas (Centro de la Mujer Peruana “Flora
Tristan”) (spoke in Spanish): First, as part of civil
society in Latin America and the Caribbean, we
warmly congratulate the delegations of our region,
which, for the most part, have undertaken at this
session to advance the commitments of the Platform for
Action.
I do not know whether I should say “Good
evening”. Can one say “Good evening” on an evening

73

A/S-23/PV.10

such as this? Are those days good in which a single
word can make us lose sight of the fact that beyond it
are the lives of millions of women? What word can be
worth more than the concepts that the word itself
represents? What word has greater value than the
women who are trafficked in, or greater than that which
at this very moment hours of child labour are
producing? What word is worth more than the fear of
women living in areas of conflict, especially when
those areas of conflict are the very bodies of those
women? Is there a single word worth more than
migrant women working without rights and without
fixed hours? Can one hide discrimination and exclusion
with a single word? What colours do words have? In
what language and culture did the best and worst words
originate? With what language and with which culture
do we seek to place a value on the diversity of faces,
races, ethnic groups, histories and struggles of our
women? Can evenings, afternoons and mornings be
called good on days when Governments turn a deaf ear
to the commitments we women assumed, and which
many of those represented here have not respected?

countries and wishes to make war on the love that does
not fit its definitions?

How can we express in so short a time the
confidence with which we went to Beijing? How can
we speak about everything we have done in the past
five years to fulfil our part of the Platform for Action?
How can we express to those represented here that they
have placed our hopes in brackets because of a
language problem? After this sorry lack of action, how
can we believe in those Governments whose ruling
elites are more concerned with their own petty
religious, political and economic interests? How can
we go back to our countries and tell our peoples that 10
is more than 187? Must we once again convince the
Assembly that our struggle is just?

Ms. Badran (Alliance for Arab Women): I have
the privilege to speak on behalf of the Arab region,
with thousands of non-governmental organizations
working for women’s rights. We all share the same
language, and are united by the same destiny.

How many more words are necessary for youth
not to be stigmatized? How many words must be
learned for a female astronaut not to astonish anybody?
How much citizenship and democracy must be learned
for the positive discrimination and institutional
mechanisms that we called for to become things of the
past? How many more words are necessary for
pregnancy not to mean the risk of death, with abortion
the primary cause? How many words are necessary for
love not to be condemned when it does not conform to
the words that some of those represented here wish to
use to define it? What kind of logic is it that accepts
mutual hatred and war between and within our

74

What religion do words have? What words define
that God through whom attempts are made to
legitimize contempt, violence and injustice against
women? I say to those whom the cap fits: “With what
words do you believe can muzzle the creativity, ideas
and dreams of millions of women? Can we really seek
to change history in this new millennium? The time of
prohibition and brackets belongs to some of you here
but — in spite some of you — the time of history is
ours. You have the opportunity to advance with us
women. What words at this session will you place the
most value on? Five years ago in the General Assembly
it appeared that everything had been said. Now the
words no longer understand what is happening. The
words of the women of Latin America and the
Caribbean are ‘Rights, justice and democracy’. May
your words not take history backward.”
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Hoda
Badran, Chairperson of the Alliance for Arab Women.

At this important meeting, I would like to
highlight the following points.
First, we honour everything that has been
achieved through the Beijing Conference, the
International
Conference
on
Population
and
Development and all human rights instruments. We
will therefore take these achievements forward, not
backwards.
Secondly, significant steps have been taken since
Beijing by almost all countries of the Arab region.
Gains in critical areas of concern have been achieved.
Efforts are still needed, however, in the following
areas: ensuring the freedom of non-governmental
organizations and providing the necessary support for
their work; reviewing and changing existing
legislation, including family laws, existing textbooks
and media messages to eliminate all forms of
discrimination against women; ratification of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and its optional
protocol, and the Statute of the International Criminal

A/S-23/PV.10

Court, because there is no contradiction between them
and Arab constitutions or between them and the right
interpretation of Islam, which is the dominant religion
in the region. Moreover, we call for more
democracy — socially, economically and politically —
to allow all women to participate effectively in all
public decisions; we need protection for women
activists and intellectuals against violence and
reactionary campaigns, and against intimidation aimed
against free thinking.
Further, problems in the areas of the economy,
education and social insurance need to be addressed
more vigorously. The needs of rural women,
disadvantaged groups and others with special
handicaps should get more attention. Other issues to be
addressed include “honour killing”, reproductive health
and immigrant women. Resources to address women’s
needs have to be increased both nationally and
internationally.
The region has witnessed immense problems,
causing suffering among its women and affecting the
efforts of Governments to implement the Platform for
Action. Palestinian women have suffered, and are still
suffering, from displacement and, along with Syrian
women, are in distress as a result of the Israeli
occupation. Lebanese women too have suffered from
the continued invasion of the South. Iraqi, Sudanese

and Libyan women are suffering as a result of
economic sanctions and embargoes. We demand the
honouring of United Nations resolutions and just
peace; we demand the lifting of sanctions and the
freeing of prisoners from all prisons.
At this time of change, there is nothing that
cannot be changed to enable women to exercise their
rights more fully and to carry out their responsibilities
more effectively. Such changes can happen through
conscientious, purposeful social action, through the
provision of information and with the support of
legitimacy. If all of us — non-governmental
organizations, Governments and the business sector —
assume our responsibilities; if the media become the
messenger rather than the message; if we restore belief
in democracy: then we, men and women, may be able
to live and let live, and to love and be loved.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on agenda items 8 and 9.
In view of the fact that the Ad Hoc Committee of
the Whole has not completed its work, I shall now
suspend this meeting, which will resume immediately
following the conclusion of the work of the Ad Hoc
Committee of the Whole.
The meeting was suspended at 10.55 p.m.

75
