United Nations

A/ES-10/PV.27

General Assembly

Official Records

Tenth Emergency Special Session

27th meeting
Tuesday, 20 July 2004, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

The Hon. Julian R. Hunte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 4.10 p.m.
Agenda item 5 (continued)
Illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and
the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan to introduce draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.18/Rev.1, which has been circulated in
provisional form.
Mr. Zoubi (Jordan): I have the honour to
introduce, on behalf of the Arab Group and the
sponsors listed in document A/ES-10/L.18, as amended
in document A/ES-10/L.18/Rev.1 in its provisional
form, a draft resolution entitled “Advisory Opinion of
the International Court of Justice on the Legal
Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including in and around
East Jerusalem”. I may add that we have made sure
that the revised text has been distributed to all missions
in advance.
The structure of the revised draft resolution has
been thought through with extreme care, taking into
consideration the points of view of interested countries
and groups of countries. The text is divided into three
closely connected parts. The first two parts fall within
the preambular section and the third constitutes the
operative part.
The first preambular part contains the terms of
reference alluded to in the Court’s opinion, as well as

(Saint Lucia)

fundamental elements relevant to the subject matter, all
of which are familiar to all of us. The text also
specifies that the General Assembly receives with
respect the advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice on the legal consequences of the construction
of a wall in the occupied Palestinian territory, rendered
on 9 July 2004.
In the second part of the preambular section, the
draft quotes the Court’s reply to the question put forth
by the General Assembly in resolution ES-10/14,
which we believe, when taken together with the terms
of reference and other essential elements, is necessary
for the purposes of setting up the operative part.
As for the operative part, it consists of eight
paragraphs, beginning with the General Assembly’s
acknowledgement of the advisory opinion rendered by
the International Court of Justice, pursuant to a request
put forward by the Assembly itself last October. The
draft then goes on to demand Israel’s compliance with
its international legal obligations, as identified in the
Court’s opinion, as well as compliance by all States
with their own legal obligations, as identified in the
opinion itself. Moreover, the draft, in its operative part,
calls on States parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949 to ensure Israel’s compliance with
international humanitarian law. It also invites
Switzerland, in its capacity as the depositary of the
Geneva Conventions, to conduct consultations and to
report to the General Assembly on the matter, with
regard to the possibility of resuming the Conference of

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

04-43162 (E)

*0443162*

A/ES-10/PV.27

High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention.

By virtue of the discretion vested in me, I hereby
suspend the meeting.

We believe that a practical measure which the
General Assembly should take as a result of the
advisory opinion is to request the Secretary-General to
establish a register of damage caused by the building of
the wall in the occupied Palestinian territory. This has
been reflected in operative paragraph 4.

The meeting was suspended at 4.20 p.m. and
resumed at 6.55 p.m.

Finally, we hope that the General Assembly will
unanimously adopt the draft resolution, as revised. I
beg members’ permission to allow for further
amendments to be presented from the floor.
The President: Before we proceed further, I
should like to consult the Assembly with a view to
proceeding immediately to consider the draft resolution
contained in document A/ES-10/L.18/Rev.1 in its
provisional form. In this connection, since the revised
draft resolution has been circulated only today, it
would be necessary to waive the relevant provision of
rule 78 of the rules of procedure.
The relevant provision of rule 78 reads as
follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed
or put to the vote at any meeting of the General
Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated
to all delegations not later than the day preceding
the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Assembly agrees with this proposal.
It was so decided.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/ES-10/L.18/Rev.1 in its provisional
form.
I call on the representative of the Netherlands on
a point of order.
Mr. Peersman (Netherlands): In our capacity as
the European Union Presidency, we would like to ask
your indulgence, Sir, in requesting some time for
consultations before we continue the meeting. Would
you be able to grant that request?
The President: A request has been made for a
suspension of the meeting to allow for further
consultations on the draft resolution.

2

The President: I apologize for the delay. I am
sure that the majority of those who have been members
of this body for many years appreciate that that is
nothing unusual. It is a testimony to the strength of the
Organization and to its resilience that we are able to
exercise such a great measure of good governance. I
thank members for that.
I give the floor to the representative of
Liechtenstein to introduce amendments to draft
resolution
A/ES-10/L.18/Rev.1,
as
previously
circulated in provisional form.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): As members
know, lengthy and complex consultations have been
carried out on draft resolution A/ES-10/L.18/Rev.1 in
its provisional form. As a result of those consultations,
I have been asked by the main parties involved in the
talks to read out to the Assembly the changes to the
draft resolution, upon which they have agreed. I will do
so in order to facilitate the proceedings of the
Assembly. I understand that the text that I am about to
read out has been distributed in the room.
There are, to begin with, two new preambular
paragraphs. Immediately following the fourteenth
preambular paragraph, which begins, “Condemning all
acts of violence”, two new preambular paragraphs are
to be inserted. They read as follows:
“Calling upon both parties to fulfil their
obligations under relevant provisions of the road
map, the Palestinian Authority to undertake
visible efforts on the ground to arrest, disrupt and
restrain individuals and groups conducting and
planning violent attacks and the Government of
Israel to take no actions undermining trust,
including deportations and attacks on civilians
and extrajudicial killings,
“Reaffirming that all States have the right
and the duty to take actions in conformity with
international law and international humanitarian
law to counter deadly acts of violence against
their civilian population in order to protect the
lives of their citizens”.

A/ES-10/PV.27

Those two new paragraphs constitute all the
changes that are to be made to the preambular part.
I now turn to the operative part of the draft
resolution. In paragraph 2, the word “identified” is to
be replaced with the word “mentioned”. In paragraph
3, the first word, “Demands”, is to be replaced with the
words “Calls upon”, and the word “identified” is to be
replaced with the word “mentioned”. Finally, in
paragraph 7, the word “compliance” is to be replaced
with the word “respect”.
Those are all the changes that I have been asked
to read out. I hope that that will facilitate our work this
evening.
Mr. Zoubi (Jordan): Jordan, on behalf of the
Arab Group and the sponsors, accepts the amendments
presented by the Permanent Representative of
Liechtenstein. We appreciate his efforts.
Mr. Van den Berg (Netherlands): The
Netherlands, on behalf of the European Union, can
accept the amendments as put forward by the
Permanent Representative of Liechtenstein.
The President: In view of the statements just
made, we shall now proceed to consider draft
resolution A/ES-10/L.18/Rev.1, as orally amended in
its provisional form.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Ms. Kelly (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
resolution A/ES-10/L.18/Rev.1, as orally amended in
its provisional form, I should like, on behalf of the
Secretary-General, to inform Member States that by
operative paragraphs 4, 5, 7 and 8, the General
Assembly would:
“[Request]
the
Secretary-General
to
establish a register of damage caused to all
natural or legal persons concerned in connection
with paragraphs 152 and 153 of the Advisory
Opinion” (para. 4);
“[Decide] to reconvene to assess the
implementation of the present resolution, with the
aim of ending the illegal situation resulting from
the construction of the wall and its associated
regime in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem” (para. 5);

“[Call] upon all States Parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 to ensure respect by
Israel for the Convention, and invites
Switzerland, in its capacity as the depositary of
the Geneva Conventions, to conduct consultations
and to report to the General Assembly on the
matter, including with regard to the possibility of
resuming the Conference of High Contracting
Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention”
(para. 7); and
“[Decide] to adjourn the tenth emergency
special session temporarily and to authorize the
President of the General Assembly at its most
recent session to resume its meeting upon request
from Member States.” (para. 8)
Should the General Assembly adopt draft
resolution A/ES-10/L.18/Rev.1, as orally amended in
its provisional form, with regard to operative paragraph
4, the Secretary-General would proceed to establish the
scope of work arising from the request and revert to the
General Assembly on its implications. Given the
number of disciplines involved, the resource
requirements are anticipated to relate to several budget
sections of the programme budget.
As concerns operative paragraphs 5, 7 and 8, at
this stage no financial implications are anticipated,
based on the assumption that no official document
involving translation is expected, that operative
paragraph 7 does not imply further meetings of United
Nations bodies and that only one possible additional
report is assumed, the size of which cannot be
determined at this stage.
Finally, I wish to inform members that the draft
resolution, as orally amended in its provisional form,
will be issued as an official document under the
symbol A/ES-10/L.18/Rev.1.
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote before the voting. May I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Clodumar (Nauru): At the meeting of the
resumed tenth emergency special session of the
General Assembly held on 8 December 2003 (see
A/ES-10/PV.23), my delegation cast a negative vote on
the resolution referring to the International Court of
Justice the question of the legal consequences of the

3

A/ES-10/PV.27

construction of a wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in and around East Jerusalem. The
reason for our action was essentially that we agreed
with the view that a resolution of the Middle East
conflict will be found not through non-binding judicial
intervention, but through a political process that is
highly dependent on the political will of the leaders to
lead their people towards peace.
We have not changed our view in that regard.
However, we have now gone beyond that point, and the
Court — having decided unanimously that the General
Assembly had the authority to refer the question of the
wall to the Court and that the Court had jurisdiction to
deal with that referral — issued its advisory opinion on
9 July. The draft resolution before the Assembly relates
to that subject.
My delegation listened carefully to the statements
made last Friday, and we have studied the draft
resolution. We have come to the conclusion that the
draft resolution has gone beyond being a procedural
one to accept the advisory opinion of the Court — I
refer to operative paragraph 1, which we can support,
together with operative paragraphs 6, 7 and 8 — to
become a substantive motion requesting, nicely or
otherwise, Israel and other Member States to act upon
the legally non-binding opinion of the Court. Here, I
refer to paragraphs 2 and 3.
Secondly, we do not believe that the General
Assembly is the appropriate forum in which to demand
action that touches upon peace and security, inter alia.
Therefore, my delegation cannot support that proposal.
My delegation sees paragraph 4 as pre-empting the
capacity of the Palestinians to establish such a register.
Other avenues of assistance should be explored before
the limited resources of the United Nations are
committed. Therefore, we do not support that proposal
either.
We view operative paragraph 5 as much more
than a procedural paragraph, since the purpose of
reconvening the emergency session has been
conditioned on the implementation of demands set out
in paragraph 3. We cannot support that proposal.
Therefore, the net result of our views on the draft
resolution is that my delegation will abstain in the
voting.
Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
We regret the rush of the General Assembly to adopt
this draft resolution. A durable solution is to be found

4

only in a negotiated settlement between Israelis and
Palestinians. From the outset, we have counselled
against taking any action that would interfere or be
inconsistent with peace efforts in accordance with the
road map. The draft resolution diverts attention from
where it should be: on practical efforts to move the
parties towards the realization of the ultimate goal of
two States living side by side in peace and security.
This distraction is precisely what last autumn we
feared could happen. The draft resolution remains
unbalanced. Nor does the draft resolution reflect the
fact that the Court’s decision may be quite limited in
its practical significance since it was based on
information about Israel’s security barrier dating from
last year. Much has changed since then, including the
Israeli High Court’s recent binding decision, which has
led to an ongoing process in Israel to adjust the
location of the barrier.
We also regret the effort to politicize the Court’s
non-binding opinion in this matter. Last autumn, we
expressed our concern about the potential risks to the
International Court of Justice of such misuse.
Moreover, we remain concerned about some of the
apparent legal conclusions in the opinion. For example,
it seems to say that the inherent right of self-defence
under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter does
not apply when a State is attacked by terrorist
organizations. That seems to be directly at odds with
the Security Council’s resolutions adopted after
11 September 2001, which confirm the right of selfdefence in the face of a terrorist threat.
We also have serious concerns about the push to
convene a conference of the High Contracting Parties
to the Fourth Geneva Convention. As in the past, we
oppose efforts to politicize the Geneva Conventions,
and we would not attend if such a meeting were held.
The United States remains convinced that the
focus must remain on President Bush’s vision of two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security, and on the road map as the appropriate
means to realize that vision. All sides are now focused
on Gaza and partial West Bank withdrawal as a way to
restart the progress towards that vision. The United
States, the Quartet, the international community and
regional partners are all engaged in intensive planning
and discussion about implementation of Israeli
disengagement from Gaza and parts of the West Bank
and related practical matters of security, Palestinian
reform and the economic and humanitarian needs of

A/ES-10/PV.27

Palestinians. The United States has resolved to
continue to seek a successful outcome to these efforts
and to realize peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Rodríguez Zahar (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Last December, with Mexico’s vote in
favour, the tenth emergency special session of the
General Assembly adopted the historic resolution ES10/14, which requested an advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice. In that manner, Mexico
expressed its deep concern at the content of the report
of the Secretary-General on the construction of a wall
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem (A/ES-10/248). At the same time, we
expressed our confidence in the International Court of
Justice to resolve the question before it in accordance
with international law. The General Assembly’s action
was responsible and adhered to the Charter of the
United Nations, whose preamble cites the need, “to
establish conditions under which justice and respect for
the obligations arising from treaties ... can be
maintained”.
Today, Mexico will vote in favour of draft
resolution A/ES-10/L.18/Rev.1, as orally amended in
its provisional form, in order to manifest our deep
esteem for and confidence in the International Court of
Justice and because we greatly appreciate the fact that
the Court, having agreed to rule on the question
formulated, offers the parties in conflict and the
international community as a whole legal rulings of
great significance that will contribute to finding a
lasting and strictly legal solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict.
Mexico, which accepted the binding authority of
the International Court of Justice at the time of its
creation, has turned to it for both advisory opinions and
the settlement of legal disputes. Our confidence in that
high organ has only grown over the years. The
objectivity and great care taken with both the form and
the content of its decisions strengthen the legality and
the certainty on which relations between States should
rest. My Government welcomes the fact that Palestine,
with the support of the General Assembly, has been
able to turn to the only international court to which it
has access. In good faith, Palestine submitted to the
Court fundamental legal questions that are key for
solving the complex conflict that has stained with
blood the Palestinian and Israeli peoples.

Mexico believes that with this advisory opinion,
the Court has contributed significantly to clarifying the
scope of applicable norms of international law,
including international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, as well as the scope of
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council. We hope that the Court’s legal
rulings will mark a new stage in the search for a
solution ensuring lasting peace for Israel and Palestine
within borders that are secure and internationally
recognized — but that are also secure.
As a Member of the Organization aware of its
obligations, Mexico fully adheres to the Court’s
recommendations to Member States and expresses its
complete readiness to act accordingly.
Finally, Mexico respectfully calls on the Security
Council to consider the Court’s recommendations to it
and to consider what additional measures are necessary
to put an end to the illegal situation created by the
construction of the wall.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the vote.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/ES-10/L.18/Rev.1, entitled “Advisory
Opinion of the International Court of Justice on the
Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including in and
around East Jerusalem”, as orally amended in its
provisional form..
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chile,
China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic

5

A/ES-10/PV.27

Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and
Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Canada, El Salvador, Nauru, Papua
New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Uganda,
Uruguay, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/ES-10/L.18/Rev.1, as orally
amended in its provisional form, was adopted by
150 votes to 6, with 10 abstentions (resolution
ES-10/15).
The President: Before giving the floor to those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote on the resolution just adopted, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Gillerman (Israel): I should like to start with
a vote of thanks: thank God that the fate of Israel and
of the Jewish people is not decided in this room.

6

Let there be no mistake: Israel has respect for the
Assembly and for the noble principles for which it
stands. It is precisely because of this respect that we
cannot but be dismayed that harmful and politicized
interests too often seek to gain control of its mandate
and activities. It was that principled position that led
many States to join Israel in objecting to the abuse of
the International Court of Justice last December, and it
is that same position that should have led States to
object to the resolution voted on today.
In this context, we would like to express our
sincere appreciation to those States that decided not to
support
today’s
one-sided
and
totally
counterproductive resolution.
Sadly, the Assembly has missed yet another
opportunity to make a relevant contribution to the
cause of peace, by pandering to an agenda that seeks to
focus on the response to terrorism, but also to
marginalize the gravity of terrorism itself and the
responsibility of the Palestinians to end their terror.
This resolution cannot but embolden those who are the
true enemies of Israeli and Palestinian people.
We recognize the efforts of certain States that
have sought to introduce some semblance of balance
into the text of the resolution. But in our view that was
not the issue here. It is not about grudging references
to terrorism or carefully crafted, often constructively
ambiguous, phrases. It is about whether States will
grant legitimacy to initiatives that, at their heart, are at
odds with the very spirit and letter of the road map. It
is about whether States will entertain, with polite
diplomacy, efforts that are so transparently designed to
ensure that no genuine pressure is ever brought to bear
against the terrorism that made the security fence
necessary and that at this moment — and at every
moment — is sabotaging the prospects for peace. It is
about whether, in addressing an issue of direct
relevance to a country’s national security — of direct
relevance to the life and death of its citizens — the
Assembly can afford to show such little regard for
Israel’s right and duty to protect its people.
There is a broader context and a wider goal that
this resolution belittles, if not ignores. A central part of
that context is the continuing threat to peace and to
lives posed by the deadly violence that, just today,
claimed the lives of two Israeli soldiers — killed by yet
another Hizbullah violation of the Blue Line. Without a
comprehensive approach to the obligation of all

A/ES-10/PV.27

parties — an approach that is so lacking in this myopic
resolution — we cannot move towards peace. Those
States that recognized the harmful and perverse nature
of the advisory opinion request, especially those that
are members of the Quartet, are in our view dutybound to demand an end to the Palestinian abuse of
United Nations organs, not to engage with them.

thorough review of the entire route of the fence,
subject to judicial scrutiny, and we will ensure that the
correct and legal balance is struck between the quality
of life of individuals living along the fence and the
right to life of the civilians protected by it. But we
reject absolutely the attempt to use the law as a
political weapon, as if the law applies to Israel but does
not apply to anyone else. When all is said and done, it
is simply outrageous to respond with such vigour to a
measure that saves lives and to respond with such
casual indifference and apathy to the ongoing
campaign of Palestinian terrorism that takes lives. This
is not justice, but a perversion of justice, and people of
conscience around the world see it as such.

The ill-conceived resolution, and those that will
no doubt follow, will only complicate the mutual
implementation of the road map and erode its central
status. In order to return to the path of peace, passing
references to the road map and the mutual obligations
of both sides cannot be treated as bargaining chips for
which concessions are demanded and given. In terms
of returning to the path of peace, a total disregard for
Israel’s bold and courageous initiative to disengage
from Gaza and parts of the West Bank can only be
interpreted as a decision by those countries which
supported the resolution to disengage themselves from
the reality in the region. It does not bode well, and it
casts serious doubt on the ability of those States to
contribute to the peace process.

The price of the international community’s
indifference towards Palestinian lawlessness has been
painfully evident in the last few days. That lawlessness
and violence, bred by Arafat’s corrupt and repressive
rule, has received none of the Assembly’s attention, but
it is at the heart of the problem. The Palestinian
representative will no doubt blame the recent chaos in
Gaza on Israel, too.

In order to return to the path of peace, we should
not allow the misuse of the International Court of
Justice to take centre stage, while pushing the
imperative of mutual recognition and mutual
compromise to the sidelines. And in order to return to
the path of peace, we should not be so detached from
reality as to treat an advisory opinion as though it were
binding and binding Palestinian obligations as though
they were non-existent.

But that view is clearly not shared by many
ordinary Palestinians who actually live in the region.
Anyone familiar with the reality on the ground knows
that Arafat and his henchmen, having sponsored and
tolerated terrorism for so long and having refused to
allow security reform, as required by the road map,
have proved that they are neither willing to be partners
in peace nor ready to meet the responsibilities of
democratic leadership for their own people.

This is not a recipe for progress. It is a sure
recipe for failure. Regardless of actual events on the
ground, we can all rest assured that a new set of
virtual-reality draft resolutions will be presented in
September when the Palestinian representative hopes
that more public attention can be drawn to the matter.
After all, as long as these self-serving Palestinian
drafts are viewed as the basis for negotiations, rather
than as the basis for failure, we should not expect
anything different.

Sadly, the Assembly, by buying into a mock
narrative that fails to genuinely demand anything from
the Palestinian leadership, has reinforced their sense of
impunity and done nothing to compel them to rethink
their catastrophic strategy.

We will not repeat any of our comments
regarding the advisory opinion and the tainted process
that created it. We believe that our statement on Friday
speaks for itself. Israel is not above the law. Israel will
ensure that the route of the security fence complies
fully with the requirements of international law, as
detailed by its Supreme Court. We will continue our

Last December, a disservice was done by the
Assembly not just to the International Court of Justice
but to the balanced and non-selective application of the
rule of law. Today, we believe, the Assembly has
compounded that error. The reputation and credibility
of international judicial institutions are the worse for it;
the claim of the Assembly to legitimacy in dealing with
this conflict is the worse for it; and the Israeli and
Palestinian people are the worse for it.
Mr. Van den Berg (Netherlands): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries — Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey and

7

A/ES-10/PV.27

Croatia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates —
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the former Republic
of Macedonia, and Serbia and Montenegro — and the
European Free Trade Association (EFTA) country
Iceland, member of the European Economic Area,
align themselves with this declaration.
The European Union acknowledges the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice on the
legal consequences of the construction of a wall in the
occupied Palestinian territory, rendered on 9 July 2004.
In the spirit of consensus, we voted in favour of the
resolution that has just been adopted.
The European Union respects the International
Court of Justice, and the advisory opinion largely
coincides with the European Union’s position on the
legality of the barrier built by Israel on the Palestinian
side of the Green Line. The European Union once
again expresses its opposition to the route of the barrier
being built in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including in and around East Jerusalem.
The European Union will not conceal the fact that
reservations exist on certain paragraphs of the Court’s
advisory opinion. We recognize Israel’s security
concerns and its right to act in self-defence. The
European Union reconfirms its deep conviction that the
Quartet road map, endorsed by Security Council
resolution 1515 (2003), remains the basis for reaching
a peaceful settlement. It calls on all sides to refrain
from further escalation and to take the steps required to
begin the implementation of the road map.
The most important step is for all sides to desist
from all further acts of violence.
Ms. Jackson (Bahamas): The Bahamas
delegation voted in favour of draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.18/Rev.1, as orally amended, because of the
Bahamas’ unswerving commitment to the rule of
international law and those institutions which
promulgate such law.
While we fully appreciate the distinction between
an advisory opinion and a ruling by the International
Court of Justice, we would nonetheless wish to show
our support for the International Court of Justice and
the important role it plays in international affairs and,
indeed, in strengthening multilateralism.
The Bahamas recognizes the right of each State to
protect its people from violent and harmful acts, as

8

well as the obligation to respect human rights and
international humanitarian law. Accordingly, the
Bahamas continues to call on all of the concerned
parties to seek a lasting, peaceful settlement to the
conflict in the Middle East.
Ms. Rivero (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay does not reject or challenge the nature or the
value of the advisory opinion. Far from it, it reiterates
its commitment to international law and to the bodies
responsible for its application, specifically the
International Court of Justice.
Uruguay’s abstention cannot and should not been
seen as any kind of criticism of the International Court
of Justice or of its advisory opinion. Uruguay
abstained, as it did in the voting on draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.14, on the understanding that the request
made by the General Assembly for an advisory opinion
dealt with only one aspect of a very long-standing and
extremely complex issue.
We believe that the issue should be considered
within the context of the overall situation and that, in
selecting only one of the problems related to the
question, we are not making a concrete contribution to
the peace process in the Middle East. The reality is
infinitely more complex. In that respect, my delegation
reiterates once again its belief that returning to the road
map, which represents a comprehensive approach to
peace in the region, is the path to which we must
urgently return.
Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland supported the draft resolution that was put
to the vote. The text reflects the basic position that
expressed by the International Court of Justice in its
advisory opinion of 9 July last. The resolution calls on
the Government of Switzerland, in its capacity as the
depositary of the Geneva Conventions, to conduct
consultations and to report to the General Assembly on
the matter, with a view to ensuring respect for
international humanitarian law within the context of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, by including the
possibility of convening a Conference of High
Contracting Parties.
Switzerland stands ready to accept such a
mandate. We have done so in the past. Indeed, an
invitation extended to Switzerland to conduct
consultations of the Parties to the Geneva Conventions,
with a view to eventually resuming the Conference of
High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva

A/ES-10/PV.27

Convention, is nothing new for our country. Such
meetings have already taken place in Geneva, in 1997,
1998, 1999 and 2000.
The guiding principle of Switzerland’s actions in
this connection is based on the established parameters
of its humanitarian policy which are fully applicable to
the context of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict — that is
to say, the promotion of the universality of respect for
international humanitarian law; and the refusal to
support any attempt to politicize or instrumentalize
international humanitarian law.
Switzerland will therefore do its utmost, with a
sense of humility, realism and commitment, in the
discharge of its difficult mandate. It will commit itself
to promoting respect for international humanitarian law
and to the application of the Fourth Geneva
Convention in the context of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.
We will consult all the parties concerned with a
view to determining ways and means to best discharge
the mandate that has been entrusted to it by the
Assembly.
In that context, in the view of Switzerland,
convening an international conference is one of several
options. We will strive to achieve greater respect for
international humanitarian law by all parties.
Switzerland will also give particular attention to
ensuring that all consultations it might conduct within
the context of the mandate entrusted to it by the
General Assembly contribute to supporting and
facilitating the international community’s efforts to
find a negotiated political solution to the conflict.
Mr. Rock (Canada): At the time of the adoption
of resolution ES-10/14, which referred this issue to the
International Court of Justice, Canada questioned
whether the request for an advisory opinion was a
useful step, given the highly charged political
environment that existed at the time — and that still
prevails.
We acknowledge that there are elements of the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
(ICJ) that reflect Canadian policy regarding the
applicability
of
international
law,
including
international humanitarian law, and opposition to the
settlements within the Palestinian territories. Canada
has opposed the construction of the barrier within the
Palestinian territories and East Jerusalem, and we were

encouraged by the recent decision of the Israeli High
Court in that regard.
But in Canada’s view, any action by the General
Assembly should contribute to the aim of advancing a
just, lasting and negotiated settlement to the conflict
between Israelis and Palestinians. That includes any
action in relation to the ICJ advisory opinion, which is
meant to clarify some of the issues in order to assist the
parties in reaching a peaceful settlement. As the Court
itself noted, “the question of the wall is part of a
greater whole” (A/ES-10/237, p. 22). We believe it is
the responsibility of the General Assembly to consider
the ICJ’s opinion as part of that greater whole before
adopting a resolution on the subject. In Canada’s view,
the resolution just adopted by the Assembly does not
adequately discharge that responsibility.
To be sure, Canada remains concerned with the
highly prejudicial impact the barrier may have on
prospects for peace. The barrier’s adverse effect on the
ever more dire humanitarian and socio-economic
situation of the Palestinian population in the occupied
territories is indeed troubling. Although Israel has a
right and a duty to protect its citizens, measures taken
in that regard must be consistent with the applicable
international humanitarian law, which is binding on all
parties to the conflict.
But while we have serious concerns regarding the
route of the barrier, the issue of the barrier cannot be
viewed in isolation from Israel’s security concerns. As
the Court itself maintained, Israel has the right to take
necessary measures to protect the security of its
citizens and its borders from attacks by Palestinian
terrorist groups, including by restricting access to its
territory, but it must do so in accordance with
international law, including the law of occupation. The
resolution does not adequately reflect that reality.
Canada affirms the right of Israel to ensure its
own security. Neither terrorism nor support for
terrorists who target the innocent, in whatever form, to
advance whatever cause, can ever be justified. At this
time, Canada believes that it is the responsibility of the
international community, including the Assembly, to
help create conditions favourable to the peaceful
resolution of the conflict in the context of the Quartet’s
road map. However, we do not believe that this
resolution, which seeks to implement the Court’s
opinion as if it were a binding decision instead of an
advisory opinion, and which does not adequately

9

A/ES-10/PV.27

reflect the current situation of the larger conflict, will
help advance the cause of peace. For those reasons,
Canada chose to abstain in the vote on this resolution.
Mr. Strømmen (Norway): The advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice confirms with an
overwhelming majority that the wall violates
international law and that those parts of the structure
situated within the occupied Palestinian territory,
including in and around East Jerusalem, must be
dismantled. The Court’s conclusions concur with
Norway’s views, and we therefore voted in favour of
the resolution. A united international community,
headed by the Quartet, must continue its efforts to
revitalize the political process and to get the parties
back to the negotiating table. The tragic situation in the
Middle East can be brought to an end only through the
implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions.
Both parties must respect their obligations and
adjust their policies so as to be in accordance with the
road map. The Palestinian Authority must do more to
fulfil its obligations to reorganize its security apparatus
and thus enable it to fight terrorism more effectively. It
is crucial that Israel address its security needs within
the confines of international law. Norway calls upon
Israel to comply with its legal obligations as identified
in the advisory opinion.
Mr. Rehren (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): The
foundations of Chile’s general position on the Middle
East conflict, whose essential elements are strict
respect for the norms and principles of international
law, have enabled my country to reconcile the general
guidelines of our foreign policy with the promotion of
our bilateral relations both with Israel and with
Palestine and the Arab countries insofar as the parties
respect the basic principles to which I have just
referred. In conformity with that overall policy, my
Government is opposed to all acts of terrorism,
whether perpetrated by States or isolated extremist
groups. We categorically reject selective killings,
suicide attacks and all acts of violence affecting
innocent civilians.
We voted in favour of resolution ES-10/15,
adopted today, which acknowledges the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice of 9 July.
We particularly value the final preambular paragraph
of the resolution, which states that respect for the
International Court of Justice and its functions is

10

essential to the rule of law and reason in international
affairs.
Nevertheless, it had been our hope that the
resolution could have included an explicit reference to
Israel’s right and duty to protect the lives of its citizens
against indiscriminate and deadly acts of violence, in
conformity with applicable international law, as noted
in paragraph 141 of the International Court of Justice
advisory opinion itself.
Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan) (spoke in Russian): I
would like to inform the General Assembly that after
30 June, the delegation of Tajikistan temporarily lost
the right to an exemption under Article 19 of the
Charter. Accordingly, my delegation was not able to
participate in today’s vote. Had we been able to do so,
we would have voted in favour of resolution ES-10/15,
which we support.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the vote.
I now give the floor to the observer of Palestine.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine): The debate has been
concluded. We believe that it is time for
implementation, for compliance and, at a later stage,
for additional measures. We are not going to respond to
some of the comments that we heard earlier. We have
taken the floor simply to express our deep appreciation
and thanks to all for the magnificent results that were
achieved today in support of international law and in
support of peace and reconciliation in the Middle East.
We want specifically to thank you, Mr. President,
for your leadership and for your patience — something
which we also thank all Member States for
demonstrating. Of course, our deep appreciation goes
to the sponsors of the draft resolution and to all those
who supported its earlier versions, especially members
of the Non-Aligned Movement and members from the
three regions of Africa, Asia and Latin America.
Moreover, we appreciate the efforts of all those who
tried hard to reach agreement with us and to broaden
the support for such an important resolution. I would
like to mention specifically the European Union in that
regard.
The advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice that was rendered on 9 July is a historic
development. The advisory opinion identified and
affirmed the legal aspects related to the construction of
the wall in the occupied Palestinian territory, including

A/ES-10/PV.27

in and around East Jerusalem, as well as the legal
aspects of the question of Palestine and the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. We believe it is the most important
development within the United Nations system since
the partition plan.
Today’s General Assembly resolution —
especially since it was adopted by such an
overwhelming majority — also represents a very
important development. I might say that it could indeed
be the most important resolution of the General
Assembly, again, since the adoption of resolution 181
(II) of 1947. We are confident that all Member States
will deal with the provisions of the present resolution
with the needed utmost seriousness with regard to their
implementation.

Finally, I would like, on behalf of our people and
our leadership, to thank the General Assembly and all
its members for doing such a great job today. Permit
me also to express once again our thanks and
appreciation to the judges of the International Court of
Justice.
The President: At this stage, I should like to
thank all members for their patience and forbearance.
The tenth emergency special session of the
General Assembly is now adjourned, in accordance
with the terms of paragraph 8 of resolution ES-10/15,
adopted at the present meeting.
The meeting rose at 7.55 p.m.

11
