S/2018/174

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 March 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 52 of Security Council
resolution 2348 (2017). It covers major developments in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo since the issuance of my report of 5 January (S/2018/16). The report
describes progress in the implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic o f the Congo
(MONUSCO); provides an overview of political developments following my report
of 15 February on the implementation of the 31 December 2016 politic al agreement
(S/2018/128); outlines progress in adjustments to the Mission’s priorities, posture and
presence, as well as its comprehensive approach to the protection of civilians; and
provides information on the performance of MONUSCO uniformed personnel.

II. Major developments
A.

Political situation
2.
The political situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo remains tense,
with continued differences among Congolese stakeholders regarding the
implementation of the political agreement of 31 December 2016, notably with respect
to the holding of elections and confidence-building measures. Although the
Government and the ruling Majorité présidentielle took encouraging steps in
preparation for presidential and legislative elections scheduled for 23 December
2018, they made no significant efforts in the implementation of confidence-building
measures, including the opening of political space. The opposition continued to call
for the swift implementation of confidence-building measures to create conditions
conducive to the holding of peaceful and credible elections. However, it remains
divided over whether the President, Joseph Kabila, should be in office during the
transition period. Divisions also persisted within opposition platforms. On 30 January,
the Avenir du Congo party announced its withdrawal from the Rassemblement des
forces politiques et sociales de la République démocratique du Congo acquises au
changement (Rassemblement) subgroup known as the Group des sept, citing the
platform’s inability to coalesce behind a single presidential candidate. A subgroup of
the Rassemblement, the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social, remains beset

18-02992 (E)

050318

*1802992*

S/2018/174

by a struggle between the mainstream party, led by the interim leader, Félix
Tshisekedi, and the dissident wing of the party, under the moral authority of the Prime
Minister, Bruno Tshibala. Struggling with internal divisions and facing difficulties in
gathering popular support, opposition leaders have devoted greater efforts to
mobilizing their supporters by rallying behind the calls of the Comité la ïc de
coordination (CLC) for nationwide protests to demand the full and swift
implementation of the political agreement. The Government accused CLC and the
Catholic Church of instigating acts of “insurrection” aimed at disrupting the electoral
process, and national security forces continued to repress demonstrations.
3.
On 22 February, the Minister of Justice, Alexis Thambwe Mwamba, signed two
decrees granting release on parole to Huit Mulongo, the former Chief of Staff of the
opposition leader Moïse Katumbi, and amnesty to 33 individuals who had been
sentenced to prison for acts of insurrection and war and political offences. The
President of the National Council for Monitoring the Agreement and the Electoral
Process, Joseph Olenghankoy, indicated in the media that the decision had been taken
in line with confidence-building measures envisaged under the political agreement of
31 December 2016. Some civil society representatives expressed some reservations,
arguing that the release was not directly linked to the confidence-building measures.
4.
On 25 February, CLC called for nationwide demonstrations, supported by
opposition groups, to demand the swift implementation of the agreement of
31 December 2016. The Congolese National Police violently dispersed the p rotests,
which resulted in the death of at least 2 persons in Kinshasa and Mbandaka (Equateur
Province) and wounding of 47 and the arrest of 102 demonstrators. On 26 February,
the Mbandaka garrison military tribunal tried, under flagrante delicto procedure , a
police officer on charges of murder of a demonstrator in Mbandaka and sentenced
him to life imprisonment. A police officer accused of using a non -lethal weapon in a
disproportionate manner leading to the death of a demonstrator in Kinshasa was also
arrested.
5.
As political tensions mounted and international actors reacted to the situation,
the Government hardened its tone and position vis-à-vis some segments of the
international community. At a press conference on 26 January, Mr. Kabila stressed
that the electoral process was a national matter conducted under the oversight of the
Independent National Electoral Commission, reaffirmed the readiness of the
Government to finance the process and warned of external interference that could
undermine the sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In response to
the decision of Belgium to redirect its aid for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
from the Government to humanitarian and development partners pending progress in
the electoral process and the opening of political space, the Congolese authorities
indicated on 31 January that the Maison Schengen in Kinshasa had been ordered to
cease its consular activities until further notice. Furthermore, on 5 February, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo decided to reduce the number
of weekly Brussels Airlines flights to Kinshasa from seven to four, stated that it was
closing its consulate in Antwerp and requested the Government of Belgium to close
one of its consulates in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, possibly in Lubumbashi.
6.
During the reporting period, individuals suspected of attempts to overthrow the
Government were apprehended. On 29 January, Tanzanian authorities arrested a
renegade colonel of the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo — FARDC), John
Tshibangu, while he transited through Dar es Salaam airport. He had appeared in
propaganda videos in late January, allegedly in the border area of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and Uganda, delivering a 45 -day ultimatum for
Mr. Kabila to leave power. He was transferred on 5 February to Kinshasa, where he
awaits trial on charges of rebellion. Also on 5 February, Mr. Thambwe Mwamba
2/15

18-02992

S/2018/174

announced that Congolese rebel Freddy Libeba and an associate, Alexandre
Mitshiabu, had been arrested by national security forces in the border area with the
Central African Republic. Libeba is alleged to be an associate of renegade Colonel
Tshibangu.
7.
Although the political context remained fragile and important challenges
persist, some progress was made towards the implementation of the electoral calendar.
On 31 January, the Independent National Electoral Commission announced the
completion of voter registration in Kasai Province. Countrywide, more than
46 million potential voters, 47 per cent of whom are women, have been registered.
This marks the end of the update of the voter register in the 26 provinces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and a key milestone in the electoral process. On
24 January, MONUSCO organized an interactive session with donor countries for the
Commission to explain the functioning of the voting machines expected to be used in
the upcoming elections. The Commission has ordered hundreds of voting machines,
to be delivered between the end of February and March, with a view to raising the
population’s awareness of the use of the machines. However, the use of voting
machines remains controversial among Congolese political actors, given the ten se
political situation and technical questions that might arise with the use of the
machines on a large scale. During the reporting period, MONUSCO finalized its
electoral assistance concept note and operational plan. The Mission also assisted the
Commission in adjusting its operational strategy with regard to the introduction of
voting machines, in communication, awareness-raising and training efforts and in the
timely delivery of electoral equipment to over 23,000 training centres or voting sites
and over 90,000 polling stations. I have reported in further detail on the electoral
process and the support being provided by MONUSCO and the United Nations
Development Programme to the Commission in document S/2018/128.
8.
At the meeting of the African Union Peace and Security Council held on 27 and
28 January in Addis Ababa, the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Moussa Faki, stated that recent tensions and violence in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo served as a reminder of the importance of implementing the agreement of
31 December 2016 with a view to holding elections on 23 December 2018. On
1 February, the Executive Secretary of the Southern African Development
Community, Stergomena Lawrence Tax, visited the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and held meetings with senior government officials, as well as with
stakeholders involved in the electoral process, including MONUSCO. She called
upon Congolese political actors and the population to play their part in ensuring a
peaceful and credible electoral process, noting that electoral violence could have a
negative impact on stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.
9.
MONUSCO continued to support the implementation of the Peace, Se curity and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
On 24 and 25 January 2018, the Mission facilitated a national youth forum of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region for 70 participants on the
promotion of peace. Participants called upon the Government to increase space for
dialogue and involve the youth in decision-making processes related to elections.
10. On 14 February, in Kinshasa, the President of the Republic of the Congo, Denis
Sassou Nguesso, the Chair of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and President of Angola, João Lourenço, and Mr. Kabila met to discuss issues of
mutual interest, the situation in the Great Lakes region and the political and electoral
processes in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In a communiqué issued after the
meeting, the participants called for, inter alia, the full implementation of the Nairobi
declarations of 12 December 2013 and the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework; urged Congolese stakeholders to exercise restraint and condemned any
attempt to seize power by unconstitutional means; and indicated the readiness of the
18-02992

3/15

S/2018/174

Governments of Angola and the Republic of the Congo to support the authorities of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in overcoming the serious challenges in the
electoral process. The President of Gabon and Chair of the Economic Community of
Central African States, Ali Bongo Ondimba, and the President of Zimbabwe,
Emmerson Dambudzo Mnangagwa, met Mr. Kabila on 22 and on 2 7 and 28 February,
respectively, to discuss the situation in the region and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and issues of mutual interest.
11. In other political developments, on 20 February, Mr. Kabila appointed the
Secretary-General of the ruling Parti du peuple pour la reconstruction et la démocratie
(PPRD), Henri Mova Sakanyi, to the post of Vice Prime Minister and Minister of the
Interior, which had until then been held by Emmanuel Ramazani Shadary. On
26 February, Mr. Ramazani Shadary was appointed Permanent Secretary of PPRD.

B.

Economic developments
12. A downward economic trend persisted as inflation increased and the Congolese
franc depreciated by more than 30 per cent in the past 12 months. On 9 January, the
Ministry of Finance of the Democratic Republic of the Congo announced that
$489.2 million in revenue had been collected from the mining sector during the period
from January to September 2017, an increase of more than 9 per cent over the same
period in 2016.
13. On 27 January, Parliament adopted revisions to the 2002 Mining Code aimed at
significantly increasing revenue from the mining sector. Large international mining
companies operating in the Democratic Republic of the Congo responded with
criticism, cautioning that raising the cost of doing business could stifle investment.
The Code is awaiting promulgation by Mr. Kabila.

C.

Security situation
14. The security situation continued to deteriorate in many parts of the country.
FARDC launched major operations against both foreign and Congolese armed groups
in North Kivu and South Kivu. Despite those operations, armed group activity has not
decreased and intercommunity tensions continue to fuel violence in the Kivu
provinces. In the Kasai region, Kamuina Nsapu militias have stepp ed up their
destabilizing activities following FARDC redeployments to the east of the country for
military operations. Instability in the Central African Republic and in South Sudan
continues to destabilize the northern border areas of the Democratic Repub lic of the
Congo, with refugee flows into the country.
15. The general security situation in the Grand Nord area of North Kivu remained
volatile. Upon receiving reinforcements of troops and equipment from Haut -Lomami
and the Kasai provinces, FARDC launched, under Operation Sukola I, a major
offensive campaign against the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF). On 8 and
10 January, suspected ADF elements attacked FARDC positions on the Mbau Kamango axis. FARDC responded on 13 January with artillery fire in the Oicha area,
taking control of two major ADF camps. In response to the operations, suspected ADF
elements launched attacks on FARDC positions on 19 January, which resulted in the
killing of 12 FARDC soldiers and 4 ADF elements. ADF launched further attacks
against an FARDC camp near Mayi Moya on 21 January. On 24 January, suspected
ADF elements attacked FARDC in Mapobu (10 km east of Oicha), killing 5 FARDC
soldiers and wounding 36 others. MONUSCO provided support in evacuating the
wounded. On 13 February, the FARDC spokesperson for Operation Sukola I, Captain
Mak Hazukay Mongba, announced that FARDC had released several hostages from

4/15

18-02992

S/2018/174

ADF and taken control of a major camp of the armed group in Mwalika, about 80 km
from Beni. In Lubero territory, Mai-Mai groups continued to attack FARDC positions
and build a broader ethnic Nande Mai-Mai coalition. In late January, clashes between
Mai-Mai groups intensified along ethnic lines, with Nande Mai -Mai groups such as
Mai-Mai Mazembe, the Union des patriotes pour la libération du Congo and Mai-Mai
Kilalo clashing with ethnic Nyanga Nduma défense du Congo-Rénové forces in
western Lubero. The clashes resulted in the displacement of civilians.
16. Elsewhere in North Kivu, a Hutu Mai-Mai Nyatura faction, led by Mai-Mai John
Love, attacked Yobora village (50 km north of Nyanzalé) in Rutshuru territory and
burned down 140 huts belonging to the Nande community, prompting the population
to flee towards Kanyobagonga. In Masisi territory, tensions within the ethnic Hunde
Mai-Mai groups, including the Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et
souverain, led to the emergence of several splinter groups and an increase in threats
to the civilian population.
17. On 12 February, FARDC and the Rwanda Defence Force clashed in the border
area close to Virunga National Park, in Rutshuru territory, North Kivu. The
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda traded
accusations of violation of territorial sovereignty, each claiming that the clashes
occurred on its side of the border. Congolese and Rwandan authorities have requested
the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism to investigate the circumstances
surrounding the incident. MONUSCO provided support to the investigations of the
Mechanism. On 17 February, the Rwanda Defence Force announced that it had handed
over the bodies of three Congolese soldiers killed during the clashes to FARDC.
18. In South Kivu, Mai-Mai Yakutumba and allied groups conducted major attacks
against FARDC, notably on 5 January, when Mai-Mai elements attacked an FARDC
position near Uvira, killing four FARDC soldiers and five national police officers. On
18 January, suspected Mai-Mai Yakutumba elements attacked an FARDC convoy
carrying the newly appointed South Kivu commander for Operation Sukola II,
General Philemon Yav, killing four FARDC soldiers. FARDC launched operations
against Mai-Mai Yakutumba on 21 January and took control on 25 January of
Kazimia, a stronghold of the armed group. On 25 January, a large group of Mai -Mai
elements attacked an FARDC position in Mahembe (25 km west of Lulimba), forcing
FARDC to retreat. On 27 January, suspected Mai-Mai elements clashed with FARDC
in Kahoho (50 km south-west of Lulimba) and reportedly burned houses before
retreating. On the same day, up to 70 suspected Mai-Mai elements ambushed a
MONUSCO convoy at Kalonda II (25 km south of Lulimba), killing one Pakistani
peacekeeper and wounding another. The violence in this region of South Kivu
Province has resulted in the displacement of thousands of civilians, inclu ding over
8,000 who fled to Burundi and 1,200 to the United Republic of Tanzania. FARDC
military operations forced several Mai-Mai Yakutumba elements to flee to Burundi.
On 3 February, media reports indicated that the Government of Burundi had
extradited 34 Mai-Mai Yakutumba elements to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
On 8 February, General Yav announced that FARDC operations had resulted in the
death of 83 Mai-Mai Yakutumba elements and 6 FARDC soldiers and the capture of
120 Mai-Mai elements. He added that almost all the localities formerly under the
control of the armed group had been recovered by FARDC, including the Ubwari
Peninsula and the coastline of Lake Tanganyika from Kalemie to Uvira.
19. Elsewhere in South Kivu, in Shabunda territory, Mai-Mai Raia Mutomboki
factions appeared to be expanding, attacking mining sites and looting population
centres. From 17 to 19 January, in the Uvira area, FARDC repeatedly clashed with
the Burundian Forces nationales de libération and associated Congolese Mai -Mai
groups. On 23 January, a Banyamulenge landowner was killed by unknown assailants
near Mutarule, increasing intercommunity tensions. This coincided with an increase
18-02992

5/15

S/2018/174

in insecurity on the Kamanyola-Uvira road amid tensions related to the presence of
2,499 Burundians from the Zebiya religious sect in Kamanyola.
20. In Tanganyika Province, the security situation deteriorated further owing to the
expansion of Mai-Mai Yakutumba and its allies into the north of the province and the
spillover effects of FARDC operations in South Kivu. On 2 January, Mai-Mai Hapa
na Pale elements allied with Mai-Mai Yakutumba attacked an FARDC position near
Lumumba (20 km south of Bendera), killing three FARDC soldiers. Subsequently,
between 5 and 14 January, FARDC and the armed group repeatedly clashed in the
area north of Kongolo, which resulted in the death of an unconfirmed number of
soldiers, rebels and civilians. On 2 and 5 January, MONUSCO provided medical
evacuation support to FARDC. Elsewhere, in Nyunzu and Kalemie territor ies,
intercommunity tensions between the Luba and Twa continued, with militias on both
sides remaining active.
21. In Haut-Katanga Province, there was continued spillover from Tanganyika
Province, with the situation in Pweto continuing to cause concern as FARDC clashed
with the Éléments militia group. On 14 January, there were reported clashes between
Twa militias and the Éléments at Kabulembe (45 km south-east of Pweto), causing a
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Katama groupement (40 km north-east
of Pweto), including displacements of the local population. By the end of January,
Zambian officials stated that 14,283 Congolese had fled into Zambia.
22. In Ituri Province, while the human rights abuses committed by the Force de
résistance patriotique de l’Ituri (FRPI) have decreased slightly, the militia remains
the greatest source of insecurity. In January, there were reports of involvement of
FRPI elements in the looting of villages, rape, and abduction, torture and ill -treatment
of civilians. In Djugu territory, tensions persisted between the Hema and Lendu
communities following an outbreak of intercommunal violence in December 2017.
Between 12 and 30 January, Lendu youth armed with machetes killed four women
and one man and wounded two women and four men from the Hema community.
Hundreds of houses were burned down in the intercommunal violence. On 3 February,
members of both communities clashed in the villages o f Blukwa and Drodro, leading
to at least 25 deaths. On 20 February, in Djugu territory, Lendu youths reportedly
killed four Hema civilians (two men and two girls) and one FARDC soldier and
destroyed some 300 houses in the Tche area (16 km south of Blukwa). The violence
has prompted significant population displacements within the province and towards
neighbouring Uganda. Since early February, at least 32,000 people have been
internally displaced to Bunia, including more than 20,000 sheltering at Bunia General
Hospital and 12,000 sheltering with host families. An estimated 39,718 Congolese
have also fled to Uganda since 1 January. On 12 February, the then Vice Prime
Minister and Minister of the Interior, Mr. Ramazani Shadary, visited Bunia to assess
the situation and explore, with local and provincial authorities, ways to address the
mounting violence between the Hema and Lendu communities. FARDC and national
police elements were also deployed in the affected areas to help to bring the situation
under control. In Aru territory, instability persisted along the border with South
Sudan. On 10 January, an hour-long exchange of fire occurred at Ndrimu between
FARDC and suspected armed elements of the Armée de libération du peuple
congolais, a residual armed group associated with the Kakwa community. The group
has been largely dormant, and its strength is assessed to be fewer than 50 elements.
On 22 January, in Aru territory, 10 former militia members of the Front des
nationalistes et intégrationnistes (FNI) were arrested by national security forces on
suspicion of involvement in a campaign to recruit young people to fight in South
Sudan. FNI is a Lendu-based armed group that was very active during the Hema Lendu conflict in 2000 and subsequently demobilized.

6/15

18-02992

S/2018/174

23. In Haut-Uélé and Bas-Uélé, the security situation was relatively calm, although
conflicts in the Central African Republic and South Sudan have had a continued
impact on the border areas. In January, in the area north of Duru, in Haut-Uélé
Province, FARDC arrested armed elements from South Sudan, including one from the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition (SPLM/A-IO) with over
1,300 ammunition rounds. In early January, in Buta, Bas-Uélé Province, FARDC
detained Romaric Madango, an anti-balaka leader, and two of his associates after they
had crossed into the province from the Central African Republic. They were
subsequently transferred to Kinshasa and extradited on 22 February to the Central
African Republic. Furthermore, according to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, there is a rise in the influx o f Central African refugees
who are living among host communities in very remote areas in Bondo territory,
Bas-Uélé. There was also a spike in activities by suspected Lord ’s Resistance Army
elements in the last two weeks of January. The activities included the abduction of
five Central African refugees and multiple attacks on civilians in Ango, Bangadi,
Bondo, Dungu and Faradje territories.
24. In the Kasai region, the security situation remains fragile, with reports of
increased destabilizing activities of Kamuina Nsapu and other militia groups. In Kasai
Central, Kamuina Nsapu elements attacked the airport in Kananga on 2 and
17 January, killing at least six FARDC soldiers. FARDC operations launched after the
attacks resulted in mass displacement in villages up to 40 km east of Kananga. In
Kasai Province, on 17 January, there were clashes between Kamuina Nsapu mili tia
and FARDC in Kambamba, about 65 km north of Tshikapa, resulting in the killing of
at least four Kamuina Nsapu militia members. Along the border of Mweka territory,
in Kasai Province, and Demba territory, in Kasai Central Province, tensions remained
between the Baluba and Bateke communities. On 29 and 30 January, a local Bateke
chief allied with Kamuina Nsapu launched attacks in Kakenge village against riv al
Baluba communities and State agents, which resulted in at least 20 people killed and
over 350 households displaced. Most of the victims were from the Bateke, Balulua
and Baluba communities. Throughout January, there were clashes between ethnic
Chokwe Bana Mura militia and Lubaphone populations and diamond miners in
Kamonia territory, in Kasai Province, along the Angolan border.

D.

Humanitarian situation
25. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is facing one of the world ’s most serious
humanitarian crises, with 13.1 million persons in need of humanitarian assistance and
protection across the country, double the numbers in 2017; this includes 2.2 million
newly internally displaced, bringing the total number of internally displaced persons
to 4.5 million, among the highest numbers in Africa. In addition, 670,000 persons
have fled to neighbouring countries as refugees, including 39,718 who fled to Uganda
in 2018 owing to rising violence in Ituri Province. Furthermore, around 7.7 million
people face severe food insecurity throughout the country, a 30 per cent increase from
2017, with more than 2 million children being severely acutely malnourished and
requiring urgent assistance. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is also affected
by a severe cholera crisis due to people’s limited access to clean water and sanitation,
with over 3,000 suspected cases, including in the capital, Kinshasa. Humanitarian
access to several areas remains a challenge, despite advocacy efforts with the
Government.
26. Humanitarian actors continue to scale up their operations, yet funding levels
remain critically low. In 2017, the Humanitarian Response Plan called for
$812.6 million and was funded at 57 per cent only. The financial requirements have

18-02992

7/15

S/2018/174

doubled compared with 2017, with $1.68 billion currently needed to meet the urgent
needs of over 10 million people.

E.

Human rights situation
27. MONUSCO documented 744 human rights violations in January 2018, a
substantial increase over the average number of violations per month in 2017
(541 violations). About 78 per cent of those violations occurred in conflict -affected
provinces, especially in Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu. State agents continue to be
the main perpetrators, with 60 per cent of the violations, while armed groups were
responsible for 40 per cent of human rights violations and abuses. There was a 27 per
cent increase in the number of reported human rights abuses by armed groups and
militias, confirming the spread and intensification of their activities, which fuelled
inter-ethnic and intercommunity violence in Ituri (Hema/Lendu), North Kivu
(Hutu/Nande), Kasai (Lulua/Chokwe) and Tanganyika (Twa/Luba). In January alone,
126 persons, including at least 18 women, were victims of extrajudicial or summary
killings.
28. Increasing restrictions on political space continue to impede the establishment
of an environment conducive to a credible, peaceful and transparent electoral process.
That trend is illustrated by the 103 violations linked to restrictions on fund amental
freedoms and political rights documented by MONUSCO in January, more than
double the number recorded in January 2017 (47 violations). Those violations were
committed mainly by State agents and principally target journalists, civil society
activists and political opponents, who face harassment, threats and intimidation. As
indicated in my report of 15 February on the implementation of the 31 December
2016 political agreement (S/2018/128), the demonstrations called for by CLC
throughout the country on 21 January were violently repressed by national security
forces, with at least 7 persons, including 2 women, killed, 47 wounded and 121 arrested,
some of whom are facing trial. Moreover, MONUSCO staff were physically and
verbally assaulted by national security forces while monitoring the situation.
29. On 1 February, the Minister of Human Rights, Marie-Ange Mushobekwa,
established a joint commission of enquiry composed of representatives of the
Ministries of Human Rights, Justice, and the Interior and Security, the National
Human Rights Commission and civil society to investigate allegations of human
rights violations committed on 31 December 2017 and 21 January 2018 and to bring
the alleged perpetrators to justice. The commission conducted its investigations,
including hearings from 9 to 21 February. MONUSCO, through the United Nations
Joint Human Rights Office, provided technical advice to the commission, notably on
investigating human rights violations and protecting victims, witnesses and sources.
Sexual violence
30. In January, at least 44 women and 16 girls were victims of conflict -related
sexual violence. While various Mai-Mai groups remained the main perpetrators of
sexual violence against women, Kamuina Nsapu militiamen and FRPI elements
increasingly targeted minor girls during their destabilizing activities. In January, State
agents were responsible for sexual violence against 11 victims (7 women and 1 girl
by FARDC soldiers and 2 women and 1 girl by national police elements).
Child protection
31. Through the monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave violations against
children in situations of armed conflict, MONUSCO verified that, in January, at least
189 children had been affected by six grave violations against children in armed

8/15

18-02992

S/2018/174

conflict. At least 93 children had escaped or been separated from armed groups,
including 72 from Kamuina Nsapu (33), Mai-Mai Mazembe (26) and Nyatura (13).
32. MONUSCO also documented the killing of 14 children, including 2 girls, and
the maiming of 9 children, including 5 girls, by the Bana Mura militia and the
Kamuina Nsapu. The Bana Mura militia killed seven children and the Kamuina Nsapu
killed five children and wounded three others. Furthermore, MONUSCO documented
attacks against four schools and three hospitals, mostly by Kamuina Nsapu and
FARDC.

III. Deployment of the Mission and implementation of
its mandate
A.

Support for the implementation of the political agreement of
31 December 2016
33. MONUSCO continued to impress upon the Congolese authorities the fact that
the implementation of the confidence-building measures envisaged in the political
agreement of 31 December 2016 remains a prerequisite for defusing political
tensions. The Mission provided a regularly updated list of political prisoners to th e
Government and engaged the competent authorities on their release to de -escalate
tensions and instil trust among political actors. MONUSCO continued its good offices
role to help to advance the political process. My Deputy Special Representative David
Gressly met with Mr. Tshibala and the Vice Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Léonard She Okitundu, on 20 and 23 January to exchange views on the
political and electoral situation and encourage progress on the implementation of
confidence-building measures. On 1 February, he travelled to Lualaba Province and
held meetings with the Governor, during which he encouraged the Governor to, inter
alia, open political space and uphold the rights to freedom of expression and peaceful
demonstrations.

B.

Comprehensive approach to protection of civilians
Mission-wide strategies
34. MONUSCO is adopting a comprehensive approach to the protection of civilians,
bringing together conflict and political analysis, stabilization activities, human rights
reporting, early warning capacities and military operations under a coordinated
Mission-wide strategy. In line with that approach, MONUSCO is implementing a joint
tailored strategy and operational plan, with a view to better coordinating MONUSCO
actions in efforts to address the threat posed by FRPI. Discussions are also under way
with the Congolese authorities for the establishment of an interministerial working
group to develop a joint action plan to address the threat posed by FRPI. Furthermore,
MONUSCO is finalizing a joint strategy to address the violence in the Grand Nord
area of North Kivu.
35. MONUSCO is implementing the “protection through projection” concept,
which requires a review of the locations of the Mission’s bases and rapidly deployable
battalions, with a view to enabling the force to provide protection through its presence
in areas where it is needed and to project into areas of emerging violence. MONUSCO
closed seven bases, mainly in Ituri and Tanganyika Provinces, but maintained a
mobile posture with the deployment of at least 12 standing combat deployments in
the Kasai region, North Kivu, South Kivu and Tanganyika. In addition, MONUSCO
engaged and strengthened local community protection mechanisms in areas affected

18-02992

9/15

S/2018/174

by the closure of forward bases with the aim of enabling those mechanisms to better
mitigate conflicts and violence.
36. At the same time, MONUSCO continued to support explosive ordnance disposal
operations, through the Mine Action Service of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, to ensure that areas are safe for the local population. In January alone,
the Service conducted 73 explosive hazard management tasks in response to FARDC
requests.
37. In line with the recommendations of the strategic review of MONUSCO, the
Mission’s justice and corrections sections readjusted their approaches and activities
to support the protection of civilians, with an emphasis on supporting the
investigation and prosecution of serious crimes through the prosecution support cells.
That realignment also entailed focusing on supporting Congolese authorities in the
management of high-risk prisoners and the protection of vulnerable groups in a
number of prisons. Furthermore, a joint prison security task force of MONUSCO and
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has been established in
seven provinces, and an action plan is being implemented in close collaboration with
national and provincial authorities to comprehensively address prison security
challenges.
Field-level responses
38. In North Kivu Province, MONUSCO backed mediation efforts by provincial
and local actors aimed at a peaceful resolution of conflicts, particularly between the
Nande and the Hutu communities in Lubero and Rutshuru territories. As part of its
efforts to address inter-ethnic tensions in the area, on 24 January MONUSCO, in
collaboration with the provincial and local authorities, facilitated the return of the
traditional chief of the Bwito chefferie to Kikuku (15 km north of Nyanzalé) in
response to a request made by the local population.
39. In Beni territory, in response to the launch of militar y operations against ADF,
MONUSCO strengthened its Community Alert Network system by engaging with
200 network members and local authorities on early warning and response issues.
Improved situational awareness is also being achieved through the MONUSCO joi nt
analysis, collection and early warning cell, an integrated unit in which military, police
and civilians work together. Furthermore, joint missions bringing together relevant
components of MONUSCO were deployed to Kasindi from 7 to 10 January and to
Oicha on 5 February to help to strengthen local protection responses to the increased
activities of ADF. MONUSCO continued to support 65 members of local protection
committees, including 15 women, with training and mentoring in the Bulambo,
Kirumba and Kanyobagonga areas.
40. In Ituri, in connection with the closure of four MONUSCO bases in Irumu and
Mambasa territories, MONUSCO undertook outreach missions to the local
communities in Bogoro, Bukiringi, Gety and Mambasa to explain the “protection
through projection” concept and engage on how local security committees could take
over from MONUSCO in protection of civilians matters. In Djugu territory, from
13 to 15 February, MONUSCO organized a structured dialogue between the Hema
and Lendu communities to help to address issues causing intercommunity tensions
and violence. Furthermore, MONUSCO encouraged FARDC to consider deploying
troops to areas vulnerable to outbreaks of inter-ethnic tensions, such as Djugu, and
dismantling illegal checkpoints. MONUSCO also engaged focal points of the
community alert networks in Aru and Irumu territories on the “protection through
projection” concept.
41. In South Kivu, in response to the rise in threats to the civilian population,
MONUSCO completed a mapping of communities at risk and set up early warning
10/15

18-02992

S/2018/174

and response mechanisms accordingly. More precisely, MONUSCO conducted
patrols, established two standing combat deployments and carried out three
intercommunity mediation sessions in Fizi and Shabunda territories.
42. In Tanganyika, MONUSCO continued to support efforts by the provincial
authorities and communities to set up the local dialogue forums to promote peaceful
coexistence, and prevent and mitigate violence between the Luba and Twa communities.
In February, the local authorities, civil society and MONUSCO established two local
inter-ethnic dialogue committees in Lwizi and Mwanza groupements.
43. In Kasai Province, MONUSCO conducted patrols and established standing
combat deployments, which helped to prevent the escalation of local tensions, instil
some level of trust among the local population, many of whom are internally
displaced persons or returnees, and ensure liaison with humanitarian actors. In Kasai
Central, in Dibaya territory, MONUSCO also delivered, in Tshimbul u, training on
human rights to FARDC and national police officers and to human rights activists,
which contributed to promoting an environment conducive to the protection of civilians.
44. In the Uélé provinces, on 23 and 24 January, MONUSCO conducted asse ssment
missions to Bangadi and Faradje to review the security situation along the border with
South Sudan, following the continued influx of refugees from the Central African
Republic and South Sudan into the Democratic Republic of the Congo. From 1 to
3 February, a joint assessment mission was deployed to Bitima (north of Duru)
following the dispatch of the joint protection mission to Bangadi to assess the security
situation in anticipation of the closure of the Mission’s forward base in Bangadi.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration/disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration
45. From 1 January to 12 February, MONUSCO registered the surrender of 182
combatants from Congolese armed groups. Eighty-six of those combatants entered
the national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme (PNDDR III).
MONUSCO also continued to provide logistical support to the government -run
reintegration camps under the national programme in Kamina and Kitona. In additi on,
81 foreign combatants surrendered, along with 154 dependants, and all were
repatriated by MONUSCO to Rwanda within the framework of the disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, reintegration and resettlement programme. In addition,
MONUSCO continued to support 293 former combatants of the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda (FDLR), including 1 woman, and 1,073 dependants (8 men,
242 women, 419 boys and 404 girls) accommodated in the Kanyobagonga and
Walungu camps, as well as the government-run camp in Kisangani. MONUSCO
continues to explore individual solutions for the 355 SPLM/A-IO members under
MONUSCO care in the Munigi camp, in the Goma area.
46. To complement disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts,
MONUSCO continues to expand the community violence reduction programme.
Currently, 37 projects are being implemented, with the majority targeting former
combatants who have returned to their communities, in addition to marginalized
youth. Projects include the prevention of recruitment into armed groups and the
promotion of peace and peaceful cohabitation in the communities concerned.
Stabilization
47. MONUSCO continued to support the operationalization under the International
Security and Stabilization Support Strategy of six targeted stabilization interventions,
which focus on the root causes of conflicts in Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu
Provinces, with funding from the $40 million Stabilization Coherence Fund.
MONUSCO also supported advocacy efforts in Ituri, North Kivu an d South Kivu
18-02992

11/15

S/2018/174

Provinces to increase political engagement in the stabilization process through the
development of compacts with provincial authorities and a democratic dialogue
process, so as to address the main drivers of conflict and enhance political
engagement from provincial and local authorities.

C.

Progress in adjusting the Mission’s priorities, posture and presence
48. MONUSCO continued to prioritize support for the political process, towards the
holding of elections, and the protection of civilians. The Mission supported the
Independent National Electoral Commission in completing the update of the voter
register and engaged extensively with the Government with a view to opening
political space, including by upholding the right to peaceful assemb ly and freedom of
the press.
49. MONUSCO made some adjustments to its posture by redeploying an additional
formed police unit from Goma to Kinshasa. The redeployment brings the total number
of formed police units in Kinshasa to three, which enhances the M ission’s ability to
conduct robust patrolling in support of the protection of civilians and to protect United
Nations personnel and premises in the city.
50. The Mission maintained its presence in the Kasai region, which witnessed flare ups of violence in some areas during the reporting period. That presence is expected
to remain until the conclusion of the electoral process but could evolve according to
conflict dynamics and the humanitarian situation.
51. In the wake of the tragic attack on 7 December 2017 on a MONUSCO company
operating base at Semuliki, in North Kivu, and the report of General Carlos Alberto
dos Santos Cruz of 19 December 2017 on improving the security of United Nations
peacekeepers, the Mission took a number of measures to enhance the security of its
bases and the protection of peacekeepers. MONUSCO is undertaking a review of its
footprint and the force’s deployment, with a view to reconciling necessary measures
to improve the security of peacekeepers, including appropriate medical evacuation
support, with available resources.
52. On the civilian side, MONUSCO further streamlined its civilian footprint,
including by closing its liaison office in Kampala, and restructured some critical
functions, notably political and good offices support, in line with the
recommendations of the strategic review of the Mission.

D.

Assessment of performance of the Mission’s uniformed personnel
in protecting civilians
53. Two special investigation teams visited MONUSCO during the reporting period,
to examine the circumstances surrounding the attack against the company operating
base at Semuliki, North Kivu, which resulted in the death of 15 peacekeepers, and the
response of the company operating base in Kamanyola to the clash on 15 September
between Burundian asylum seekers and FARDC, which left 37 civilians dead. Both
investigations identified a number of systemic performance issues to be addressed by
the Secretariat, MONUSCO and troop-contributing countries.
54. MONUSCO finalized a review of the preparedness and security of its company
operating bases during the reporting period and is taking steps to address internal
weaknesses, as they have an impact on performance.

12/15

18-02992

S/2018/174

E.

Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
55. The United Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse
continues to be enforced among all categories of personnel in MONUSCO. All
allegations have been assessed and reported in accordance with existing and
applicable reporting and investigation procedures. In close collaboration with the
United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Population Fund and other
partners, MONUSCO provided support to victims of sexual exploitation and abuse.
The Mission also continues to strengthen and actively carry out preventive measures
including training, risk assessment/monitoring visits, regular deterrent patrols and the
implementation of a non-fraternization policy for uniformed personnel. MONUSCO
engaged with communities at risk and supported the operationalization of the
community-based complaint mechanisms and community awareness-raising
programmes. Three projects totalling $175,000 were approved under the trust f und
established for assistance to victims and are being implemented in Munigi and Bujovo
(in the Goma area), Sake (North Kivu) and Kavumu (South Kivu). In Kinshasa, North
Kivu and South Kivu, the MONUSCO Conduct and Discipline Team organized an
intensive awareness-raising campaign on protection from sexual exploitation and
abuse, which resulted in incidents of sexual exploitation and abuse being reported.
56. Quarterly meetings of the sexual exploitation and abuse task force continued,
along with a dedicated meeting of MONUSCO leadership to address serious
allegations of misconduct and review the Mission’s internal capacities and resources
in preventing allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse. Payments have been
suspended for all members of troop- and police-contributing countries suspected of
sexual exploitation and abuse. Furthermore, the Mission is taking measures to
repatriate implicated uniformed personnel as soon as their presence in the Mission
area is no longer required for the purpose of comple ting investigations.

IV. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
57. As at 1 February, 32 security and safety-related incidents affecting United
Nations staff, uniformed components, assets and operations, as well as international
non-governmental organizations, had been reported. They include 19 crime -related
incidents, 3 cases linked to civil unrest, 8 hazard -related cases and 2 incidents linked
to armed conflict. MONUSCO assessed that its operations to neutralize armed groups
did not have any impact on its staff members or installations.

V. Financial aspects
58. The General Assembly, in its resolution 71/301, appropriated the amount of
$1,141.8 million for the maintenance of MONUSCO for the period from 1 July 2017
to 30 June 2018. As at 28 February, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special
Account for MONUSCO amounted to $151.8 million. Total outstanding assessed
contributions for all peacekeeping operations at the same date amounted to
$2,403.4 million.

VI. Observations
59. Overcoming the political crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
remains challenging. Delays in the implementation of the political agreement of
31 December 2016 continue to weaken confidence among Congolese stakeholders
and to fuel tensions around the political transition and the electoral process. The
18-02992

13/15

S/2018/174

deterioration of the security situation in recent months, particularly in the Kivu
provinces, has caused additional population displacements. A collective effort by the
Government and regional and international partners is urgently required to help to
reverse those trends, which risk undermining stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region as a whole.
60. I remain concerned by the lack of constructive engagement by some opposition
leaders in the political and electoral processes. It is of utmost importance that all
Congolese political stakeholders seize the opportunity provided by the political
agreement of 31 December 2016 and seek consensus on how to ensure a credible
electoral process and democratic transfer of power.
61. I am nevertheless encouraged by the progress made by the Independent National
Electoral Commission towards the completion of voter registration. I welcome the
steps taken by the Government to establish the legal framework required for the
holding of elections on 23 December 2018. MONUSCO has demonstrated its
commitment to that goal through the provision of essential technical and logistical
support for the elections, including the transportation of electoral materials and
Commission personnel in accordance with the electoral calendar. The implementation
of the electoral calendar will require continued, strong synergy between the
Commission, MONUSCO and the Government at all levels. I call for the swift
enactment of the revised electoral law and other relevant legislation to ensure that all
timelines are met. In this regard, I encourage the Government to continue to provide
the Commission, in a timely and consistent manner, with the required funding to
complete the electoral process. I also call upon international partners and the
Commission to urgently conclude discussions on the revised Projet d ’appui au cycle
électoral au Congo basket fund.
62. It is imperative that the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
do its utmost to ensure respect for the fundamental freedoms and political rights
enshrined in the Constitution and the country’s international obligations. I am deeply
concerned that the Government has made no significant progress on the
implementation of the vital confidence-building measures to which it committed in
the agreement of 31 December 2016. I am particularly disturbed by the violent
repression of peaceful demonstrations on 31 Dece mber 2017 and 21 January 2018
and urge the Government to ensure that national security forces show restraint and
abide by the law when dealing with public demonstrations. I call upon the
Government to swiftly investigate reports of human rights violations by members of
the security forces and take effective measures to address impunity.
63. To effectively carry out its mandate, MONUSCO requires the full commitment
and engagement of the Government and the security forces. The pattern of restrictions
placed on national MONUSCO human rights monitors and United Nations police
patrols by the security forces is unacceptable. I appeal to the Congolese authorities to
ensure that MONUSCO is given the freedom of movement vital to the implementation
of its mandate to protect civilians and monitor, document and report on the human
rights situation.
64. The humanitarian situation in the country remains of grave concern. I am
disturbed by reports alleging that hundreds of thousands of Congolese citizens in the
east have fled their homes in the context of FARDC military operations against armed
groups in the region. Resources are limited, and funding gaps must be immediately
addressed to enable an urgent response to the increase in displacements and other
critical humanitarian needs. I call upon the Government to do its utmost to ensure a
safe and secure environment for the population and to allow unfettered access to
people in need of assistance.

14/15

18-02992

S/2018/174

65. I am outraged by the continued attacks on United Nations peacekeepers. I call
upon the Government to bring those responsible to justice. The sacrifice made by
these brave soldiers shall not be in vain, and MONUSCO will continue to work with
the Congolese authorities to address the grave security challenges facing the country.
66. In follow-up to the special investigations into the Semuliki and Kamayola
incidents, I will make every effort to ensure that concrete measures are taken to
prevent the recurrence of such incidents and ensure that the MONUSCO force is
optimally configured, equipped and trained.
67. The continued deployment of MONUSCO, including the Intervention Brigade,
remains essential to support the political and electoral processes, protect civilians and
help the Government and people of the Democratic Republic of th e Congo to
overcome the grave political and security challenges facing the country at this critical
juncture. I therefore recommend that the Security Council extend the mandate of
MONUSCO, taking into account the recommendations made in my special report o n
the strategic review of MONUSCO (S/2017/826), for a period of one year, until
31 March 2019, with its current authorized troop and police ceiling. While I am
mindful of the financial constraints that Member States face and the need for the
United Nations to make the best use of the resources placed at its disposal, I encourage
Member States to ensure that MONUSCO is sufficiently resourced and equipped to
effectively carry out its mandate during this extremely delicate period and will
continue to ensure that the United Nations makes the best use of the resources placed
at its disposal.
68. I commend my former Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Maman Sambo Sidikou, whose assignment concluded in January, for his
dedication and leadership. I am deeply grateful to MONUSCO personnel, the United
Nations country team and troop- and police-contributing countries for their dedication
to the cause of peace in a highly challenging environment. I also wish to thank the
African Union, donor countries and regional and multilateral organizations and
non-governmental organizations for their continued support to the people of th e
Democratic Republic of Congo.
69. Finally, I want to welcome my new Special Representative, Leila Zerrougui, and
wish her success as she works together with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Congolese people, the United Nations country team and
regional and international partners in addressing the challenges facing the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

18-02992

15/15
