Resolutions adopted without reference to a Committee

independence to colonial countries and peoples, and
its resolution 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961 by
which it established a Special Committee to examine
the implementation of the Declaration,
Having considered chapter IV of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situati?n with regard to ~he
Implementation of the Declaration on the Grantmg
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,21
relating to the question of Nyasaland,
1. Takes note of the conclusions and recommendations concerning Nyasaland which were adopted by
the Special Committee on 7 June 1962 and transmitted
by the Secretary-General to the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland on 18 June 1962;
2. Notes with satisfaction that, at the constitutional
talks held in London in November 1962, agreement
was reached on a new constitution for Nyasaland;
3. Expresses the hope that this agreement will lead
to the achievement of independence by N yasaland without delay in conformity with the wishes of its people.
1196th plena,·y meeting,
18 December 1962.

1819 (XVII). The situation in Angola
The General Assembly,
Having considered the critical situation in Angola,
Having considered the report of the Special_ ~ommittee on Territories under Portuguese Admmistration,28 established under General Assembly resolution
1699 (XVI) of 19 December 1961,
Having considered the report of the Sub-Committee
on the Situation in Angola, 24 established under General Assembly resolution 1603 (XV) of 20 April 1961,
Resolutely condemning the mass extermination of the
indigenous population of Angola and other severe repressive measures being used by the Portuguese colonial authorities against the people of Angola,
Deploring the armed action being taken by Portugal for the suppression of the people of Angola and
the use in this process of arms supplied to Portugal by
certain Member States,
Noting that in the Territory of Angola, as in other
Portuguese colonies, the indigenous population is denied all fundamental rights and freedoms, that racial
discrimination is in fact widely practised and that the
economic life of Angola is to a large extent based on
forced labour,
Convinced that the colonial war being carried on
by the Government of Portugal in A?-gola, th~ violation by that Government of the Security Council resolution of 9 June 1961,25 its refusal to implement the
provisions of the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples contained
in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, and its refusal to implement resolutions
1542 (XV) of 15 December 1960, 1603 (XV) of
20 April 1961, 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961
and 1742 (XVI) of 30 January 1962, constitute a
28 Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventeenth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 54, documents A/5160 and
Add.l and 2.
24 Ibid., agenda item 2:9, document A/5286.
25 Official Records of the Security Council, Sixteenth Year,
Supplement for April, May an4 June 1961, document S/4835.

75

source of international conflict and tension as well as
a serious threat to world peace and security,
Bearing in mind the principles embodied in resolution 1514 (XV),
1. Expresses its satisfaction to the Sub-Committee
on the Situation in Angola for the work it has accomplished;
2. Solemnly reaffirms the inalienable right of the
people of Angola to self-determination and independence, and supports their demand for immediate
independence ;
3. Condemns the colonial war being carried on by
Portugal against the people of Angola and demands
that the Government of Portugal put. an end to it
immediately ;
4. Again calls upon the Portuguese authorities to
desist forthwith from armed action and repressive
measures against the people of Angola ;
5. Ur:1es the Government of Portugal, without any
further delay:
(a) To release all political prisoners ;
( b) To lift the ban on political parties;
( c) To undertake extensive political, economic and
social measures that would ensure the creation of freely
elected and representative political institutions and
transfer of power to the people of Angola in accordance
with the Declaration on the granting of independence
to colonial countries and peoples ;
6. Requests Member States to use their influ~nce
to secure the compliance of Portugal with the present
resolution;
7. Requests all Member States to deny Portugal
any support or assistance which may be used by it
for the suppression of the people of Angola, and in
particular to terminate the supply of arms to Portugal ;
8. Reminds the Government of Portugal that its
continued non-implementation of the resolutions of the
General Assembly and of the Security Council is inconsistent with it~ membership in the United Nations;
9. Requests the Security Council to take appropriate measures, including sanctions, to secure Portugal's compliance with the present resolution and with
the previous resolutions of the General Assembly and
of the Security Council.
1196th plenary meeting,
18 December 1962.

1844 (XVII). International Co-operation Year
The General Assembly,
Deeply convinced that wider and more intensive international c:o-operation would provide one of the most
effective means of dispersing international tensions,
Noting that there exists a large measure of international co-operation in various fields among the peoples
and nations of the world,
Believing that the world would be well served both
by an increased awareness of +he existing level of international co-operation and by a marked increase in
the number of projects in diverse fields jointly undertaken on an international basis,
Realizing that increased international co-operation
can most readily be brought about by expanding and
building upon the activities of existing organizations
and institutions, particularly the United Nations,
