TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

th
MEETING: 13 NOVEMBER 1967
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1375) . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda

. . . . , I . . . . . . . , , . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . +. . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 November 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Arab Republic addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8226)
.............................................

1

qpv.1375

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED

AND

Held in New York on Monday,

SEVENTY-FIFTH
13 November

President: Mr. Mamadou Boubacar KANTE (Mali),

1967, at 10.30 a.m.

question submitted by the Soviet Union delegation. The
first speaker on my list is the representative of Israel. I now
call upon him.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

4. Mr. EBAN (Israel): I thank you, Mr. President, for
agreeing on 9 November that I make immediate reply to the
accusations brought against Israel by the Foreign Minister
of the United Arab Republic [1373rd meet&g]. That
agreement was frustrated, and members of the Council
went on to formulate their views after hearing one party
and not the other.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 375)

I.

MEETING

Adoption of the agenda.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 November 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/8226).

5. I draw relative satisfaction from the fact that eight
members of the Security Council voted for the normal
decencies of equitable discussion. This is not a procedural
issue alone. Since 1953, the Security Council has been
prevented by the Soviet veto policy from adopting any
resolution to which an Arab State is opposed, irrespective
of the merits of the case or of the majority view. We have
now had an initiative from the same source to prevent a
normal procedure of discussion by parties at interest in an
international dispute. The denial to Israel of equal opportunity to succeed in its advocacy in the Security Council
has for fifteen years been an important factor in the
derangement of the Middle Eastern equjlibrium. If the
imbalance is extended from matters of substance to’ those
of procedure, the Security Council’s function in the Middle
Eastern conflict will become progressively undermined.
Surely then a vigilant resistance to discrimination must be
waged not only by international organizations, but within
them.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in thi Middle East
Letter dated 7 November 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/8226)

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In accordance with the decision taken by the Council at its 1373rd
meeting on 9 November, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite the representatives of the United Arab
Republic, Israel and Jordan to take places at the Council
table and to participate without vote in the discussion.

6. I now come to this table to clarify israel’s attitude on
three questions: What answer do we make to the violent
accusations directed against us by the Foreign Minister of
the United Arab Republic? How does Israel propose to
advance peace and security in the Middle East? How can
the Security Council, within the terms of our Charter, best
promote the settlement of the conflict arising from the war
which the Arab States have been waging and maintaining
against Israel for nearly two decades?

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mahmoud Riad
(United Arab Republic), Mr. A. &ban (Israel) and Mr. A. n/r.
Rifa 1 (Jordan) took places at the Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I have
received a letter dated 11 November [S/8237] from the
representative of Syria asking that his delegation be invited
to participate without vote in the discussion. If I hear no
objection, I shall invite the representative of Syria to take a
place at the Council table.

7. The Security Council has been called into session at the
request of the Government of the United Arab Republic,
which in the summer of this year attempted to destroy the
State of Israel and wipe it forever off the map of the earth.
Humility and repentance would have been more appros
priate to the Egyptian Foreign Minister than the plaintive
belligerence which he has expressed.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Daoudy (Syria)
took a place at the Council table.

3. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The Security Council will now resume its discussion of the question
before it. I should like to draw the Council’s attention to
the draft resolution dated 10 November, ($3236/ on this

8. Seldom has a Government committed a more wanton
assault on international peace than that which the United
1

Arab Republic concerted five months ago. After a decade
of tranquillity on the Egypt.ian-Israel demarcation line, the
Government of the United Arab Republic plunged the
Middle East into sudden war. Mr. Riad has insulted the
memory as well as the critical faculties of his audience. In
discussing the origins of the conflict, he never allowed
prosaic truth to restrict his creative imagination. He chose
not to tell the Security Council how the United Arab
Republic moved its armies into Sinai in mid-May; how the
United Arab Republic brought up 90,000 troops against
Israel’s southern region; how the United Arab Republic
supplied, according to President Nasser, with Soviet reports
of non-existent Israel troop concentrations on the Syrian
demarcation line, 900 concentrated tanks with their advance forces within swift striking distance of Israel; how the
United Arab Republic occupied the entrance to the Strait
of Tiran with belligerent purpose; how the United Arab
Republic, having evicted the United Nations Forces overnight, admitted the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to Cairo with careful timing so that the blockade of
the Gulf of Aqaba might be announced while he was in
mid-journey; how the United Arab Republic representative
at this table told the Security Council on 29 May that:
“there is not a shadow of doubt as to the . . , existence of”
“state of war between the Israelis and , , . the Arabs”
7134R.d meeting, para. 89/; how he laid arrogant claim in
this very place to Israel’s southern coastal strip and the Port
of Eilat; how the Jordanian monarch was summoned to
Cairo to sign a pact of encirclement and aggression, and
returned to Amman with the macabre Mr. Shukairy gloating at his side; how Arab troop contingents from Iraq,
Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Algeria moved into battle
positions ready for their share of the spoils; how Egyptian
air commanders were given instructions, now in our hands,
about the specific Israel targets which they were to bomb;
how King Hussein’s brigades were instructed in writing that
Israel’s villages were to be occupied and “all their inhabitants put to death”; how Jordan, refusing the most specific
Israel proposals for avoiding the conflict, poured shells and
bombs into Jerusalem’s streets from guns and mortars
carefully sheltered by the Holy Places; how Syria took up
the aggression with artillery bombardment from the Golan
heights; how President Nasser filled the air with frank and
exuberant announcements of his intention to bring about
Israel’s doom.

11. What is the Egyptian Foreign Minister’s complaint
against Israel? His complaint is that Israel energetically
refused to be destroyed. What is his proposal? His proposal
is that Israel put itself in the position most congenial for
the next attempt to destroy it. What is his purpose? His
purpose is to refuse negotiation and agreement, To the
offense of making war, Cairo adds the offence of refusing
peace. For this refusal, the United Arab Republic seeks the
Security Council’s sanction.
12. But the dramatic facts which the United Arab
Republic representative has wantonIy suppressed are not
forgotten in Israel. They will never be forgotten there. A
new dimension has been added to the national memory,
and the exploration of it will long continue. Our nation still
lives intimately with the peril and the solitude which
afflicted it in those agonizing weeks. We still remember the
cold horror which that peril evoked in world opinion. We
still recall how the imminent extinction of Israel’s statehood and the massacre of its population were seriously
discussed across the world in wild intoxication of spirit in
every Arab capital, and with tormented but impotent
sorrow in other lands. We take unbounded pride in the six
days of resistance by which the danger was gloriously
overcome. And we remember the heavy price exacted’in
death and bereavement, in mutilation and anguish and
suffering.
13. These are our m&mories. I evoke them here in
vehement rejection of the attempt by the United Arab
Republic representative to wash his hands clean of his
Government’s sustained aggression against the security of
Israel and the peace of the Middle East. I recall them also
because these memories lie at the heart and centre of
Israel’s policy today. If you ignore our memories, you
cannot understand our policy. That policy can be expressed
in a single sentence. It is our firm resolve never, never to
return to the danger and vulnerability from which we have
emerged. This resolve must prevail over every other
consideration. To avoid a return to any of the conditions
which prevailed on 4 June is a supreme national purpose,
worthy of every effort and any consequence.
14. In their speeches to the Security Council on 9 November [1373rd meeting], the Soviet and United Arab
Republic representatives sought to persuade the Security
Council of two things: firstly, that Israel’s refusal to be
strangled and bludgeoned to death was an act of “aggression”, and secondly, that the way to get peace in the
Middle East is to reproduce the precise conditions Which
brought about the war. These are the only two ideas which
the Soviet and Arab representatives have expressedduring,
the long discussions of the summer and autumn months. 1
submit that there is not a single grain of truth or value in
either of them.

9. I can still recall his voice as I heard it on 26 May; “We
have been biding our time until we were perfectly ready
and prepared . . . we now feel that we are sufficiently
strong and that, engaging in war with Israel, we can, with
God’s help, be victorious.” Lest this be not clear enough,
we heard the official announcement from Radio Cairo later
that day: “The Arab people is firmly resolved to wipe Israel
off the face of the globe.”
10. There has never been an aggressive war for which
responsibility is more explicit and unmistakable than the
United Arab Republic’s responsibility for this war. The
representative of the United Arab Republic has told the
Security Council nothing of all this. His Government now
comes here saturated with war guilt, heavy with responsibility for nineteen years of purposeful aggression, to lay
complaint and accusation against Israel,

15. It is especially important that this problem of aggres.
sion be faced and probed. It is the starting point for any
rational understanding of past events and future necessities,
The Egyptian Foreign Minister spoke of Israel “aggression”
sixty-one times; the Soviet representative only twenty-four’,
Frequency of reiteration is a typical symptom of weak
argument. Never has this been more true than in this case,
To the charge of aggression I reply that Israel’s resistanceto
2

the assault concerted against it last summer will resound
across the generations as a triumphant assertion of human
freedom. From the dawn of its history, the people now
rebuilding the State of Israel has struggled, often in
desperate conditions, against tyranny and aggression. Our
defence last June falls nobly within that tradition. As Israel
freed itself from the aggressive stranglehold, we could hear
the cry of ardent relief that resounded across the peaceloving world from end to end. Alone, embattled, neither
requesting nor receiving aid, Israel, by independent effort
and sacrifice, had withstood a conspiracy of violence. In the
life of our generation, it is hard to think of any other hour
in which progressive opinion has rallied in such tension and
agony of spirit to any cause. Never have justice, honour,
peace, national freedom and international morality been
more righteously defended.

Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan have confessed to having
forged a story of alleged intervention by two major Powers
on Israel’s side in the hostilities of last June.
20. It is hard to recall a more flagrant violation of
international civility. The accusation mocked the truth of
Israel’s solitude in danger and defence. It was also calculated to convert a serious local conflict into a global issue
affecting the entire human destiny. Should not those
responsible for a falsehood of such vast scope be treated
with intense scepticism in relation to whatever else they
say? It is in this light that the United Arab Republic’s
version of all that happened in this tempestuous year
should be examined.
21. I understand that both Governments have now confessed this forgery, But it remains for ever inscribed on the
tablets of history. It is reasonable that all other Egyptian
and Jordanian assertions on the origins and evolutions of
this conflict be assessed in the light of this dangerous
manoeuvre.

16. Something of this world opinion found expression
even in the international organizations where Arab and
Soviet positions have a great numerical advantage. Proposals
seeking to define Israel’s action as “aggression” were
rejected in the Security Council on 14 June [136&h
meeting], and in four separate votes in the General
Assembly at its emergency session on 4 July [154&h
meeting/. In each case, the rejection of the charge was so
emphatic as to imply a rebuke to those who had invented
it. Of special significance was the defeat of what the
spokesman of the Latin American group called “the
ridiculous Soviet resolution” on Israel “aggression” for the
discussion of which the General Assembly had been
convened in emergency session.

22. So much then for the charge of Israel “aggression”.
The other part of the Soviet and Arab case as presented on
9 November is that the 4 June situation should be restored.
The folly and injustice of this suggestion were expounded
by many eminent statesmen who took part in the General
Assembly discussion last summer. Speakers from all five
continents stressed what should now be an international
axiom. It was perhaps most incisively stated by the Minister
of External Affairs of Canada, quoting a previous statement
by his eminent Prime Minister:

17. I am aware that Israel’s decision to survive has caused
some difficulty for Arab representatives and those ~110
support them. But in the light of international judgements
and of massive world opinion, everyone who speaks of
Israel “aggression” is uttering a violent untruth. Israel’s
defensive action was taken when the choice was to live or
to perish, to protect the national existence or to forfeit it
for all time. We even have Arab acknowledgement that this
was our choice. The official Cairo Radio on 23 May defined
the situation with unusual veracity, It said: “Israel is faced
with two alternatives, either of which will destroy it. It will
either be strangled to death by the Arab territorial and
economic blockade, or it will perish by fire of the Arab
forces encompassing it from the South, from the North and
from the East.”

“Are we to go through all this again? Are we to return
to the status quo? Such a return would not be to a
position of security . , , but would be a return to terror,
bloodshed, strife, incidents, charges and counter-charges
and ultimately another explosion.“’
23. The most profound need of the Middle East is for
constructive innovation. We must not be satisfied to rebuild
the fragile provisional structure which, under the weight of
years and the brunt of Arab hostility, has fallen about our
heads in ruin. We must now build a durable edifice of
relations insuring security and peace for our tormented
region.
24. In the light of this principle, I now come to state
Israel’s national policy: a cease-fire has been established by
the Security Council as a provisional measure within the
terms of the Charter. We shall maintain and respect the
cease-fire until it is replaced, as we wish to replace it, by
peace treaties ending the state of war, determining the
agreed national frontiers of States, and ensuring a stable
and mutually guaranteed security. We cannot return to the
shattered armistice regime or to any system of relations
other than a permanent contractually binding peace, And
we agree with those who have said in the General Assembly
and elsewhere that the fragile armistice lines must be
superseded by agreed and secure national boundaries. After

18. The most important action which the United Nations
has taken, beyond the cease-fire, has been to determine the
non-aggressive character of Israel’s operations in early June.
Everything in our policy flows from this premise. Our
thinking on the political, juridical, territorial, and security
aspects of the Middle Eastern problem is based on the
secure premise that we have repelled aggression, are still
being threatened with its renewal, and must now so act as
to ensure that it shall not succeed in any new assault.
19. In, rejecting the description given by the United Arab
Republic representative on past events, I cannot fail to
comment on the general record of veracity. This theme is
illustrated by an extraordinary event of which the international implications have not yet been fully explored. The
Governments of the United Arab Republic and the

Records of the Genera2 Assembly, Fifth Emergency
Session, Plenary Meetings, 1533rd meeting, para. 115.

1 Official
Special

3
i

from the map of the world and to destroy its people. The
idea that Israel should move from the cease-fire line in tllg
absence of a formal peace settlement ending the state op
war and fixing recognized national boundaries is so irra,
tional and unprecedented that it is amazing to hear it
expounded at all. Such an idea could only arise in tluk
atmosphere of anomaly which has dominated the Arab,
Israel discussion. For nearly two decades it has bee]\
accepted that Arab States may behave towards Israel aQ
though there is war, while Israel must behave towards then0
as though there is peace. Surely those days are over, It i,
more legitimate to break out of siege and blockade than i;t
is to impose them.

the cease-fire lines, a permanent and mutually recognized
territorial boundary is our only possible destination.
25. In their meeting at Khartoum, the Heads of the Arab
States proclaimed a policy of seeking a solution on the basis
of three principles: No recognition, No negotiation, No
peace, For reasons which will for ever remain mysterious to
me, some writers have described these three refusals as
symptoms of “moderation”. Against the Khartoum policy
of no recognition, no negotiation and no peace, Israel
presents its policy: Recognition, negotiation, peace. Is there
any honest doubt which of these two policies conforms
with our Charter and which of them violates it? If it were
necessary to distil the essence of the Charter into three
words, would not those words be recognition, negotiation
and peace? By recognition I mean an acknowledgement of
the sovereign equality of States and of their consequent
duty to determine theirrelations directly with other States,
free from external intervention or pressure. By negotiation
I mean the exchange of ideas, the comparison and
harmonization of interests and the reciprocal acceptance of
defined rights and obligations. By peace I mean not only
the opposite of war, but an order of relations beginning
with mutual acceptance and evolving into a community of
States reconciling their full and separate sovereignty with a
widening process of co-operation.

29. The irrationality of replacing the cease-fire by any,
thing short of peace is illustrated by a study of the addre!s$
of the United Arab Republic’s Foreign Minister. If we were
to follow his advice, we should be consciously inaugura$
a prelude to the next explosion. There would be a renewed
blockade of Israel’s southern approaches. There would be
immunity for terrorist incursion from a reoccupied Gazr(,
There would be the old inferno of insecurity in the heights
of Golan and upper Galilee. There would be the constarll
possibility of menacing troop concentrations in Sinai. There
would be a military frontier tearing Jerusalem apa.~
between two rival sovereignties. Israel after its peril arId
sacrifice would be restored to full vulnerability. In tll~
absence of a peace treaty with a final boundary settlement,
there would be the continuing tension arising from recipro.
cal territorial claims. Everything would be ambiguous,
provisional, precarious and unresolved.

26. The international discussion of the Middle East has
been long and intricate. It is possible, however, to define
the theme and issue in simple terms. There has been not a
six-day war, there has been a nineteen-year war conducted
by the Arab States against Israel in varying degrees of
intensity, with the ultimate hope and purpose of Israel’s
destruction. The issue is whether this war is going to be
liquidated now by a final peace settlement or merely
interrupted in order to be resumed in conditions more
propitious for success.We should fail in candour if we were
to describe the issue in less clear and lucid terms. The
question is not whether Arab States do or do not recognize
Israel’s right to exist. We do not seek Arab recognition of
our nation’s right to exist. Israel’s right to exist is precisely
equivalent to theirs and is not in any degree dependent on
their consent. There is even something invidious in the
phrase. What we seek and what the international community should promote is not a meaningless formula, but a
meaningful act. The act of which I speak is the negotiation
and conclusion of peace treaties by direct negotiation
between Israel and the Arab States.

30. This policy should be examined in the light ot’
Preiident Nasser’s address to the Khartoum conference in
which he said, in effect, that Israel’s withdrawal should be
politically achieved because the Arab States were not strong
enough to achieve it militarily.
Once withdrawal w/as
accomplished without negotiation or reconciliation wiith
Israel, he said, an Egyptian army and air force rearmed by
Soviet weapons could&y intimidation or action, inaugurate
the next phase o< pressure leading to the “recovery of
Palestine”. Something of this view was there endorsed by
King Hussein. The central idea was to have an interval, rIOi
to have a termination.
31. The Security Council will note that in his address Ithe
Egyptian Foreign Minister promised nothing in return for
what he asked. We must assume, in accordance with the
latest recorded statement, that it is still the policy of Llle
United Arab Republic to close the Suez Canal to Israel
shipping, A contrary statement by the Foreign Minister of
the United Arab Republic would, of course, be of interest
here. We must still assume that it is the policy of the Uni$
Arab Republic to regard the Gulf of Aqaba as an inter0
Arab waterway; to maintain an economic boycott “5
pressure on other States; and to preserve territorial cl@’
beyond the point of the withdrawal which they seek. f’le
Egyptian representative’s assertion at this table last slum4’Uef
that his Government does not regard Eilat as part of Isf
has not been cancelled. Is the Foreign Minister in a
to cancel it? If the previous Egyptian policies on the
the Gulf and the open character of the territorial
tion have changed, would the Foreign Minister say so at
table? He has not said so. He has not responded to

27. In adopting this policy we are faithful to international
precedents and traditions. It is a traditional principle of
international law, as United Arab Republic representatives
have SO often pointed out, that a state of war can be
terminated only by a treaty of peace. This was last said at
this table in May 1967. It is also a universal tradition that
cease-fire lines are superseded by permanent boundaries,
and that a transition from a state of war to a state of peace
is effected by bilateral agreement. Every item in Israel’s
current policy conforms with established international
practice. We are behaving as any State is entitled to behave
against which a state of war has been openly proclaimed
and brutally practised. Israel is not in a position of juridical
defence.
28. Never in Charter history has there been a case such as
this where several States have conspired to expunge another
4

specific questions which I put to him from the General
Assembly’s rostrum. His speech on 9 November sounded as
if he were dictating a punitive settlement to a vanquished
Israel. This is not his right, nor is it our position.

paper. The closest ar’l\: k ‘;.ir,tion tc.) At came when the
F~eign Minister of Brazil proposed to the Arab States and
Israel last September that a signed peace agreement and
consequent orders for moving from the cease-fire lines be
ratified on the same day.

32. The severity of this verdict is not reduced by the
nostalgia of the United Arab Republic for the 1949
Armistice Agreement. When the Foreign Minister of the
United Arab Republic says that he wants to return to that
Agreement he is uttering a threat and not a promise. For
that Agreement worked and would work only according to
the United Arab Republic’s interpretation of it. It was
converted long ago by the United Arab Republic’s inter”
pretation into a formula for belligerency, a prescription for
blockade, a basis for irredentism, and an alibi for a refusal
to make peace. In this Security Council on 29 ‘May
Ambassador El Kony correctly stated that that Agreement
was based on military considerations alone. But he also
stated on that occasion that: “The existence of a state of
war . . . is distinctly and explicitly stated in article IV,
paragraph 3”, and that “the conclusion of a partial or
general armistice agreement does not end the state of war”
f I343rd meeting, paras. 90 and 871.

37. Just as it is paradoxically necessary to labour hard to
persuade international organs of the necessity to advocate
peace treaties, so is it necessary to prove that the advocacy
of negotiation is not an extravagant and somewhat immoderate pursuit. This is the most extraordinary of all
recent developments. The United Nations jurisprudence on
the problem of negotiation has been in constant retreat for
many years.
38. Nineteen years ago the General Assembly called on the
Arab States and Israel “to seek agreement by negotiations . +. with a view to the final settlement of all questions
outstanding between them”. That is the text of the General
Assembly’s recommendation of 11 December 1948 [resolution 194 (III)/. That call was repeated by the General
Assembly in identical terms on 14 December 1950
(resolution 394 (L’)J, and on 26 January 1952 [resolution
512 (VI)].
The latter declared significantly that “the
governments concerned have the primary responsibility for
reaching a settlement of their outstanding differences”; this
was said by the United Nations General Assembly fifteen
years ago.

33. Thus, whenever a representative of the United Arab
Republic speaks of the 1949 Agreement we should know
what he means. The United Arab Republic has declared,
published and proclaimed that that Agreement was consistent with the doctrine of a state of war; with nonrecognition of sovereignty; with permissive encouragement
0f terrorist incursion; with unresolved territorial claims;
with
an unrenounced hope of bringing about Israel’s
liquidation. We are tired of contesting the United Arab
Republic’s interpretations, We accept them; we accept that
the 1949 Agreement signifies what the United Arab
Republic has always interpreted it to mean: the absence of
peace, maritime blockade, and a prelude to ultimate total
war. That is why that Agreement exploded long ago. It was,
i11 the Egyptian conception, a regulated system of unilateral
hostility.

39. On 11 August 1949, this Security Council, having
approved the General Armistice Agreements, expressed the
hope that the signatory States would “at an early date”
seek agreement by negotiations conducted either with the
Conciliation Commission for Palestine or directly for a
settlement of all questions outstanding between them
lresolu tion 73 (1949)].
40. On 17 November 1950, the Security Council was
obviously beginning to think that the armistice had lasted
too long. Accordingly, it reminded Egypt, Israel and Jordan
of their obligation to negotiate for permanent peace
(resolution 89 (1950)]. On 18 May 1951, the Security
Council was visibly perturbed by the fact that the armistice
had lasted for two whole years. Accordingly, the Security
Council expressed “its concern” at the failure of Syria and
Israel to move beyond the armistice to “permanent peace”
(resolution 93 (1951/f.

34. We can, accordingly, have nothing to do with it or
with any of its apparatus or with any similar situation of
juridical anarchy. The only juridical possibility now available is full, formal peace, Why should we evade this fact?
Everything
else has been tried, War has been tried three
times; cease-fires, truces and armistices have been tried for
nineteen years, only to explode in successive vidlence. Only
one thing has not been tried: only peace has not been tried.
The hour is ripe for the untried experiment of peace.

41, Today, after nearly two decades, the Security Council
and the General Assembly are inhibited not only from
acting but even from speaking about the negotiation of
permanent peace. The Arab States have been allowed to
banish the word “negotiation”
from the United Nations
vocabulary. No delegation has allowed this fatal concept to
appear in any text that we have been shown. The idea of
negotiation has been converted from a Charter principle
into an Israel eccentricity. Worse than this seems to have
happened. Negotiation is sometimes described as a beautiful
dream, but beyond the scope of rationality. The eminent
Foreign Minister of France said on 22 June:

3 5. It is remarkable and ominous that after two decades’of
war and fragile armistice it should be necessary to argue
that the only alternative to the cease-fire is now formal
peace. My friend the Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign
Minister of Ireland said, on 27 June: “the only hope I see
of avoiding another outbreak in the area is the speedy
negotiation and signing of a permanent treaty of peace by
Israel and the neighbouring States”.’
36. Yet we have not lived to see the day when this simple,
precise idea is expressed in a draft resolution or a working
2 Ibid.,

1538th

“How can it be expected that these Arab countries,
which for twenty years have refused to negotiate with
Israel-however great the shock they suffered or possibly

meeting,pam. 39.
5

even because of that shock-would be any more ready to
negotiate today than they were yesterday? r’3

Union on the inadmissibility of territorial change, Rlut of
course each continent has its own experience. The Middle
Eastern experience is different from any other. On 29 May
the Jordanian representative objected to the use of the term
“territorial integrity” in relation to Israel. His objection was
soundly based. His case was that the 1949 to 1967
Armistice Agreement did not fix boundaries. It fixed a
demarcation line. He said, “I know of no territory; 1know
of no boundary” [I 345th meeting, para. 84J. And he went
on to deny Israel’s full title to the territory on its side of
the demarcation line.

42. It seems to me, with all respect, that one of the factors
which make negotiation difficult is the proclamation by
eminent statesmen of their impracticability. The prediction
helps to create the condition which it predicts. And when
the representative of France tells us on 9 November that it
would be “unrealistic” to have negotiations without withdrawal, I only invite the Council to believe that it is
unrealistic to believe that there can be withdrawal without
negotiation. At any rate, every known international precedent supports this view.

48. It did not occur to Ambassador El-Farah that a legal
principle, if it is to be applied at all, must be applied
reciprocally. But it can be certainly agreed that nothing has
been more effective in preventing an atmosphere of
stability in the Middle East than the fact that for nineteen
years there have been demarcation lines based, accordiag to
the 1949 Agreements, on “military considerations” alone.
Nothing has been regarded as permanent. Everything has
been unresolved. The text of the Egyptian-Israel Agreement
said:

43. I have never heard of any substantive agreement on
any subject ever having been achieved by Governments that
do not set eyes on each other. When there is no shock we
are told that negotiation is unnecessary. And when there is
shock, we are told that it is unrealistic. I do not believe that
a Security Council which declined to assert the inadmissibility of refusing negotiation would be likely to stimulate a
purposeful move towards peace.
44. So much, then, for the. concepts of peace and
negotiation, which I think are indispensable in any statement of Security Council objectives.

“The Armistice Demarcation line is not to be construed
in any sense as a political or territorial boundary and is
delineated without prejudice to rights, claims and positions of either Party . . . as regards ultimate settlement.”

45. In addition to these, the Israel Government attaches
primary importance to the necessity, after nineteen years of
ambiguity, of determining permanent and agreed national
boundaries. Now this is really the very heart of the
Arab-Israel problem. The central issue to be negotiated in a
peace settlement is the establishment of permanent boundaries. Without this how can we envisage any solution of the
deadlock? The position was stated with complete precision
by the Prime Minister of Denmark, Mr. Krag, when he said
to us in the General Assembly on 21 June:

And also:
“It is also recognized that the basic purposes and spirit
of the Armistice would not be served by the restoration
of previously held military positions.“’
49, Israel does not ask the Security Council to endorseor
refute any specific view on the manner in which a s’ecure
and agreed boundary should be negotiated. We are, how
ever, entitled to ask that our position in that inevitable
negotiation be not prejudiced. It is not relevant to transfer
the territorial doctrines and experiences of another hemisphere to an area in which the only territorial agreements
which have ever existed have been based on military
considerations alone. If territorial dispositions based 011
military considerations are “inadmissible”, then the inadmissibility applies to territories occupied by Egypt and
Jordan in defiance of cease-fire and truce resolutions in
May 1948. Indeed, it applies to the whole of the territory
of the previous Palestine Mandate. It would be discrinrinatory to apply the principle in one direction alone. Regional
doctrines cannot be transplanted from one continent tc
another without regard to the different juridical circumstances which prevail. We must work within the law and the
necessities which apply to our own region. Our own re:gio%
to its disaster, has only had demarcation lines based on
military conquests or military considerations. The distlnction is vital. A demarcation line means v-ulnerabiIity. A
negotiated boundary means stability. A demarcatiorl line
means the maintenance of reciprocal territorial claims. A
boundary implies their mutual and final renunciation.
Surely, in view of the importance of this matter, it lis the

“I therefore suggest that the problem of withdrawal
cannot be envisaged as an isoIated step. The problem of
the withdrawal of troops is closely connected with some
of the most burning and sensitive political problems, such
as the final settlement of the borders in the area and the
claim of Israel, and indeed of all States in the area, for the
safeguarding of their territorial and political integrity.“4
46. This observation was made almost at the same time as
that in which the President of the Wnited States was
emphasizing the necessity of applying the principle of
territorial
integrity to accepted and secure national
frontiers and not to fragile armistice lines, A few days ago
the representative of Canada spoke of the transition from
war to peace and of the necessity for xecure, recognized,
respected and acknowledged boundaries.
47. The problem is too serious to be dismissed by Soviet
charges of what the Deputy Foreign Minister of the Soviet
Union called Israel expansionism. A glance at the map of
the Soviet Union as it has evolved in the past three decades
lends a remarkable aspect to any observations by the Soviet
3 Ibid., 1531st meeting, para. 101.
4 Ibid., 1529th meeting, para. 73.

5 Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year*
@eCfol
Supplement No. 3, article V, para. 2; article IV, Paa. 2.

6
-

absolute right of any party to appIQaCh
the peace negotiation without having this matter prejudiced in advance.

crucial hour ranks with the Egyptian-Jordanian pact and
the blockade of the Straight of Tiran as one of the main
factors on which President Nasser based his conviction that
he could, in his words, “restore the situation to what it was
before 1948”.

50, In the light Of the pllrpOSeS
that I have outlined, my
delegation wishes to comment on some of the draft texts
before the Security Council. Our standard of judgement is
whether or not they prejudice our negotiating Position in
advance.The draft resolution of 7 November presented by
India, Mali and Nigeria [S/8227/ does not meet this test, It
was initiated and formulated without consultation with
Israel, We have studied it and we reject it unreservedly, The
suggestion that Israel should IIIOVC from the cease-firelines
without a peace treaty defining permanent and secure
frontiers is unacceptable. There is no basis for such a
proposal in international law or tradition.

55. In May the United Arab Republic representative, with
the support of the Soviet and Bulgarian representatives on
the Security Council, was asking the Council for nonintervention.’ They said that there was no reason why the
Security Council should be wasting its time in having a
meeting at all. That was their view in the third week of May
1967.
56. In the last week of May, we had the unbelievable
spectacle of the Soviet, Bulgarian and Arab representatives
arguing that there wasno reason for the Security Council to
do anything, there was nothing to cause concern-only a
murderous troop concentration against Israel on three
fronts, only a fully-fledged maritime blockade, only the
declaration of a state of war and the announcement by
President Nasser that he was now going to secure Israel’s
total destruction. The Arab States then succeeded in
obtaining from the Security Council the non-intervention
which they sought. They now ask it to inteivene in order to
rescue them from that success.The United Arab Republic
virtually says to the Security Council: “Stay out of the way
when I wish to make war against Israel. Come and restore
me if my adventure fails,”

51, The three-Power draft also prejudices our territorial
and security problem by asking for withdrawal without a
final peace treaty and by’ defining in advance the territorial
and security situations which should follow the cease-fire.
That was not done in 1948. The situation to be achieved
after the cease-fire was left for the negotiation of the
parties, with the help of the United Nations. It is for the
sovereign Governments of the area to determine by
negotiation the situation to succeed the cease-fire.
52. The statement on maritime freedom in this text is
entirely compatible with the United Arab Republic’s
doctrine on the exclusion of Israel’s shipping from the Suez
Canal and with the definition of the Gulf of Aqaba as an
Arab waterway. If this were not so, the text would frankly
speak of freedom for the shipping of all States, including
Israel, in the Suez Canal and the Gulf of Aqaba. In view of
the role of the navigation problem in the wars of 1956 and
1967, this obscurity is perilous to peace, In view of these
fundamental weaknesses, the Israel Government has decided that it cannot give consent, support or co-operation to
this proposal or to any diplomatic processesbased upon it.
Israel will give its constructive attention to any proposal
based on a negotiated peace which does not prejudice our
substantive interests in advance. There are no proposals
tabled which prejudice the Arab theory or doctrine or
negotiating position. Ours should not be prejudiced. Similarly, there are no proposals on the table which give
sufficient weight in our view to the conception of negotiation and agreement.

57. This surely is not the Council’s task. I was impressed
by the weight of opinion expressed around this table on
9 November in favour of a consensual result in which the
parties could acquiesce because they would feel that their
positions were not prejudiced in advance. This, I think, is
the only reasonable course which can still be pursued with
some hope of success.
58. I was surprised that, in introducing the three-Power
text, the Indian representative did not attach any importance to the question of whether Israel’s co-operation had
been sought or could be anticipated. I was surprised
because, in United Nations jurisprudence, his Government
has always laid great stress on the need for securing the
agreement of the parties for any United Nations effort
within the domain of pacific settlement.

53. It is vital that at this important stage of our work we
should understand the principles by which we should guide
our action. The Security Council is acting within Chapter
VI of the Charter in pursuit of pacific settlement. It is
seeking agreements and not imposed solutions. If it were
able to impose anything, the time to have acted seriously
would have been when the Canadian and Danish delegations, in those perilous hours last May, called for action to
Prevent the impending tragedy of war.

59. For example, on 24 January 1957, the Indian repre-

sentative said:
“ . . 9there are only two waysin which any settlement can
be reached. One is imposition; and I submit that the
United Nations has no power under the Charter of
imposinga settlement. The other is by the agreement of
the two parties. Therefore, today to record another
resolution which reaffirms something that one party has
rejected,
reaffirms the large number of resolutions which
we have rej,ected . . . is, in our submission, not calculated
to promote the purposes of the United Nations or of the
exercise by the Security Council of the tasks entrusted to

54, But when the clouds of war gathered fast and Israel’s
danger electrified the conscience of mankind, the Security
Council was Prevented by its internal structure and power
balance from doing or saying anything to prevent the
impending war. It offered Israel no single grain of support
or encouragement in her ordeal of encirclement and
blockade. The Paralysis of the Council’s function in that

it.” [ 765th meeting,para. 140.1
7

we hold in solitude. Our co-operation can be expected only
for ideas which do not jeopardize the security and peace of
our nation.

On 15 February 1957 he added:
“Any attempt to interfere in this or not to allow this
question to be solved by direct riegotiation . . , would be
wrong.” (769th meeting, para, 175.J

63. If the Security Council wishes us to consider the
appointment of a United Nations representative, our view is
that such a representative could play .a useful role in
bringing parties together only if his directives or frame of
reference do not prejudice our policies or our negotiating
position in advance. Indeed, they need not prejudice the
positions or the negotiating positions of any party.

The Indian representative said on 20 February 1957:
“ [Those J who produced this draft resoIution which has
now been co-sponsored by others, had both private and
public knowledge that the Government of India would in
no circumstances agree to this. Therefore, to produce a
proposition which requires the consent of the parties, in
the face of our declaration that we will not agree to it, is
either to take the view that what we say does not mean
anything or that their persuasive powers would be so
great that we would surrender our principles. I think that
neither of those conclusions is justified.” [773rd meeting,
para. 79.J

64. I say this because we do not wish to stand still. We
want the caravan of peace to move forward, but jn
prudence and in sure direction. We believe that a directly
negotiated peace settlement is not only possible but
inevitable. Our basic premise is the inadmissabilit!, of
refusing negotiation in an international dispute, As the
British Prime Minister said in the General Assembly two
years ago, “the enemies of negotiation are the enemies of
peace”.6

On 7 May 1964 the Foreign Minister of India, Mr. Chagla,
said:

6.5. A peace negotiation, for us, is not an abstract
principle. We have serious and constructive proposals to
make in these communications with neighbouring States.
Those proposals would be conducive to the interest and the
national honour of all negotiating States. We should, of
course, have to be ready to consider and react to ideas put
to us directly by the other side. We have a concrete vision
of what peace means in terms of our region’s daily life:
peaceful relations instead of violent acts; normal dialogue
instead of belligerent threats; thriving commerce instead of
boycotts and blockades; intensive regional development
within a community of sovereign States; a constructive and
compassionate approach to the population problems
created by two decades of war and Arab belligerency; a
respectful concern, formally expressed, for universal spiritual interests; liberation from the crushing burden of compctitive armament; the devotion of Arab and Israel efforts, free
from military strife and political rancour, to the adviancement of the total human destiny. These are not impossible
objectives. They lie ready to our hand. We shall maintain
our position until they are achieved, but it is to their
achievement, to the achievement of peace, that our effort
will be consecrated, be the journey short or long.

“My final appeal to the Security Council is to realize
that the differences between India and Pakistan can be
solved only by those two countries, and that there is
more chance of a settlement if there is no intervention by
third parties. No superimposed solution will do any
good.” [ill 3th meeting, para. 61./
And on 12 May 1964 he said:
“If the Council is interested in the maintenance of
peace and internationd relations, it should avoid any
solution superimposed upon the two countries or intervention in any talks or discussions we might have with
each other.” [1115th meeting, para. 35.1
60. These doctrines are of immaculate validity. But Israel,
like India, has been a sovereign State for nearly two
decades, and her vital interests should not be, cannot be,
determined outside her consent. Moreover, there is one
criterion which distinguishes Israel from every other State.
It is well that I should speak of it frankly. Israel, alone in
the family of nations, is struggling not for a marginal
interest or even for a cherished objective but for her very
existence and survival. All men of sensitive conscience and
of historic imagination must surely respect this consideration with special care.

66, The PRESIDENT (translated &urn French): I call
upon the representative of Jordan,
67. Mr. RIFA’I (Jordan): The issue before the Council
today is one of principle and lies at the very roots of the
United Nations, It defines the problem which has been
before the Council for the past five months. The answer
which the Council gives will determine the future course of
events in the Middle East as well as the image of the United
Nations in the world. Are we in this Organization prepared
to stand firm and take a clear decision, or are we to shrink
from our responsibilities and sit back and let matters drag
on and lead to failure, confusion and an arbitrary state of
affairs based on military activities?

61. The Arab Press is already full of articles about how
Israel can still be destroyed in a second stage, if at this stage
she can be lured or pressed back to where she was on
4 June 1967, without peace and without a permanent
frontier delimitation.
62. We have learnt this summer to take Arab public
statements very seriously, And when Israel’s survival is
brought into question, there comes into the human
consciousness a great mass of memories of holocausts and
massacres for which Israel’s sovereignty and security are the
only shelter and consolation. Therefore this is not a matter
to be dealt with lightly. We in the Government of Israel
must guide our action in the light of a responsibility which

6 official Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth Session,
Plemcv bYeclings,1397th meeting, para.43,

8

68. This Council has been invited to meet in urgent session
in order to give an answer to and provide a remedy for this
basic issue-namely, is occupation or acquisition of territory by military conquest admissible under the Charter of
the United Nations and international order? If the answer
is in the negative, then the basic foundations of peace will
be established and the United Nations will emerge as the
centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in the
attainment of the principles and purposes of its Charter.
But, if the answer is in the affirmative, then I must ask in
all fairness what good purpose this Organization servesif it
is not able to implement its principles and aims or if it
cannot reap the fruits of its hard work during the past
twenty-two years.
69. Members of the Council will recall that, on the
outbreak
of fighting,
Security Council resolution
233 (1967) called, as a first step, for an immediate
cease-fire and for a cessation of all military activities in the
area. Surely that resolution was a prelude to something
basic that was supposed to follow-that is, the elimination
of acquisition of territory by military conquest, in order
that a state of affairs might be created which would bring
about peace and justice, of which this area has been
deprived for the past twenty years, Instead, we find that we
are now where we were on the day we first met in this
Council, and the problem has been left unresolved, and
diplomatic efforts and countepefforts have taken the place
of urgent and affirmative action. In the course of this long
delay Israel defiance has been building up,
70, In its resolution 237 (1967) of 14 June, the Security
Council called upon the Govermnent of Israel to ensure the
safety, welfare and security of the inhabitants of the areas
where military operations, had taken place and to facilitate
the return of the inhabitants who had fled the areas since
the outbreak of hostilities. Israel failed to comply with that
resolution, and of the 200,000 citizens who fled from west
to east Jordan it refused to allow more than 14,000 to
return.
71. In its resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V), the
General Assembly, deeply concerned at the situation
prevailing in Jerusalem as a result of the measures taken by
Israel to change the status of the City, considered that
Israel measures were invalid and called upon Israel to
rescind all measures already taken and to desist forthwith
from taking any action which would alter the status of
Jerusalem.
72. In direct challenge to those resolutions, the Israel
Prime Minister stood in the Knesset on 30 October 1967 to
declare his Government’s master plan to build in the Old
City of Jerusalem 1,500 housing units for the Jewish
settlers from all over the world, I should say in this respect
that there is not one single acre of land which is Jewish
property in the Old City of Jerusalem. Arab land ownership
there and in the surroundings of the Old City of Jerusalem
is 100 per cent.
73, Everyone knows that Israel disregards those resolutions and continues to defy the wishes and decisions of the
Organization which brought Israel into existence, We are
bound to ask the reason for this. It is simply that Israel’s

defiance seems to derive from the hesitation and constant
delay of this Council as regards taking firm action in
accordance with the tasks entrusted to it by the Members
of the Organization.
74. Here, then, is where the tragedy lies-a tragedy that
will lead to danger and create a precedent which will
threaten the existence of small and disarmed nations.
75. Now we have reached a stage where the time element
is vital, Arab delegations made their first journey to the
fifth emergency special session and asked for the immediate
withdrawal of all Israel armed forties from all occupied
territories, back to the positions they had held prior to
5 June 1967. It was clear that the principle of immediate
and complete withdrawal wasupheld by all the membership
of the General Asssembly of the United Nations. The
Secretary-General said in the introduction to his annual
report to the General Assembly:
“There is the immediate and urgently challenging issue
of the withdrawal of the armed forces of Israel from the
territory of neighbouring Arab States occupied during the
recent war. There is near unanimity on this issue, in
principle, because everyone agrees that there should be no
territorial gains by military conquest. It would, in my
view, lead to disastrous consequences if the United
Nations were to abandon or compromise this fundamental principle.“7
76. Withdrawal of Israel’s forces from all Arab territories
has been the central point in all the statements of
representatives in this Council and in the General Assembly.
Every Member voted for the withdrawal of all Israel forces
from the territories occupied by them as a result of the
recent armed conflict. Nevertheless, the Organization and
its membership were unable to protect the principle of
withdrawal from being drowned in political argumentations
alien to the merits of that fundamental principle. We
therefore had to make a second urgent demand, for the
sake of peace in our region and for the sake of the survhd
of the United Nations.
77. We have come again this time with the same politica
approach and with a great deal of awareness of the
consequences should the United Nations fail again in its
responsibilities for the maintenance of international peace
and security q
78, The recent Arab summit conference held in
Khartoum, convened to deal with this question, demonstrated one great fact. It demonstrated a high degree of
responsibility by the Arab States towards peace and
stability in their region and, undoubtedly, in the whole
world. If the policy and spirit of the Khartoum conference
can be adequately appreciated by this Council, and if
appropriate decisions to remedy the situation can be taken,
then peace in the Middle East will find its way. Otherwise
any moderate approach or conciliatory attitude on the part
of the Arabs in the ireatment of the present crisis will, I am
afraid, prove to be far from realistic. The United Nations
will then cease to be the direction towards wh&h we should
7 Ibid., Twenty-second Session, Supplement No. lA, para. 41.

84. We want peace in our region, for it is the essential
security for the safeguarding of our civilization and the
continuation of the progress we have achieved. Indeed, alI
our collective security arrangements are defensive in character, defensive against any unexpected Israel armed attack
on all or any of our territories. The Israelis, however, keep
repeating irrelevant and fallacious arguments to justify their
military occupation and continued refusal to withdraw
from the territories conquered through aggression. They
claim that withdrawal without sufficient guarantees for
what they term future peace and security in the area is not
acceptable.

turn to ask for the removal of armed aggression from our
occupied lands. In such a case we shall have to return to our
people and explain to them that they have no other course
but to mobilize their own efforts, to use their own
resources and to organize themselves in order to liquidate
the Israel aggression, no matter what the price and the
sacrifice might be.
79. Consultations have been going on, intensively and
extensively, among the representatives on the Council and
with various groups and members outside the Council, for
the purpose of reaching an understanding regarding the
decision which the Council ought to take as a result of its
present deliberations. Our position in those consultations
and in the discussions inside and outside this Council has
been made clear. It is our strong and sincere conviction that
the most fundamental requirement in the present crisis of
the Middle East, for the creation of a state of peace, is
undoubtedly the removal of Israel’s military occupation
and the withdrawal of Israel forces from all the Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 5 June.

85. But what is the main threat to peace and security in
the area? What has been the main source of instability and
frequent explosions, and what are the real guarantees for
future peace? For many years the peoples of the region
lived in peace and quiet. It has only been during the last
twenty years that the world has felt the threat to peace
coming from the Middle East.
86. The main threat to peace and security in our region
has been caused by two main factors. The first has been the
systematic Israel expansionist policy based on milhary
aggression as the record of Israel clearly shows. It has been
a record of systematic Israel expansion from one line to
another at the expense of the Arab lands.

80. Half of my country is now under Israel occupation as
a result of Israel’s military conquest. On the west bank of
the Jordan there are a million Jordanians who are under the
persecution, torture and intimidation of the Israel military
authorities. My people on the west bank of the Jordan have
been ruined by the Israel occupation and every individual
has suffered but is still determined to exist as a Jordanian.

87. A record of further expansion in the demilitariized
zones created by the United Nations; the repeated and
organized Israel attacks on neighbouring Arab countries
under the guise of retaliation or so-called punitive raids; the
wiping out by Israel of several Arab villages and the mass
slaughter of their inhabitants, particularly on the Jordanian
front-lines; and two major, large-scale attacks and occupation of vast Arab territory, once in 1956 and once in 1967.
These manifestations of Israel’s systematic policy of violence and steady expansion are the main explosions that
occurred in the area and were each time described #asa
threat to peace and security in the area and the world, as in
fact they were. In all these casesIsrael was the aggressor,
and the neighbouring Arab countries were the targets and
the victims. In allthese casesit was the security of the Arab
countries, not of Israel, that was threatened and endangered. The United Nations knows this fact, and it has
registered it in its annals and records.

8 1. The development on the west bank of the Jordan is
second to none in the whole area. In the past nineteen years
towns and cities have grown up, with modern homes,
hotels, hospitals, schools, gardens, factories, and other
establishments which are something that any nation could
be proud of. Those towns and cities have been built up by
the sheer hard work of men and women who took up
employment in different parts of the world in order to be
able to build their homes in the lands close to those from
which their fathers had been ejected some nineteen years
earlier. The great development achieved on the west bank is
a tribute to the people of Jordan and their determination to
live in peace and prosperity. We need only look at Arab
Jerusalem, and see the great development there. Towns
such as Nablus, Ramallah, Beit Hanina, Shuafat, Hebron,
Bethlehem and Jericho are but examples of the wonderful
and great achievement of our people.

88. For nineteen long years, hundreds of thousands or our
innocent people have been living in camps far from their
homes and native land on meagre international charities.
For nineteen years our Arab borders were the targets of
Israel aggressivemilitary attacks and our citizens werekilled
and murdered in cold blood. For nineteen years our natural
resources, property and income fell into Israel hands, For
nineteen years we kept coming to this Council with one
complaint after another against Israel’s aggression and
belligerence. We maintained a normal approach and a
peaceful conduct. It has been Israel that professed peace
but exercised war and violence. If Israel now feels, and has
felt, insecure it is only the feeling, very genuine and
justified, that the policy of continued violence and perpetual state of aggression cannot make Israel acceptable osrits
acquisition of war-spoils legalized.

82. In the economic field this prosperity and development
in such a short period is beyond description. Speaking of
education, on the west bank something like 40,000 to
50,000 men and women graduate every year. Most of them
take up employment in different parts of the Arab world
and contribute significantly to the general development
that is taking place in the Middle East. Those men and
women earn their living by hard work and determination, in
order to sustain their families on the west bank and develop
their country in a magnificent manner.
83. With those facts brought before the Council, can the
United Nations-the Organization which was founded for
the welfare of man-abstain from assuming its responsibility
and allow the very life and existence of the million
Jordanians to be shattered and destroyed as a result of the
military conquest and subjugation by the force of arms?

89. The second factor causing the threat to peace and
security in the area and the world is this: For twenty Years
10
- 1

the living symbol of the Palestine tragedy, the main victims
of the gross act of injustice done to the Arabs in Palestine,
the dispossessed and displaced, have struggled for their
rights and their future, but have till now been denied
justice. Despite their inalienable right to go back to their
homes and regain their life and property, and despite
successivereiterations by the United Nations of the
resolutions recognizing this right and ordering repatriation
and compensation, Israel continued to ignore that right and
to defy the United Nations resolutions. For twenty years
tllis problem has continued to survive in the midst of the
human, political, economic and international life of the
area.If will continue to do so as long as the weight of world
conscienceand international efforts does not bring pressure
to bear on Israel. Injustice breeds revolt, and the revolt of
peoples and nations is a sign of a failing international
systemand an erosion of world peace.
90. What kind of peace can the Israelis envisage when
Israel continues to ignore and to defy the United Nations
resolutions on the problem created directly and exclusively
by Israel in its very act of emergence into being? Israel
spokesmen have no right to aspire for peace while refusing
to accept its prerequisites. They cannot invoke the right of
security and destroy, by their acts and position, the very
basisof peace.
91. The Arabs, on the other hand, have not been a burden
on peace. Despite a deep sense of continuing grievance, the
Arabshave restrained themselves in act and deed as befits a
nation born in the values and doctrine of peace. The only
tangible-and perhaps not so tangible-expressions of belligerence they have made, throughout these twenty years,
havebeen their dedicated and uncompromising attitude of
refusal to give legitimacy to continued injustice and their
refraining from recognizing an unjust and illegal situation 1

95. On 20 February 1957, President Eisenhower said:
“Should a nation which attacks and occupies foreign
territory in the face of United Nations disapproval be
allowed to impose conditions on its own withdrawal? ”
That statement remains as true now as when jt wasmade jn
1957. I can quote many important statements made in this
Council and outside the Council advocating this argument,
namely, that withdrawal of Israel troops from all the
occupied Arab territories which they held after 5 June is
the first requirement along the way of peace.
96. The Arab representatives to the United Nations have
made their position clear. My King, His Majesty King
Hussein, advocated throughout the world and during his
visits to various countries the just cause of our people.
97. We have nothing more to say. We, and our peoples, are
therefore waiting for the result of your efforts.
98. Mr. TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated fvom
Frel~h): I should like first of all, as I begin my statement,
to dwell for a moment on one particular passage in the
statement made by the Foreign Minister of Israel where he
gave a striking example of the intransigence and truculence
of the extremist and military circles in Israel, which have
set in motion every conceivable means of propaganda
throughout the world in an endeavour to gain acceptance
for their territorial and other claims. According to him,
some members of the Security Council are guilty of having
prevented the Council from taking action against the Arab
countries last May, when the latter were alleged to have
been planning intervention and aggression against Israel.
99. As everyone knows, at that time we received an
assurance through the Secretary-General that the Arab
countries would not undertake any action calculated to
endanger peace in the Middle East and did not intend to
commit any act of aggression. Those countries have kept
their word; they have done nothing.

92. What threat is there in that for the peace in the world
and in the area? The insecurity of Israel comes from
within, from the sense of guilt, from the sense of Israel’s
irrational dependence on a futile policy of violence and
aggression, from the feeling that the international forces
which have so far supported Israel’s policy have done SO
either out of ignorance of the facts or under a system of
Zionist manipulation which is not ljkely to continue with
success.

100. The representative of the People’s Republic of
Bulgaria was included in this accusation. But he did not
know at that time-and I am sure the same was true also of
the representative of the Soviet Union and other representatives-that large-scale aggression was being planned. On
the other hand, those who had a more or less precise idea of
the situation and knew, from accurate information received
from sources in Israel as well as from sources of their own
that Israel’s forces were preparing to strike, tried at the
time to turn the feelings of the Security Council and its
members, and against whom.7 -against the future victims of
the Israel aggression then being prepared. Therein lies the
responsibility of those countries, and their representatives
here, who have to answer the charge made before the
CouncjI: they refused to act against the aggression being
planned by the Israel representatives and by Israel’s military
forces.

93. The Arab attitude has not been the source of
instability in the area, nor has it been opposed to a genuine
concept of peace, It is, therefore, a false and unfounded
argument by Israel spokesmen that withdrawal from occupied Arab territories is not a prescription for peace. Israel’s
withdrawal from our territory is in itself necessary and
right. It is also a precondition for peace in the area and in
the world. It js the duty of the Security Council and the
United Nations to bring this about, for it was initially in the
United Nations that the original problem was born. And it
is with the positive efforts by the United Nations to correct
the mistake committed two decades ago, and to implement
its principles and resolutions, that a just and lasting peace
canbe achieved.

101. More than five months have passed since the Security
Council last discussed this problem and failed to condemn
Israel’s aggression
against the neighbouring Arab States
owing to the stubborn opposition of certain Western
delegations, headed by the United States.

94. World public opinion everywhere has supported the
validity of our stand, a stand which offers a sound basis for
ajust peace.

102, In view of the Security Council’s powerlessness to
act, the General Assembly was convened in emergency
11

special session. It too failed to find a solution to the
problem of obliterating the effects of Israel’s aggression,
again because of the determined opposition of those same
countries, which instead of condeI!ming the aggression and
the aggressor tried by every possible means to explain away
and condone the aggressive acts.
103. The present session of the Security Council comes at
the end of a long series of consultations between the
interested parties and the members of the Security Council,
In particular there have been a number of private consultations and meetings between the non-permanent members of
the Security Council, at which efforts have been made to
find some common ground between the Afro-Asian and
Latin American countries on the basis of the draft
resolution submitted by the Latin American countries
during the fifth emergency special session of the General
Assembly.’ These efforts have culminated in nothing more
than a consensus regarding the procedure to be followed-in
particular the appointment of a special representative of the
Secretary-General, with terms of reference defined on the
basis of certain fundamental principles. The consultations
failed, however, when the question arose of defining the
terms of reference and the principles which would guide the
special representative-and this in spite of the fundamental
concession made by the non-aligned countries to take as the
basis for their work and their efforts in the Security
Council the draft resolution for which the Western Powers
had voted during the emergency session of the General
Assembly .9

105. We are not at all convinced by the Danish repre.
SeiltatiVe’S explanation of the opposition to the dr,sft
resolution submitted by those three countries, when he sitid
on 9 November last:
“There is a structural difference between resolutions of
the General Assembly which take the form of recom.
mendations and which as such can be regarded as
expressions of world opinion, and resolutions of (he
Security Council which arc to form the basis of action,”
[I 3 73rd meeting, para. 23 7./
106. On the contrary, this explanation constitutes an
indictment of the Western Powers themselves. The truth is
that apart from the fact I have just outlined, which make!; lt
clear that the Western countries were prepared to vote and
did vote for this draft resolution when they were sure that
it had little chance of being adopted by the General
Assembly owing to the situation prevailing in the Middle
East, it now appears that they do not want action to be
taken on the basis of those principles as embodied in a
recommendation for which they nevertheless voted.
107. Hence we are forced to conclude that, if the Latin
American draft resolution had been adopted during the
fifth emergency special session in June and July, the
Western countries, and particularly the United States,
would not have considered those recommendations a!; a
basis for action. This is a strange idea of the role of the
United Nations,

104. At this point it is interesting to note that in the
course of the fifth emergency special session, which was
convened to deal with the problems of the Middle East,
when it became clear that the draft resolution submitted by
the Latin American countries had no chance of being
adopted owing to the general political atmosphere prevailing in the region concerned, the United States of America
and certain Western countries voted in favour of the draft.
But now, when the Arab countries state, in the words of
the Foreign Minister of the United Arab Republic, that: “In
these consultations”-the
recent consultations in which
members of the Security Council took an active part-“we
travelled a long way in an effort to meet all the points
raised by those who were sincerely labouring to find a just
and reasonable formula” /1373rd meeting, para. 73/, and
when the Afro-Asian and the Latin American countries
have prepared a document, both the substance and the
wording of which are embodied in the draft resolution
submitted by India, Mali and Nigeria (S/8227], the United
States of America and some of its allies make it known-or
are about to do so, as the very fact of submitting draft
resolution S/8229 of 7 November indicates-that they are
not in agreement with the principles and assertions expressed in the three-Power draft resolution introduced by
India. Yet these are the very principles and assertions
defined in the Latin American draft resolution submitted to
the General Assembly.

108. It would be dangerous for the United Nations, within
its own organs, to apply a double standard in its policies,
But,how else can we explain the following sentence in Ithe
Latin American draft resolution submitted to the General
Assembly and accepted by the Western Powers at that
time?
“1. Urgently requests:
“(a) Israel to withdraw all its forces from all the
territories occupied by it as a result of the recent
conflict .” /S/8235.]
This has now been changed into the following-and here I
am quoting from the United States draft resolution just
submitted to the Security Council:
“Affirms
that the fulfilment of the above Charter
principles requires the achievement of a state of just and
lasting peace in the Middle East embracing withdrawal cf
armed forces from occupied territories . , . secure and
recognized boundaries.“[S/8229.]

109. The only purpose of this wording from the United
States draft resolution now before the Security Council is
to make it possible for the occupying aggressor to remain in
the territories where its troops are now installed. Hem it
can only complicate matters. The substitution of the idea
of “secure and recognized boundaries” for the words
“withdraw . . . from all the territories”, definitely implies
that the aggressor may decide to withdraw its troops at its
own convenience. If this is not so, then the United States
representative should give us an explanation.

8 Ibid, Fifth Emergency Special Session, Annexes, agendaitem 5,
document A/L.523/Rev.l. Also circulated asdocument S/8235.
9 Ibid., Annexes, agendoitem 5, documentA/L.522/Rev.3.
12

110. The conviction that the United States draft resolu.
tion is submitted with the aim of finding a way of
continuing the occupation of the territories is also strengthened by the fact that the terms of reference of the
Secretary-General’s special representative, clearly defined in
the three-Power draft resolution of India, Mali and Nigeria
as: “to co-ordinate efforts to achieve the purposes of this
resolution” [S/8227, para. 31, are changed in the United
States draft resolution into the establishment and maintenance of: “contacts with the States concerned with a
view to assisting them”-note the expression: “with a view
to assisting them”-“in
creating a just and lasting peace in
the area” [S/8229, pam. 31.

aggression could have disastrous effects. II could encourage
militarist, extremist and expansionist circles in Israel to
pursue their territorial claims and make them even more
truculent. It might encourage them to adopt measures to
strengthen the occupation r&ime and to transform the fait
accampli into “permanent frontiers”. In eloquent demonstration of this, the Prime Minister of Israel declared in the
speech he gave in the Knesset on 30 October of this year:

111. Today we have heard the repeated and categorical
statement by the Foreign Minister of Israel that he would
accept nothing less than direct negotiations for the conclusion of new agreements under the threat of permanent
occupation. Despite all the decisions of the United Nations,
Israel considers the agreements concluded under United
Nations auspices as null and void.

117. The deliberate delay in finding a solution to the
problem of the Middle East keeps the existing tension alive
and makes for a critical deterioration in the situation. By
turning the United Nations into a powerless spectator of
this frustrating situation, brought about in flagrant violation of the Charter and its principles, this delay does
immense damage to the prestige of the United Nations in
the eyes of world public opinion. The very role of the
United Nations as an instrument of peace and security is
called in question throughout the whole world. This could
sow the idea in the minds of the Israel extremists and
militarists that they can commit crimes with impunity and
even encourage them to embark on more irresponsible acts
still in the future. As the proverb goes “The more you have
the more you want”.

“Israel will continue to maintain in full the situation as
it was established in the cease-fire agreements and will
consolidate her position, in keeping with the vital needs
of her security and development.“’ ’

112. Yet the whole series of problems relating to the
present crisis have always been connected with action by
the United Nations; even the setting up of Israel wasbased
on United Nations action, From the very beginning in 1948
up to the latest cease-fire resolution, the United Nations has
played an important role.
113. At the same time, the present state of relations
between the parties directly involved also demonstrates that
the most realistic method of approaching a political
settlement of the problems under dispute is through direct
and active participation by the United Nations. The
Organization’s participation cannot be made light of at a
time when its role is more essential than ever.

118. But even if the United Nations were to be forced fnto
inaction as a result of clever stratagems, it is difficult to
believe that such an injustice would ever be accepted by the
Arab peoples. The great Arab peoples have, over several
thousands of years of history, suffered defeats yet have
always emerged stronger and more vigorous than ever; but
more important still they have been responsible for
economic and cultural developments from which the world
has greatly profited and for which it is greatly in their debt.

114. At the present time, Israel’s insistence that direct
negotiations are the only alternative and its attempts to
impose such negotiations make it clear that what it wants is
to drag out the problem indefinitely so as to cover up the
want of a sincere desire for a peaceful political settlement.
This demand for direct negotiations turns out to be a
negation of all the agreements concluded up to the present
time, a negation of negotiations of any kind. In these
circumstances we must steadfastly oppose the attempts by
the Israel Government to refuse the participation of the
United Nations, to spurn its help and to repudiate its
decisions.

119. Still less could the Arab States tolerate the humiliation and the insult to the entire Arab race of seeing their
soil under foreign occupation and their people expelled
from the homes in which they have lived for countless
generations. Contemporary history is full of examples Of
nations which have risen up and reacted proudly against the
provocations of foreign soldiery, We need only recall the
history of the last few years to see that this is so.
120. The extreme state of tension now prevailing in the
Middle East presents a very real threat to the peace and
security of that region and to the peace of the world. It also
represents a decided danger for the people of Israel
themselves. During the last two decades, Israel’s extremist
circles have by wars and aggressions succeeded three times
in scoring some military victory, but the people of Israel
have not gained peace thereby. In this age of national
liberation of oppressed peoples, peace in the Middle East
can only be achieved through the self-determination of
peoples and the search for a just and peaceful solution to
the thorny problems of this region which has suffered so
much from the intervention of imperialist forces, both in

115. While the United Nations has been reduced to
inaction by such manoeuvres over the past five months, the
situation in the Middle East has deteriorated considerably.
Israel’s occupation of the Arab territories as a result of the
aggression of 5 June has created an extremely explosive
situation in the area and has given rise to growing tension
which could lead to new armed outbreaks. The Israel
army’s recent premeditated provocations in violation of the
cease-fire resolutions have resulted in large-scale destruction. The havoc caused to the city oT Suez and the
refineries there, which was organized by the Israel authorities, has made the situation in the area extremely tense.
116. The unreasonable delay in arriving at a solution to
the problem of removing the consequences of Israel’s

10 Quoted in English by the speaker.

13

the past and in the present. Peace and security, respect for
sovereignty and the recognition of the territorial integrity
and political independence of every State, are all part and
parcel of the acknowledgement of this great principle of
our era, that the occupation or acquisition of territory by
military conquest is inadmissible. This means that Israel’s
armed forces must withdraw unconditionally
from all the
territory occupied as a result of the recent fighting. That
preliminary
step is essential before any attempt can be
made tg solve the problem of peace and security in the
Middle East. It is unnecessary to point out that the
acquisition of foreign territory by military conquest represents a flagrant violation of the principles of the Charter
and of the rules of international law, and constitutes an
international
crime for which the perpetrator should be
condemned and forced to assume proper responsibility at
the international level;

of the intention of the Israel expansionists to convert the
provisional military occupation into a permanent annexa.
tion of foreign lands to the territory of Israel. This point
was emphasized by Mr. Mahmoud Riad, the Foreign
Minister of the United Arab Republic, in the statement he
made on 9 November [1373rd meetiulgl. Indeed, until the
consequences of Israel’s aggression are removed and so lorlg
as there is no withdrawal of the Israel troops from all the
occupied territories, it will be impossible even to reopen the
Suez Canal to navigation after its closure because of lsrae].‘s
occupation, let alone to safeguard navigation. This problem
too is linked with that of the withdrawal of the Israel
troops from the occupied territories, and the same is true {of
all the problems which should come before those whose
task it is to deal with them.
125. The elimination of all the consequences of the
aggression will create a favorable atmosphere in which the
situation can be brought back to normal, including the
guaranteeing of free passage through the waterwaysof the
region, in conformity with the requirements of contemporary international law.

121. The withdrawal of the aggressors’ troops to the
positions they occupied on 4 June would be the first step
and the basic prerequisite for a political settlement of all
the other contentious questions; otherwise the aggressor
would be participating in the settlement negotiations from
a position of strength and would be able to use the usurped
territories as bargaining counters.

126. It is clear that lasting peace and stability in tine
Middle East cannot be ensured unlessan effort is made to
destroy the root cause of the tension which has prevailed in
that part of the world for the last two decades, and by this
I mean the solving of the problem of the Palestine refugees.
I say solving, and not merely making a show of solving, as
some would wish. Any lasting and just settlement of the
political problem should unquestionably include a settlement of the situation of Palestine’s Arab population with
due regard for their legitimate interests and on the basisof
the relevant United Nations resolutions. Naturally this has
nothing to do with those who have become refugeesasa
result of the recent conflict, since they have the right a!nd
should have the opportunity to return automatically to
their homes as soon as the occupying forces have withdrawn from all the occupied territory.

122. The entire speech by the Foreign Minister of Israel
which the Security Council has just heard was nothing more
than a glorification of all the acts of aggression committed
by Israel’s armies, backed by the attitude of the United
States of America as expressed in its draft resolution. The
Foreign Minister made it clear to anyone who would listen
that the extremist circles in Israel have no intention of
withdrawing so long as they can count on that backing.
Accustomed as he is to enjoying privileges even in the
United Nations, he complained at the Council’s decision to
allow him to speak only when his turn came. This is
symptomatic
of the state of mind which has become
characteristic of the Israel extremist circles he represents.

127. We cannot expect to see a lasting peace in the Middle
East until these fundamental and urgent problems halve
been solved. As long as the Israel troops remain in
possession of all the territory occupied as a result of the
recent conflict, and as long as the refugee problem
continues to poison the atmosphere of that region, there
can be no peace in the Middle East or any assuranceof
security in the world.

123. The People’s Republic of Bulgaria has always made it
plain that no solution is possible without the withdrawal of
the Israel troops. In his speech at the fifth emergency
special session on 20 June 1967, the Prime Minister of the
People’s Republic of Bulgaria, Todor Jivkov, said, and I
quote:
“The main prerequisite for the solution of the Middle
East problems at the present moment is the immediate
and unconditional withdrawal of the Israel troops from
the occupied Arab territories. The continued seizure of
those territories is nothing but a continuation of the
aggression. The illegal presence of Israel troops in those
areas is aimed at offering undeserved advantages to the
aggressor; in point of fact, it fans its expansionist claims
and places obstacles to the solution of the questions
relating to the restoration and consolidation of peace in
the Middle East.“l ’

128. As was pointed out by the Foreign Minister of the
United Arab Republic, Mr. Mahmoud Riad, the Arab
countries have travelled a long way in an effort to meet the
points raised by those labouring to find a just and
reasonable solution to the problem of the Middle East, The
non-aligned countries which are members of the Secur.itY
Council have prepared a working paper based on the d&t
resolution submitted by the Latin American countries at
the fifth emergency special session, and this is new
submitted as a draft resolution by India, Mali and Nigeria.
It is now the duty of those countries, headed by the United
States, which voted in favour of the Latin American draft
resolution, to remain faithful to the commitment into
which they entered at the emergency session as expressed
by their vote. The beginning of a solution to the problems
of the Middle East depends on them alone.

124. The immediate withdrawal of the aggressor’s troops
from the occupied territory is even more essential in view
11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Emergency
Special Session, Plenary Meet&q
1528th
meeting, para. 30.

14

--

129. Guided by the above considerations, the delegation
of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria will do everything in
its power, both during the discussion and in the course of
future endeavours, to contribute as far as it is able towards
solving the problems of peace and security in the Middle
East and hence in the whole world.

resolution is essentially to provide a framework of principles and guidelines within which the special representative
of the Secretary-General can contact the parties concerned
in order to co-ordinate efforts to achieve the purpose of the
draft resolution, which is to initiate the process of peaceful
settlement of the crisis. The draft resolution provides for
the adoption of all peaceful methods and actions agreed to
by the parties to settle the dispute and does not rule out
any particular means of settlement. We leave it to the
parties concerned to agree on the particular means they will
employ in seeking solutions of their disputes, This is in
accordance with Article 33 of the Charter, which enjoins
the parties to any dispute the continuance of which is likely
to endanger international peace and security, to seek pacific
settlement of the disputes, and gives the choice to the
parties to seek a solution, either by negotiation or by some
other peaceful means of their own choice, such as inquiry,
mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement,
resort to regional agencies or arrangements, or other
peaceful means of their own choice-1 repeat: of their own
choice, It is thus left to the parties to choose any of the
methods of peaceful settlement. This has been and remains
the position of my delegation. We have all along and
consistently maintained it in the past on all such matters
before the Council, and we shall continue to do so.

130. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of India, who wishes to exercise the right
of reply.
131. Mr, PARTHASARATHI
(India): My delegation has
listened with care to the statement made by the Foreign
Minister of Israel. At this meeting I should like to comment
only on one or two points.
132. The Foreign Minister of Israel has said that the
three-Power draft resolution was drafted without any
consultations with Israel. I should like to state quite
categorically that in working out the draft the three Powers
took hzto consideration not only the discussions and draft
resolutions, formal and informal, during the emergency
session and the twenty-second regular session of the
General Assembly, but also the discussions among the
permanent and non-permanent members of the Security
Council over the past several weeks. It has to be appreciated
also that this draft was worked out by six members of the
Council who had contacts with the various parties concerned.

136. The representative of Israel has also referred to the
position of my Government on India-Pakistan relations. I
must state in all frankness that the two situations are
completely different and have no bearing whatsoever on the
question under discussion. The Foreign Minister of Israel,
while comparing his Government’s stand with that of the
Government of India, ignored-and I am sure he will be the
first to appreciate this-the differing origins of the unfortunate situations as well as the divergent histories of
relationships among States in different regions of the world.
If, however, the Foreign Minister of Israel insists upon
drawing parallels, he should remember the eminent practice
of this Council, which, in 1965, insisted upon coupling the
demand for a cease-fire with a call for withdrawal to
positions previously held. Thereafter, it was possible for
India and Pakistan, which had never interrupted their
formal diplomatic relations, to negotiate at Tashkent with
the help of the Soviet Union.

133. As I said on 9 November in this Council, in working
out our draft we had in mind the views of the other
members of the Council as well as of the parties concerned.
And as my colleague and friend, Mr. Adebo, the representative of Nigeria, said on 9 November:
I can say honestly and frankly that throughout our
deliberations I was in touch with both parties ascertaining
their views. However, I regret to say that at no time in the
negotiations was I able to persuade either party to my
own point of view, and that remains the position today.”
CG

.

.

*

[1373rd meeting, para. 109.1

134. Similarly, my good friend the representative of
Ethiopia stated in the same meeting that the three-Power
draft won his delegation’s approbation not only because it
was based on the Latin American draft resolution presented
to the emergency session of the Generai Assembly, but also
because the approach was, in his view, “a sound one and
the principles involved were affirmed and maintained in
reasonable balance”(ibid., para. ZOO].

137. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I have
no other speakers on my list. As a result of informal
consultations, it appears that members of the Council are
agreed that the date for our next meeting on the Middle
East situation should be Wednesday, 15 November 1967, at
10.30 a.m. If there is no objection, I shall take it that this
proposal is adopted.

135. I now turn to another substantive point raised by the
Foreign Minister of Israel. He has stated that the threePower draft resolution prejudices bilateral talks between
the Arabs and the Israelis. The aim of the three-Power draft

The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

15

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nationr
publications,may
be obtained
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
or write
or Geneva.

from bookstores
and distributors
tar United
Nations,
Sales Section,

COMMENT

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

throughout
New York

UNIES

Les publications
der Notions
Unies
sent en vente
dons
ler librairier
et ler agencer
depositairer
du monde entier.
Informer-vour
ouprhr
de votre librairie
ou odresrez-vous
or
Nations
Unier, Section der venter, New York ou Genive.

coM0 coNs~wR

PUBL~CACIONES

DE LAS NA~IONES

Los publicocioner
de Ios Naciones
Unidar
ertbn
en todar partes
del mundo.
Consulte
•I su librero
Ventar,
Nueva
York a Ginebra.

Litho in U.N.

en vcnta
o dirijore

UN~DAS
en libreriar
y cosos dirtribuidoras
a: Naclanss
Unidor,
Secci6n

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

de

35$11-January

1971~2,100
